A /76/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

69

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 26 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft decision A/76/L.51,
circulated under agenda item 71, entitled “Rights of
indigenous peoples”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 71 at its 53rd
plenary meeting, on 16 December 2021. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft decision, it will be
necessary to reopen its consideration of agenda item 71.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to reopen consideration of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that, at its 2nd
plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 71 to the
Third Committee. In order to enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the draft decision, may I
take it that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item
71 directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 71 (continued)
Rights of indigenous peoples
Draft decision (A/76/L.51)
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft decision A/76/L.51, entitled “Informal
interactive hearing with indigenous peoples”. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt the draft decision?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/560).

A/76/L.51

*2233025*

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to draft decision A/76/L.50, which
was circulated under sub-item (d) of agenda item 98,
entitled “Reducing space threats through norms, rules
and principles of responsible behaviours”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda
item 98 at its 54th plenary meeting, on 24 December
2021. In order for the Assembly to take action on
the draft decision, it will be necessary to reopen its

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33025 (E)

was

A/76/PV.69

consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 98. May
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021, the General
Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (d) of agenda
item 98 to the First Committee. To enable the Assembly
to take action expeditiously on the draft decision, may
I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item
(d) of agenda item 98 directly in plenary meeting and
proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 98 (continued)
Prevention of an arms race in outer space
(d) Reducing space threats through norms, rules
and principles of responsible behaviours
Draft decision (A/76/L.50)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile to introduce draft decision
A/76/L.50.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
take the floor to explain the purpose and background of
draft decision A/76/L.50, submitted by the Permanent
Mission of Chile. I wish to recall that, in the election
held in Geneva on 7 February, a representative of Chile
was elected to chair the open-ended working group on
the reduction of threats in space through norms, rules
and principles of responsible behaviours.
In that connection, I wish to recall that, in
accordance with resolution 76/231, of 24 December
2021, it was decided that in 2022 an open-ended
working group with a mandate to consider existing and
potential threats and risks to space systems would be
convened to make recommendations on possible norms,
rules and principles of responsible behaviours in that
regard and to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its seventy-eighth session.
It was also decided that the open-ended working
group would work on the basis of consensus and would
hold a two-day organizational session in Geneva, as
well as two five-day sessions in Geneva in 2022 and
two five-day sessions in Geneva in 2023.
2/32

26/04/2022

At the organizational session held in Geneva on
7 and 9 February, the working group decided to hold
its first session from 9 to 13 May. Those dates were
originally scheduled for its second session, which
is why that modification had implications for the
calendar. That postponement and the task of finding
rooms available in Geneva meant that the Chair and the
Secretary had to seek the best dates available for the
four sessions.
As a result of that assessment, the Chair decided
to present a consolidated draft calendar for the four
sessions. That was no easy task, since many meetings
and conferences are being held in Geneva this year,
as well as at other duty stations. Therefore, there are
no perfect dates that avoid any clashes with other
multilateral meetings. But the proposal was made
with the intention of minimizing any possible overlaps
and to leave enough time between sessions to allow
delegations to prepare ahead of meetings.
With those considerations in mind, Chile submitted
draft decision A/76/L.50 for consideration by the
General Assembly this morning. We would therefore
like to call on all delegations that have expressed
their support for the process to help us to adopt the
draft decision by consensus, as it constitutes a very
important step towards launching meaningful debate at
the first session, scheduled to be held in Geneva from
9 to 13 May, and thereby fulfilling the mandate that
was entrusted to us.
This is a purely procedural, non-controversial
draft decision that captures the concerns of delegations
expressed at the organizational session in February
and during consultations held by the working
group’s Chair. We trust that the common purpose that
brings us together — to improve the safety, security
and sustainability of space systems in the interests of
peace and the well-being for all — will be reflected in
the adoption of the draft decision today.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/76/L.50, entitled “Open-ended
working group on reducing space threats through
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to adopt the draft decision?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/506B).

A/76/L.50

was

adopted

22-33025

26/04/2022

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/76/L.52)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.52.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour to introduce, on behalf of its co-sponsors,
draft resolution A/76/L.52, entitled “Standing mandate
for a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast
in the Security Council”. I am happy to inform the
Assembly that the initiative is currently supported by
76 co-sponsors from all regional groups.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
creates a standing mandate for the Assembly to be
convened automatically within 10 working days of
the casting of a veto in the Security Council. The
draft resolution, which will take immediate effect,
also accords precedence in the list of speakers of the
subsequent General Assembly debate to the delegation
or delegations that cast the veto, on an exceptional basis.
The mandate, which is without prejudice to ongoing
discussions in the intergovernmental negotiations
pursuant to decision 62/557, is not prescriptive with
respect to a possible outcome. While States can, of
course, propose action by the General Assembly
in accordance with established procedures of the
Assembly, that will not necessarily be so.
Liechtenstein began work on the initiative together
with a core group of States more than two years ago
due to growing concern that the Security Council has
found it increasingly difficult to carry out its work
in accordance with its mandate under the Charter of
the United Nations, the increase in the use of the veto
being the most obvious expression of that difficulty.
All States Members of the Organization have conferred
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
agreeing that the Council acts on their behalf.
We are therefore of the view that the membership
as a whole should be given a voice when the Security

A/76/PV.69

Council is unable to act in accordance with the
Assembly’s functions and powers as reflected in the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular its Article
10. The veto power comes with the responsibility to
work for the achievement of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations at all times.
We have put forward this text as an expression of our
commitment to multilateralism, with the Organization
and its principal organs at the forefront. There has
never been a greater need for effective multilateralism
than there is today, or a greater need for innovation in
order to secure the central role and voice of the United
Nations in that respect.
We conducted extensive outreach and consultations,
both individually and collectively, with our core
group and co-sponsors, in bilateral and various group
settings. Our text was first circulated to the United
Nations membership as a whole on 3 March, first made
available to a wider public on 12 April and discussed in
an open format with all interested States on 19 April.
We are grateful for the strong interest of members
of the Assembly and the numerous comments we
have received from many delegations over the course
of the lengthy process. They have helped us to refine
and improve our text, resulting in the straightforward,
legally sound and politically meaningful proposal we
submit to the Assembly today. We are very thankful for
the very strong support our initiative has received from
members and we look forward to adopting it with them
this morning.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.52.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before action is taken on the draft resolution, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): We are
meeting today to consider the prospects for reaching an
agreement on a better use of the veto power bestowed
upon the permanent members of the Security Council
since the end of the Second World War. That was a
long time ago, when the problems and aspirations
of humankind were very different from what they
are today.
If we are here today on the verge of the unacceptable
for most of the peoples of the world, it is because

22-330253/32

A/76/PV.69

the veto power is highly questionable in terms of its
effectiveness and its representativeness. It is clear
that it constitutes an impediment to the Security
Council’s decision-making abilities, as the Council
cannot act when faced with the use of the veto by one
of its permanent members, regardless of the extent of
the threat or the danger posed to international peace
and security.
That exorbitant prerogative, used a total of 295
times since 1946 by each of the permanent members
of the Security Council at one time or another, has
frequently paralysed the Organization, which is
supposed to promote international peace and security,
and has resulted in its powerlessness to act precisely
when its collective action is most indispensable. The
veto power has transformed the Security Council into
a tool for domination by some who believe that their
individual interests should prevail over the collective
interests of the entire international community.
Despite those obvious issues, some claim that the
Security Council has not been destroyed by the veto
but rather saved by it. According to them, the veto
should be considered and accepted as a necessary evil.
Whatever the case, beyond our own perceptions, as
well as the unceasing calls for Security Council reform
and the aspirations of the great majority of the peoples
of the world for a fairer, more democratic international
order that corresponds to the realities of today, another
unavoidable reality confronts us.
That reality is one in which the veto power, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, can
be questioned only if two thirds of the members of
the General Assembly formally agree to do so and, in
addition to that, only if the five permanent members of
the Security Council unanimously accept to renounce
that privilege. That hypothetical situation will, of
course, never materialize, no matter how the stars align.
It is therefore clear that we need a true paradigm
shift if we want to give the Security Council a more
human face commensurate with its mandate. Its
membership needs to be reconfigured, as do its powers
and working methods, whether by increasing the number
of its permanent and non-permanent members — which
brings with it the risk of amplifying potential abuses
of the veto power — or by simply abolishing the veto
power altogether.
Naturally, in either of those scenarios, Africa, the
continent home to the greatest number of peacekeeping
4/32

26/04/2022

missions, must take its rightful place in keeping with
the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
Furthermore, allow me to recall that those reasonable
prospects for the reconfiguration of international
governance can be realized only if they are validated
by each of the permanent members of the Security
Council, according to the current provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations — assuming that those
States would be willing to share or be stripped of their
strategic advantages.
Let us be realistic and pragmatic: it is undeniable that
the decisions made by the Organization are a reflection
of the current state of international consensus, or rather
the absence of such a consensus on the most basic and
fundamental issues. When it comes to the threats we
face, such as terrorism for example, we can barely
agree on a definition. Each nation remains focused only
on its own concerns and how it can use the international
agenda for its own purposes.
Against that backdrop, international solidarity
remains an empty slogan, and the rules-based
international order is paralysed by the spread of a “might
is right” ideology, in keeping with what is at stake at the
geostrategic, geopolitical and geoeconomic levels.
By choosing to decide today on the difficult issue
of the veto power by the permanent members of the
Security Council, if we use only rhetorical arguments
then we are saying that it is impossible for us to reform
that important organ of the United Nations in any
rational or meaningful way and we are postponing
indefinitely the prospects of the intergovernmental
negotiations process that was initiated to discuss this
very issue.
In the light of all of that, it is our conviction that
voting on draft resolution A/76/L. 52, on the use of
the veto power, will not change the scope, substance
or impact of the veto power. What we are doing today
is a reflection of our societies’ attempts to shrink a
malignant tumour in order to live and grow together
and not resign ourselves to the current situation. We
all know that, given the Charter and the way things
currently stand, a General Assembly resolution will
not serve in any way to deter those who hold the veto
power. It will therefore not be able to stop any war or
resolve any crisis on which the veto power can be used.
On the other hand, we fear that the only outcome
of today’s vote could be to lead, yet again, to the awful
spectacle of an international community divided and
22-33025

26/04/2022

disagreeing at a critical moment, when the people of the
world are hoping for a display of unity and a glimmer of
hope commensurate with their distress.
Several minutes from now, depending on whether a
vote is taken in favour or against, we will automatically
end up in one camp, in opposition to the other. Given
such a narrow path of options, we wish to recall the
wise words of a former Prime Minister of Barbados, His
Excellency Mr. Errol Barrow, who said that we should
be friends of all and satellites of none. That is certainly
the kind of the United Nations that the peoples of the
world desire: an Organization in which each nation is a
friend of all nations.
The refusal to align ourselves with spheres
of influence, which gave rise to the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, is once again highly pertinent,
at the risk of exhuming the remnants of another world
of antagonistic blocs and walls of separation, when in
fact we need a world order founded on the building of
bridges between the peoples of the world. Given that
we do not accept the logic of camps, invective and
fragmentation — which are a world away from the
world we want — my country will abstain in any voting
on draft resolution A/76/L.52.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): My delegation
takes the floor in support of draft resolution A/76/L.52,
entitled “Standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a veto is cast in the Security Council”.
Guyana is extremely pleased to be among those
supporting the progressive step that we are taking today
as States Members of the United Nations and commends
the delegation of Liechtenstein for its leadership in
submitting the draft resolution.
While acknowledging that the draft resolution is
without prejudice to the intergovernmental negotiations
on reform of the Security Council, I must acknowledge
that the question of the veto continues to be the subject of
much deliberation, principally in the intergovernmental
negotiations. It continues to occupy our attention,
primarily because of what its use often means for the
maintenance of international peace and security — a
responsibility that has been conferred primarily on the
Security Council by the States Members of the United
Nations, on whose behalf the Council acts.
On that latter note, and underscoring the
constructive approach required on any issue included
on the Council’s agenda, my delegation is of the firm
conviction that the draft resolution aims to add a critical

A/76/PV.69

element to the work that we do as an Organization for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Guyana has long been among those advocating
for the abolition of the veto. Our position is premised,
inter alia, on the view that the veto does not contribute
to accountability by those Council members who may
exercise its use and sometimes enables situations in
which they can prevent the Council from taking action
in situations that require strong responses from the
United Nations.
Such situations include humanitarian crises fuelled
by violent conflict, including war. They also include
violations of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, such as the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity and
political independence of another State. Furthermore,
they include violations of international disarmament
obligations, such as the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and the use of weapons of mass destruction,
such as chemical weapons.
In that context, and to build a culture of
accountability and transparency around the use of the
veto, the proposal to organize a debate in the most
representative organ of the United Nations — the
General Assembly — is both appropriate and necessary.
In that way, formal scope is provided for deliberations
among the entire United Nations membership, including
the Council member casting the veto, in situations in
which the latter has chosen to prevent Council action
on a matter deemed important for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Guyana believes that, by broadening the
deliberations on such issues outside the Council, all
Member States will be provided the opportunity to
contribute to the search for solutions. In our assessment,
that will also serve to strengthen the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council, bearing in mind that the General Assembly
also plays a role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Allow me to conclude by underscoring that the
use of the veto should be viewed not as a right but as
a prerogative that can be exercised by some Council
members. Considering the mandate of the Security
Council, the prerogative to use the vehicle is a heavy
responsibility that should not be taken lightly. Its use
can mean the difference between war and peace, life
and death and development and poverty.

22-330255/32

A/76/PV.69

My delegation hopes that what is achieved by draft
resolution A/76/L. 52 today, once adopted, will be a
critical step towards a rethink of the use of the veto.
I therefore urge all Member States to support its
consensus adoption as an expression of our common
responsibility to build a peaceful world.

26/04/2022

1 places the responsibility on the President, rather than
the General Assembly or its members. In effect, it
reduces the power of the Member States.

Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
finds merit in draft resolution A/76/L.52 in its intention
to make a meaningful contribution to strengthening
the role of the General Assembly and enhancing the
accountability of the Security Council to the general
membership, as provided for under the Charter of the
United Nations. This view on strengthening the General
Assembly by enhancing its ability to act on matters
affecting international peace and security in the event
that the Security Council is unable to do so, for whatever
reason, has long been espoused by the Philippines.

Thirdly, the automaticity of convening a General
Assembly debate every single time the veto is exercised
in the Security Council may prove impractical and
inefficient. The current system is not infirm and has
worked quite well over the years. Since 1946, a total
of 293 vetoes have been cast in the Security Council,
covering a number of issues. Not all draft resolutions
vetoed in the Council required Assembly action. The
context within which the veto was exercised should be
a major consideration in deciding whether a General
Assembly debate should be conducted. The holding of
a formal General Assembly debate should be decided
on a case-by-case basis after the Member States have
given the matter careful consideration.

The thrust of the draft resolution is in line with my
country’s position on the question of the veto, and in
strengthening the General Assembly, we are exercising
its role and authority — as stated in the Charter — on
questions related to international peace and security, in
accordance with Articles 10 to 14 and 35. However, the
Philippines will abstain in the voting on draft resolution
A/76/L.52 in view of the following three key points.

We have seen cases, including recently, where the
proponents of Security Council draft resolutions that
failed to be adopted because of the veto brought the
same draft resolutions to the General Assembly for
consideration. Decisions to hold a General Assembly
meeting or an emergency special session have been
made following the General Assembly rules of
procedure and practice.

First, paragraph 1 renders the convening process
automatic, as it mandates the President of the General
Assembly to convene a formal meeting of the
Assembly within 10 working days of the casting of a
veto. One existing mechanism, the emergency special
session — under resolution 377 (V), entitled “Uniting
for peace” — respects the power of the General
Assembly to decide whether or not to convene and make
recommendations to the United Nations, the Security
Council or both on any such questions or matters,
except as provided under Article 12. We note that
Article 12 empowers the Secretary-General, with the
consent of the Security Council, to notify the General
Assembly of any matters relative to the maintenance of
international peace and security — in which case the
Security Council would immediately cease to deal with
such matters.

The Philippines has consistently supported
the view that the General Assembly is the chief
deliberative, policymaking and most representative
organ of the United Nations. However, while we aim
to strengthen the role of the General Assembly and
enhance the accountability of the Security Council on
matters concerning international peace and security, it
is important that the collective and inclusive authority
of the Member States be upheld at all times.

Secondly, we wish to emphasize that it should be
the Member States of the General Assembly that decide
whether to hold a debate and initiate proceedings — not
the President of the General Assembly. Such a decision
should be arrived at after the President undertakes
consultations with the broader membership. Paragraph
6/32

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Although my
delegation sees merit in the general idea that the
permanent members of the Security Council should
clarify to the wider membership their position on peace
and security matters, Brazil is going to abstain in the
voting on draft resolution A/76/L.52.
We believe that the draft resolution was not
properly discussed. We regret that the proponents
did not engage in negotiations or organize informal
consultations to give Member States the opportunity to
make contributions to the text. Had such a debate taken
place, we would have proposed, for example, that a
similar mechanism be considered whenever a mandate
for the use of force is determined by the Security
22-33025

26/04/2022

Council. That would promote greater transparency
and accountability.
More important, the draft resolution before us
changes the delicate balance between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Creating a standing
mandate for the General Assembly to debate an item
every time a veto is cast puts in question the Council’s
authority and legitimacy. It would also discourage
efforts by Council members to find common ground
when divisive situations arise.
We must also recall that a veto, in itself, is not
a failure to maintain peace and security. It has been
embedded in the Charter of the United Nations as a
means to contain excess of power and safeguard the
international system against decisions taken by one
country or group of countries to use force. We have seen
that happen — even without this draft resolution. We
should therefore avoid weakening the system further.
The “Uniting for peace” mechanism was adopted
exceptionally to respond to situations in which
the Security Council fails to exercise its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It was officially enacted only 11
times in more than 70 years. That is not without reason.
It means that the General Assembly has been urged to
act only in extreme or exceptional circumstances. It
should remain so.
Although the text genuinely tries to find
alternatives to the Security Council paralysis, it is
not the appropriate answer to the challenge and has
not been discussed as it should be. The authority and
effectiveness of the Council will be regained only when
the General Assembly decides to move forward in the
protracted discussions on the reform. A representative
Council that reflects the current international system is
central to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to the future of the Organization.
As a founding Member of the Organization and as a
current member of the Security Council, Brazil renews
its commitment to continue working for negotiated
solutions to threats to peace and security and for an
effective United Nations.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): In the face of all the manoeuvres of the
United States and Western countries aimed at the
disintegration of the United Nations, Nicaragua has an
important message to deliver.

A/76/PV.69

My country condemns the manoeuvres and
violations of the purposes and principles that should
govern the United Nations and urges, now more than
ever, the reform of the Organization, as former President
of the General Assembly Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann
earnestly proposed on behalf of Nicaragua.
Our only proposal is to immediately begin the
process of reforming the United Nations. These
manoeuvres of imperialist North America and Western
countries is an attempt to impose total hegemony.
Nicaragua insists that the sovereign resolutions and
decisions of the General Assembly be implemented.
A good example is the case of the embargo on Cuba
and the numerous times the Assembly has voted to end
the embargo. The decisions of this sovereign General
Assembly are not being respected.
Nicaragua also denounces the United States for
ignoring the rulings of the International Court of
Justice to compensate Nicaragua, thereby undermining
the United Nations and the highest international court.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
Before proceeding to take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.52, I wish to address the question
concerning the majority required for the adoption of
the draft resolution. In the light of paragraphs 2 and 3
of Article 18 of the Charter of the United Nations, may
I take it that the Assembly decides to take action on
draft resolution A/76/L.52 by a simple majority of the
members present and voting?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.52, entitled
“Standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listen in the
document, the following have also become co-sponsors
of draft resolution A/76/L.52: Andorra, Bahamas,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, Cyprus, Djibouti,
France, the Gambia, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Jamaica,
Libya, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, the

22-330257/32

A/76/PV.69

26/04/2022

Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Morocco, the
State of Palestine, Panama, San Marino, South Sudan,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
The President: In the absence of a request for a
recorded vote, may I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.52?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/262).

A/76/L.52

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to those
who wish to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Jiang Hua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Currently, the world is confronted with unprecedented
risks and challenges. Countries need to uphold true
multilateralism, strengthen solidarity and cooperation
under the banner of the United Nations and make the
Organization the central platform for maintaining
common security and pursuing shared development.
Like other Member States, China believes
that the General Assembly is the most universal
and representative deliberative, policymaking and
decision-making organ within the United Nations
system. We support the General Assembly in carrying
out its responsibilities and playing an active and
important role, in accordance with its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations.
Liechtenstein and other countries submitted
resolution 76/262 under agenda item “Strengthening
of the United Nations system”, which aims to empower
the General Assembly, in line with its Charter mandate,
with respect to matters related to international peace
and security. The Assembly is thus empowered to make
a meaningful contribution to effective multilateralism.
Based on our consistent position on the role of the
General Assembly, we understand and concur with
the purpose of the resolution. The United Nations
Charter confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. China has always participated in
the Council’s work in a constructive and responsible
manner. We advocate that the Council should be
committed to the peaceful resolution of disputes and
the settlement of differences through dialogue and
consultation. It should strengthen coordination with
8/32

the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the International Court of Justice, as
well as other relevant organizations. We have been
actively promoting the improvement of the Council’s
working methods, greater transparency and broader
participation by Council members, especially small and
medium-sized countries.
In today’s world, full of uncertainty and instability,
the international community expects the permanent
members of the Security Council to lead by example
by upholding multilateralism, adhering to the
international rule of law, fulfilling their international
obligations and promoting global cooperation. Article
27, paragraph 3, of the United Nations Charter defines
the special responsibilities of the permanent members
of the Council, which must respect each other, respond
to the common security needs of the international
community and, more important, insist on the equality
of all countries, regardless of their size.
China actively advocates a common, comprehensive,
cooperation and sustainable concept of security and
has always fulfilled its international responsibilities
and obligations through concrete actions. We have
always defined our position in the Security Council
in a manner that is responsible to the United Nations
Charter and to history.
In circumstances where the Council is unable to
act on major issues of peace and security due to the
lack of consensus among its permanent members, we
are in favour of discussions among Member States
through the platform of the General Assembly. Under
the “Uniting for peace” mechanism, the General
Assembly can convene emergency special sessions in
those circumstances. Practice over the years has shown
that this arrangement allows Member States to play a
role on major issues of international peace and security.
At the same time, in the actual work of the Council,
there are a variety of specific situations in which the
Council is unable to act. The resolution adopted in
today’s meeting gives the General Assembly a new
mandate — to create a mechanism that automatically
triggers the General Assembly to convene meetings,
which, in practice, is likely to cause procedural
confusion and inconsistency. It is difficult to determine
at this time whether such an arrangement would serve
the intended purpose of the resolution.
Promoting the General Assembly’s and Security
Council’s faithful fulfilment of their responsibilities
22-33025

26/04/2022

under the Charter of the United Nations is conducive to
strengthening the effectiveness of the United Nations
system and implementing the purposes and principles
of the Charter, which serves the common interests of
the international community. China is ready to work
steadfastly with other Member States to that end.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Represented by a
delegation that has piloted the need for reformed
multilateralism, India fully supports any initiative
that genuinely furthers the objective of achieving
meaningful and comprehensive reform of the key
elements of the global multilateral architecture.
In the context of the United Nations, that has implied,
inter alia, bringing the structure and composition of
the Security Council into line with contemporary
geopolitical realities, through its comprehensive reform
across the five clusters of categories of membership:
the question of the veto, regional representation, the
size of an enlarged Security Council and improving
its working methods, and improving the Council’s
relationship with the General Assembly.
Our leaders have repeatedly tasked us with
delivering early and comprehensive reform of the
Security Council — a task that after years of textless,
fruitless deliberations in the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, remains not
only unfulfilled but also blocked by those perpetuating
the outdated status quo. In effect, a vocal minority
of naysayers have held the entire process of Security
Council reform hostage over the past four decades.
The only way to begin to remedy what ails the
Security Council is to make it more representative,
credible and legitimate by including more
underrepresented voices, including from developing
countries and from Africa.
My delegation has the following five issues of
concern with regard to the present initiative.
First, the General Assembly unanimously agreed in
decision 62/557, adopted in 2008, that all five aspects
of Security Council reform, including the question of
the veto, would be decided in a comprehensive manner,
and therefore no single cluster could be addressed
in isolation. When a group of pro-reform Member
States, including India, put forward a similar such
initiative nearly a decade ago, which also called for an
improvement in the working methods of the Council,

A/76/PV.69

we were accused of promoting a piecemeal approach to
Security Council reform.
It is therefore ironic that the same set of Member
States that argue vociferously against piecemeal
reform in the intergovernmental negotiations are today
themselves supporting a piecemeal initiative that
ignores the root cause of the problem. We therefore
hope that other piecemeal efforts focusing on aspects of
the category of membership and the working methods
of the Council would be treated without any double
standards and with a similar yardstick in the future.
Secondly, all five permanent members have
used the veto over the past 75 years to achieve their
respective political ends. In that regard, let me flag
what our African brothers and sisters have repeatedly
stated in the intergovernmental negotiations:
“The veto as a matter of principle should be
abolished. However, as a matter of common justice,
it should be extended to new permanent members
so long as it continues to exist.”
The privilege of using the veto has been vested in only
five Member States. The General Assembly can do
very little about it as, effectively, the permanent five
have a veto over the veto. As rightly called out by our
African brothers and sisters, it goes against the concept
of the sovereign equality of States and only perpetuates
the mindset of the Second World War — to the victor
belongs the spoils. Either all nations are treated equally
in the context of voting rights or else the new permanent
members must also be given the veto.
Bringing the veto to the General Assembly as a
stand-alone issue on which the remaining membership
has no de facto say and implying that that issue needs
to be addressed first, above all other substantive issues
of Security Council reform, is giving disproportionate
importance to one issue over all the others. That flawed
approach is therefore an aberration.
Thirdly, the provisions of resolution 76/262 also
tend to relitigate the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, as they entail structural changes in
the relationship between the General Assembly and
the Security Council that will impact the internal
decision-making dynamics of the Council.
Fourthly, the proponents of the resolution claim that
the automaticity of the standing mandate is meant to
empower the General Assembly. We fail to understand
how removing the discretion and decision-making

22-330259/32

A/76/PV.69

ability of the President of the General Assembly and
the membership can empower the General Assembly.
There are already mechanisms in place that enable
the membership of the General Assembly to decide on
an emergency basis to convene discussions, or even
take action on issues that have reached a stalemate in
the Security Council. We need not add an automatic
invocation of another mechanism by rewriting the
existing rules.
The wider implications of today’s decision bring
us to our fifth and final issue. A substantive and
important resolution such as this, with profound longterm ramifications on the relationship between two
major organs of the United Nations, their mandates
and internal working dynamics, demands much more
serious, in-depth and inclusive deliberation than was
allowed by the movers of the text of resolution 76/262.
We regret the lack of inclusivity in the way in which
it was proposed. We have serious concerns about such
take-it-or-leave-it initiatives, which do not make a
genuine effort to take into account the perspectives and
concerns of the wider membership.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor to explain our position on resolution 76/262.
We support all efforts to improve transparency in the
work of the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the United Nations as a whole. It was in that spirit
that Indonesia joined the consensus on the resolution.
Hence, it is regrettable that our endeavour to
improve the transparency of the Security Council was
conducted through a non-inclusive and non-transparent
process. Indonesia regrets the take-it-or-leave-it
approach forced upon the wider Member States in
the drafting process of this resolution, which was
conducted under a non-negotiation process with the
wider Member States.
Outreach after the resolution has been submitted
to the General Assembly is not a negotiation process.
Only through a negotiation process could we improve
the draft, which carries the collective views of the wider
Member States, a key principle of the General Assembly.
Moreover, we once again emphasize our call to end
double standards or the pick-and-choose approach in
our work in the United Nations. We should all be able
to listen to the rationale behind the use of all vetoes
without exception, with or without the issue being the
agenda of the General Assembly.
10/32

26/04/2022

Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus, a country that survived the
horrors of Nazi occupation and defeated the plague of
fascism, is a founding Member of the United Nations
and has always been very careful and responsible with
regard to the United Nations carrying out its primary
role, namely, the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We are very disturbed by the fact that in the
Security Council there are considerable differences and
disagreements among the permanent members. That
is a very dangerous situation. However, what is even
more dangerous is to ignore such disagreements and
try to find simple ways around them.
Unfortunately, that is exactly what we are called
on to do in resolution 76/262, which the General
Assembly adopted today. Instead of trying to identify
the root causes of the disagreements in the Council
and determine why it is impossible to reach consensus
in the Council, along with the reasons behind the
unwillingness of the permanent members on the
Council to reach compromise, the sponsors are relying
on brute force, namely, their ability to form a majority
in the General Assembly by using all kinds of tricks. By
the way, they are openly stating as much.
The Republic of Belarus carefully studied the
text of the resolution and has decided not to break the
consensus, but we dissociate ourselves from it. We
would like to explain the reasons for our decision.
First of all, we would like to state that the manner
in which the document was drafted was unacceptable.
The work on the draft text was carried out behind
closed doors. We are not aware of any comprehensive
round of open, inclusive and transparent discussions on
the document. Such an approach in itself raises doubts
about the integrity and right-mindedness of the authors.
Secondly, the only exchange of views, on 19 April,
following the issuance of the draft text was clearly a
formal exercise. Not only did the authors fail to clarify
most of the questions posed by delegations, but they
also did not take into account the comments made,
making only minimal minor adjustments.
After several days, the resolution was put before
the General Assembly for its consideration in a rather
hurried manner. What was the reason for such haste,
22-33025

26/04/2022

especially since, as the authors maintain, the General
Assembly already has the authority to do all that the
resolution proposes? It should be recalled that resolution
377 (V), “Uniting for peace”, of 3 November 1950,
gives the Assembly broad powers to act if the Security
Council fails to discharge its primary responsibility.
The content of the document is also problematic. The
resolution has an overtly political and country-specific
focus. Even the sponsors themselves do not deny that
fact. The document blatantly violates the streamlined
structure of the United Nations work as stipulated in the
Charter and contradicts the key principle of the division
of labour among its main organs. The resolution does
not add the transparency mentioned by the sponsors to
the Security Council’s work. The words transparency,
openness and accountability are not even used in
the text.
The resolution should have been considered as
one possible element of Security Council reform. We
believe that singling out individual elements from
the set of Council reform issues only distances the
international community from adopting the resolution
that we all need. The work on Security Council reform
is in fact devalued when resolutions are adopted in the
interests of only one group of countries, while issues of
concern to other groups remain unaddressed.
Finally, on the revitalization of the United Nations
system and the General Assembly, in recent years
Member States and the Secretariat have noted that the
agenda and schedules are overburdened, which has
had a negative impact on the practical outcomes of the
entire United Nations system.
The introduction of an automatic meeting
mechanism for the General Assembly would inevitably
lead to procedural conflict in its work. That would only
compound the accumulation of issues and would in no
way serve the purpose of revitalizing and strengthening
the United Nations system, which underpins the General
Assembly agenda item of the same name, under which,
ironically, the resolution was introduced.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): The
Algerian delegation joined in the adoption of resolution
76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for the General
Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the Security
Council”, as a procedural mechanism to strengthen the
role, powers and functions of the General Assembly
in matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security as the principal representative

A/76/PV.69

organ for deliberation and policymaking. It is therefore
important to view this initiative in the broader context
of strengthening multilateralism and responding to
the call of the United Nations membership for greater
transparency and accountability, without selectivity.
Undoubtedly, this resolution is a useful and timely
institutional step forward, but it remains modest in
relation to the need for the harmonious integration of
the main organs so that each of them can realize and
exploit its full potential.
It should be noted that the mere reported instances
of abuse of the use of the veto supports the explicit
democratization of the work of all organs, particularly
the Security Council, but structurally rather
than circumstantially.
The immense challenges currently facing the world
and all humankind require us now more than ever to
strengthen international cooperation and solidarity in
order to more effectively activate the mechanisms of
multilateral action and establish rules of a new world
order that ensure the equal participation of all countries
without any discrimination.
To that end, we must work together to advance the
process of a comprehensive reform of the United Nations
system in order to improve its performance and promote
its effectiveness in discharging the responsibilities
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations.
We need to focus on revitalizing the central role of the
General Assembly and reforming the Security Council
in order to achieve greater transparency and equitable
geographical representation and put an end to the
historical injustice imposed on the African continent.
The Algerian delegation reiterates the importance
of committing to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform, which are the only framework
for Council reform, in accordance with resolution
62/557, of 15 December 2008.
In that regard, we also stress the need for
an integrated approach, calling for genuine and
comprehensive Security Council reform that includes
the five main issues contained in the resolution, in line
with the African common position, as stipulated in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
In general, the approach adopted by Algeria with
regard to the United Nations system is in line with all
the initiatives to strengthen the complementary and
interactive relationship between the General Assembly

22-3302511/32

A/76/PV.69

26/04/2022

and the Security Council. That allows all countries
to express their positions and set out their views and
expectations on many issues that fall within the purview
of the Security Council, and should remain at the top of
the United Nations agenda.

Going forward, we hope that the resolution that
has now been adopted is implemented in a consistent
manner across the board in order to reinforce resilience
of and people’s faith in our multilateral system in
general and the General Assembly in particular.

In conclusion, it should be recalled that
strengthening multilateral action remains the only
possible way to overcome the challenges of the current
critical juncture. Our main objective is to contribute
collectively to supporting the purposes and principles
of the United Nations so that our Organization can
more effectively fulfil its mandate to ensure the human
right to a decent life in freedom, peace and dignity.

Mr. Sarufa (Papua New Guinea): On behalf of
my delegation, let me acknowledge the leadership
and the efforts of the core group of countries on the
establishment of the General Assembly standing
mandate to deal with the use of the veto in the Security
Council subsequent to a meeting in which a veto is cast.

Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand supports
the ongoing efforts to enhance transparency in the
United Nations, whether in the General Assembly or
the Security Council. In our view, resolution 76/262,
which we just adopted, reflects a well-intentioned
effort that seeks to promote greater transparency in
the work of the Security Council, particularly on the
use of the veto. The stated aspirations behind, and
the principle underlying, such efforts are important
and commendable.
At the same time, what is equally important is for
a resolution of such significance — one with wider
and longer-term institutional implications, especially
on the interrelationship between the Security Council
and the General Assembly — to benefit from more
wide-ranging and comprehensive consultations with
the United Nations membership. While we recognize
that the resolution’s genesis came about some time
ago and that the pandemic unfortunately suspended
work on it, we also note that efforts to take forward
the draft picked up dramatically in the past few weeks.
This accelerated process has, in our view, placed some
limitations on comprehensive consultations that would
have been beneficial to all.
On the substance of resolution 76/262, the
issue of automaticity, in which the President would
automatically convene a formal meeting of the General
Assembly after a veto or vetoes have been cast in the
Security Council, merits serious reflection. In our
view, the General Assembly process should be as
Member-State-driven as possible and with good reason.
Automaticity, however well meaning, takes “we, the
Member States” out of the decision-making loop and in
so doing reduces flexibility and limits options — two
key assets of diplomacy.
12/32

The veto debate is not only politically sensitive but
also emotionally charged, with its positive and negative
implications. Veto custodians in the Security Council
have a duty of responsibility, rather than a right,
and its application must be in the letter and spirit of
engendering international peace and security, pursuant
to the Charter of the United Nations. For Papua New
Guinea, as a developing small country, the rule of law
and the respect for and upholding of international law
commitments and obligations, including the United
Nations Charter, is a safety valve that affords and
assures security and protection of States such as mine.
Papua New Guinea joined the consensus in adopting
resolution 76/262, as its intent is one we share.
We note that this resolution is said to be of a
procedural nature. However, it has potential wider
substantive implications, as it relates to the international
peace and security agenda and to the mandates of both
the Security Council and the General Assembly. That
is why we raised several issues of importance to us
during the sole informal consultation with the wider
United Nations membership last held week. One of
the particular concerns to my delegation was the
inclusiveness and transparency of the process in the
context of meaningful multilateralism.
Having closed meetings in small configurations
with limited wider consultations to prepare important
General Assembly initiatives, including draft
resolutions, whether they be procedural or substantive
in nature, is not a substitute for an inclusive and
transparent process in this body. It is also not in the
spirit of our collective efforts for dialogue. However, we
welcome the outreach for dialogue and appreciate the
flexibility of the core group and sponsors of resolution
76/262, in facilitating the inclusion of new elements
suggested by my delegation and others, particularly
relating to Article 27 of the United Nations Charter.
22-33025

26/04/2022

As we meet in this Hall today to establish a General
Assembly standing mandate to deal with the aftermath
of the use of the veto in the Security Council, we are yet
again reminded of the needless suffering and pain the
people and the Government of Ukraine are currently
subjected to as a dire consequence of the veto cast by
a permanent member of the Security Council in breach
of the mandate and trust bestowed upon members of the
Council under the United Nations Charter to prevent
the scourge of war. It is incumbent upon all of us to be
better collective guardians of our international peace
and security and not just leave it to the Security Council
in its current outdated format. We can no longer afford
to have a Security Council that is not fit for purpose, has
questionable accountability and an opaque personality,
and does not represent today’s realities.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We need a Council that is truly an organ that better
serves, “we, the peoples of the United Nations” rather
than the self-serving interests of a few. It is once again
this that brings to the fore the pressing importance of
the reform of the Security Council. It is on this basis
and from this lens that my delegation saw the necessity
for us to join the consensus and support resolution
76/262, just adopted.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): In Namibia’s capacity as
a member of the African Union Committee of 10 on
the Reform of the United Nations Security Council,
I have the honour to deliver this explanation of vote
after the voting on behalf of the States members of
the African Union, following the General Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 76/262, under agenda item 124,
entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations system”,
otherwise known as the veto initiative.
The States members of the African Union thank the
delegation of Liechtenstein and the other sponsors of
the resolution for the initiative and for the engagements
over time with States Members of the United Nations,
explaining the rationale, nature and scope of the veto
initiative. We have been engaged in the process leading
to the adoption of resolution 76/262 and have acted on
the basis of each State member of the African Union,
expressing their sovereign will on this resolution, which
is, in our view, purely procedural. This explanation of
vote after the voting is focused on putting on record the
position of the States members of the African Union
on the issue of the reform of the Security Council, in

A/76/PV.69

particular, on the cluster of the question of the veto
under the agenda item on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council.
Africa remains convinced of the need for a
comprehensive reform of the United Nations system
that will significantly contribute to upholding the
principles, objectives and ideals of the United Nations
Charter for a fairer world, based on universalism,
equity and regional balance. In particular, Africa
attaches great importance to the reform of the United
Nations Security Council. We are of the firm view that
reform is needed to improve the Council and make it
an accessible, accountable, transparent, democratic,
representative and more effective organ of the United
Nations and thereby give legitimacy to its decisions and
better reflect current geopolitical realities.
Africa has a clear position on the five clusters
of the intergovernmental negotiations on the reform
of the Security Council, including on the question of
the veto and the agreed decision for a comprehensive
reform of the Security Council, as outlined in decision
62/557. We would therefore like to underline our firm
position that resolution 76/262, on the veto initiative,
is distinct from the intergovernmental negotiations on
the reform of the Security Council and has no bearing
or impact on decision 62/557 and the Common African
Position as espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus and the
Sirte Declaration. Africa remains true and faithful to
decision 62/557 and other relevant General Assembly
decisions for a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council on all the five clusters, taking into account
their interconnectedness. We therefore welcome the
eighth preambular paragraph of resolution 76/262,
which states,
“Bearing in mind its decision 62/557 […] the
present resolution and its provisions are without
prejudice to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform”.
In conclusion, we reiterate the call for a
comprehensive reform of the United Nations system
to ensure that the Organization is fit for purpose
and can lead in addressing persistent challenges and
fragile situations, as we have been urged by our Heads
of State and Governments in the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations to instil new life in the reform process.

22-3302513/32

A/76/PV.69

Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan supported the
adoption of resolution 76/262 under agenda item
124, entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations
system”. Pakistan agrees with the overall objective of
the resolution, which is to bring greater responsibility
to the conduct of the permanent members of the
Security Council.
Pakistan appreciates that the sponsors added the
eighth preambular paragraph, which recalls decision
62/557 and notes that the resolution and its provisions
are without prejudice to the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. We also
welcome the inclusion in the text of the third and fifth
preambular paragraphs, which recall Articles 12 and
17, respectively, of the Charter of the United Nations.
Under those provisions, it is clear that the trigger for
holding a General Assembly meeting in the wake of the
use of the veto by a permanent member is a situation in
which the Council is prevented from acting on questions
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. We also believe that slight modifications to
the language in paragraph 1 could have expressed that
qualification with clarity.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
a founding Member of the United Nations, Argentina
is firmly committed to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations dating back to the
negotiations of the 1945 San Francisco Conference,
especially the meeting of the General Assembly at the
second part of its first session held in October 1946
(see A/PV.37), at which Argentina took a firm position
against the right of veto.
Argentina has reiterated its position against the
right of veto and in favour of the reform of the Security
Council with the consensus of States Members every
time the issue has been raised, especially since the
process of intergovernmental negotiations began. The
Security Council must be more democratic, transparent,
efficient, representative and accountable vis-à-vis the
international community.
Argentina joined the consensus on resolution
76/262 in keeping with its historical position on the
right of veto, as a privilege that violates the principle
of the sovereign equality among States and must
be abolished. In taking into account the ongoing
intergovernmental negotiation to reform the Security
Council, my delegation would like to stress that its
support for the adoption of resolution 76/262 was
14/32

26/04/2022

predicated on its eighth preambular paragraph, which
recalls decision 62/557 and affirms that it is without
prejudice to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
76/262. However, we would like to state the following.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has been a staunch supporter
of a strengthened role for the United Nations as
the cornerstone of multilateralism in maintaining
international peace and security. Iran has also called
on the Security Council to act in a more efficient,
transparent, effective and accountable manner.
In that context, ending the Security Council’s
wrong and unlawful practices, as well as its application
of double standards, which are harmful to international
peace and security and incompatible with United
Nations purposes and principles, should remain at
the forefront of any effort to strengthen the United
Nations system.
According to Article 24, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council, in
carrying out its responsibilities, shall act in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
That means that the Council’s powers and authority
are limited, it is not above the law, and it cannot act
arbitrarily or without regard for international law.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 24,
paragraph 1, the Security Council has been given
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security by Member States.
That means that the Council has a legal, political and
moral responsibility to act properly and responsibly and
that members of the Council must make decisions based
on the common interests of the Organization’s entire
membership, rather than on their own national interests
or those of the geopolitical or geographical groups to
which they belong.
The Council is responsible to the Member States,
on behalf of which it acts, and must therefore remain
accountable to them. That indeed is the raison d’être
of Article 24, paragraph 3, which requires the Council
to submit annual or special reports to the General
Assembly, in which all Member States are represented.
United Nations organs should refrain from interfering
22-33025

26/04/2022

A/76/PV.69

in one another’s competencies and responsibilities. The
Charter serves as a yardstick in that regard.

balanced decisions. That is exactly what often compels
us to use the veto.

All United Nations organs, including the Security
Council, must adhere to the principles of impartiality,
effectiveness and professionalism and refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of States and the
pursuance of certain political interests running contrary
to their independence.

Of course, the veto is a measure of last resort and
is used when other options have been exhausted. That
is why, when using this instrument, the permanent
members of the Security Council provide the most
exhaustive clarifications as to why the veto was cast. All
such statements are publicly available. The permanent
members of the Security Council could also easily
provide the same explanations to all Member States
of the General Assembly. However, quite frankly, we
do not see that any value would be added by such
an exercise.

The right of veto is foreseen in the Charter.
However, due to the fact that it has been used arbitrarily
since the inception of the United Nations, its use must
be regulated. The use of the veto must be consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter as well
as other principles of international law enshrined in the
1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States, particularly the sovereign equality of States, the
non-use of force and non-intervention in the internal
and international affairs of States.
As stated in the eighth preambular paragraph,
resolution 76/262 and its provisions are without
prejudice to the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform. In that regard, we reiterate
our commitment to the reform of the Security Council
within the existing formats and emphasize that
transforming the Council into a truly rules-based and
accountable body must remain a top priority.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Let me say a few words about resolution
76/262, which was just adopted. Quite frankly, we had
no desire to join the consensus. I shall explain why.
The right of veto of the permanent members of
the Security Council is a cornerstone of the United
Nations architecture. Without it, the Security Council
would become a body merely rubber-stamping
questionable decisions imposed by the nominal
majority whose implementation would be unlikely.
As we know, history has borne witness to several
multilateral mechanisms in which attempts were made
to forgo a veto. However, as we all know, no good came
out of them.
In that regard, we are convinced that what needs
to be criticized is not the veto but rather the lack of
willingness of some members of Security Council to
listen to and take into account the opinion of others,
as well as their inability to find compromise and take

The decision that was made today, while it comes
in very pretty packaging, is without doubt an attempt
to create an instrument that exerts pressure on the
permanent members of the Security Council. That is an
approach that we categorically reject.
The division of powers between the Security
Council and the General Assembly is what has allowed
our global Organization to function effectively for
more than 75 years now. None of those who advocated
broadening the authority of the General Assembly at the
expense of the Security Council or who brought to the
Security Council issues that should be considered by
the General Assembly have ever enjoyed our support.
That is our principled position.
Therefore, we will continue as before to be guided
by the provisions of Article 12 of the Charter of the
United Nations, according to which the General
Assembly shall not make any recommendation with
regard to an issue that is under consideration by the
Security Council. It is obvious to us that the initiative on
which resolution 76/262 is based cannot resolve either
major or minor issues that the Member States or our
global Organization must address. At the same time,
it risks introducing additional irritants into situations
where the veto has been used.
It is difficult for us at this stage to assess all of the
potential ramifications of that decision. Therefore, for
us, today’s adoption of resolution 76/262 does not give
rise to positive emotions of any kind.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba has always supported the fact that the General
Assembly should fully assume the role entrusted to
it by the United Nations with regard to international
peace and security. The mandate of the Assembly on

22-3302515/32

A/76/PV.69

those issues has been severely undermined because
of the growing trend in the Security Council to usurp
its functions.
The Council is increasingly expanding the definition
of international peace and security to the detriment
of the important functions and responsibilities of the
General Assembly, which is the most democratic and
representative organ in the United Nations.
We also support an urgent and broad reform of
the Security Council to make it a representative,
democratic and transparent organ. The delegation of
Cuba was not opposed to resolution 76/262, which was
adopted without a vote. At the same time, we would like
to place on record several concerns and considerations
with respect to the text adopted.
First of all, we understand that resolution 76/262
does not replace the provisions of rules 8 (b) and 9 (b)
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on
the convening of emergency special sessions. For that
reason, it is our view that we should explicitly exclude
the possibility of the President of the General Assembly
convening a debate on paragraph 1 of resolution 76/262,
adopted today, given the prior voting by the General
Assembly on resolution 377 A (V), entitled “Uniting for
peace”, in which the majority of its Member States were
opposed to convening the General Assembly to discuss
that same issue.
Secondly, we believe that it is not enough to limit
the submission of the special reports of the Security
Council to those cases in which the veto was used. That
would clearly be a restrictive and selective approach
with respect to the stipulations of Article 15, paragraph
1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We reiterate the position of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, supported by Cuba, that the
Security Council is compelled to submit special reports
for the consideration of the General Assembly whenever
necessary and not only for veto-related issues.
Thirdly, the question of the veto should not be
considered separately from the other issues that are
under the mandate of the intergovernmental negotiating
framework on reform of the Security Council,
established pursuant to decision 62/557. The five key
issues identified for reforming that organ, including
the question of the veto, are closely linked and form an
16/32

26/04/2022

entire package. Similarly, we will be unable to conduct
a comprehensive review of the Council, which we need.
With regard to paragraph 4 of resolution 76/262, on
the inclusion of the use of the veto as a standing item on the
General Assembly’s agenda, as of the seventy-seventh
regular session of the Assembly, cannot in any way be
interpreted as being to the detriment of the inextricable
links among the five issues under consideration in the
intergovernmental negotiations process on reform of
the Council, pursuant to decision 62/557.
Mr. Gutiérrez Plata (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to make the following points
on resolution 76/262, which was just adopted.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Colombia adopts the traditional position of challenging
the veto and advocating its elimination. We believe that
the role played by the Security Council as part of the
mechanism set out in the Charter of the United Nations
is important and should not be overlooked.
Colombia is of the view that the system already has
a valuable instrument with which to address situations
in which the Security Council is paralysed because of
the use of the veto. Resolution 377 A (V), of 3 November
1950, entitled “Uniting for peace”, has proven its
value and effectiveness and includes a procedure and
mechanism that would enable the General Assembly
to consider a situation related to the maintenance of
international peace and security whenever the Council
is inoperable because of the use of the veto. It also has
the requisite procedural safeguards to prevent the abuse
of the mechanism and ensure respect for the distribution
of functions set out in the Charter of the Organization.
Of particular relevance is the fact that, in exceptional
circumstances, the Council itself may convene special
sessions of the General Assembly, thereby ensuring
respect for Article 12 of the Charter. Under such
conditions, we believe that a new mechanism, as set
out in resolution 76/262, is not necessary, transforms
the system that works to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security, as outlined in the
Charter, and undermines the functions of the Council,
thereby disregarding that organ in those cases in which
a permanent member has exercised the use of the veto.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption of
the resolution.
We will now hear statements after adoption.
22-33025

26/04/2022

Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries,
namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my
own country, Sweden.
We would like to thank Liechtenstein for
this important initiative. The Nordic countries
wholeheartedly welcome the adoption of resolution
76/262.
The fulfilment of the principal task of the United
Nations — the maintenance of international peace and
security —depends on a Security Council that delivers
in accordance with its mandate. The Charter of the
United Nations entrusts the Security Council with the
primary responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. The use of the veto to prevent the Council
from discharging its Charter-based duties is a matter of
great concern. During the past five years, for instance,
the veto has been used to block the action of the Council
no fewer than 17 times.
As the most recent instance of the use of the
veto — by Russia — further highlights, there is an
urgent need for veto restraint and for more transparency
and accountability when the veto power is used.
The Nordic countries have been consistent
supporters of initiatives that seek to make sure that
the Council is not prevented by the use of the veto
from taking action with the aim of preventing or
bringing an end to situations involving commissions
of mass atrocities. The resolution adopted today will
supplement those efforts. It is a significant step towards
accountability and transparency in the use of the veto
power. That is also why we have supported the initiative
since its inception two years ago.
The Security Council is entrusted with the
responsibility to maintain peace and security on behalf
of us, the Member States represented in the Assembly.
Therefore, it is natural that when permanent members
of the Council use their veto to block Council action,
they are invited to the General Assembly to explain
their positions, and that all Member States have an
opportunity to discuss the matter.
The resolution adopted today in no way encroaches
on the veto power, but it seeks to increase transparency
and accountability in its use. We hope that the new
mandate will contribute to the effectiveness of the
Security Council and to its ability to discharge its duty.

A/76/PV.69

Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the three Baltic States, that is,
Estonia, Latvia and my own country, Lithuania.
We applaud the adoption of resolution 76/262,
entitled “Standing mandate for a General Assembly
debate when a veto is cast in the Security Council”. We
are proud to have presented the resolution together with
a cross-regional group of States and to have provided
consistent support throughout the negotiation and
preparation process, which was skilfully steered by
the Ambassador of Liechtenstein and his team. We are
grateful to all the States Members of the United Nations
for their support to the resolution to render the use of
the veto more transparent. We are inspired by the strong
support of the membership for the initiative.
This momentous adoption reaffirms our strong
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
provides an opportunity to renew our dedication to it.
The Baltic States welcome the strong determination
of the international community to reflect on the
significance of the Charter to international peace and
security and its fundamental importance to effectively
functioning multilateralism. Today’s adoption is a
strong result of the consistently increasing advocacy for
a more resilient role for the General Assembly in matters
of international peace and security, as mandated by the
Charter. We believe it is necessary to make the United
Nations more capable and restore its reputation. This
resolution is a very meaningful step in that direction.
We also note that this adoption took place at a
particularly timely juncture, as the discussion within
the international community regained new traction
following Russia’s large-scale, unprovoked, unlawful
and unjustified war of aggression against Ukraine.
Besides shedding new light on Russia’s continuous
misuse of its perch on the Security Council to
misrepresent international norms, sow discord and
spread disinformation in the pursuit of national interests,
it is also a stark reminder of the dire implications of the
reduced ability of the Council to take effective action
against threats to international peace and security.
That again points to a pressing need to reaffirm our
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
strengthen the role of the General Assembly. It is a joint
responsibility of us, the States Members of the United
Nations, to act in earnest — not only to talk — and to
abide by the principles of the Charter, not merely profess

22-3302517/32

A/76/PV.69

26/04/2022

our support for them. It demands time, motivation and
commitment, but it is a fundamental effort.

The Charter of the United Nations is very clear. Let
me quote Article 24, paragraph 1:

As the principal international Organization with
the aim of maintaining peace and security, the United
Nations has a unique responsibility to re-evaluate
and reinvent itself in order to seek productive ways to
deliver on the promise of peace.

“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf.”

Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the three Benelux
countries —Belgium, the Netherlands and my own
country, Luxembourg.
The Benelux countries are proud to have
co-sponsored resolution 76/262, which was just adopted
by consensus and which establishes a standing mandate
for the General Assembly to hold a debate when a veto
is cast in the Security Council.
We thank Liechtenstein for its leadership on this
important resolution. Today’s adoption comes after
more than two years of preparation and very broad
consultations among Member States. We welcome the
fact that, as a result, the resolution enjoys very broad
cross-regional support.
The resolution we have adopted makes clear
that its provisions are without prejudice to the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. The aim is not to reform the Security Council,
but to strengthen the role of the General Assembly by
establishing a mechanism for the Assembly to convene
within 10 working days of the casting of a veto by one
or more permanent members of the Security Council
and to hold a debate on the situation as to which the veto
was cast, provided that the Assembly does not meet in
an emergency special session on the same situation.
At this critical juncture for the United Nations,
the resolution sends an important signal in support
for multilateralism. The use of the veto has increased
significantly over the past years, preventing the Security
Council from discharging its mandate effectively and
maintaining international peace and security. Recent
examples include the veto cast at the end of last year,
on 13 December 2021, which prevented the adoption by
the Security Council of a draft resolution (S/2021/990)
addressing the crucial link between climate and security,
which was supported by a broad majority of Member
States. That increased use of the veto has far-reaching
consequences for the work and the effectiveness of the
Security Council and the United Nations as a whole.
18/32

The Security Council acts on behalf of all States
Members of the United Nations. In that spirit, it makes
perfect sense for us, the Member States, to hold a debate
in the General Assembly whenever the use of the veto
by one or more permanent members of the Security
Council has made prompt and effective action by the
United Nations impossible.
The use of the veto is not a privilege, but a heavy
responsibility. The resolution we have just adopted is
a crucial step to strengthen multilateralism by making
the permanent members of the Security Council more
accountable to the general membership when they use
the veto to block the adoption of a Security Council draft
resolution. It is a crucial step forward for accountability
and transparency, and we are glad that we have been
able to make this step today with the support of so
many Member States.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Albania has supported
this initiative from the very beginning and is a proud
co-sponsor of resolution 76/262, which was adopted
today without a vote. The reasons for doing so are
very simple and straightforward, and we have said
them before.
We find ourselves at the cusp of a major global
reordering that is putting into question the basic rules
and institutions that came out of the most calamitous
war in history, namely, to maintain peace and security.
This organ, the General Assembly, has conferred
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
to maintain peace and security. That responsibility has
not been discharged in accordance with the aspirations
with which it was envisaged, at least not always. Far too
often, it has shown a dereliction of its duties.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine has made
that painfully visible for everyone to see. The Russian
veto has turned the Council into a bulwark in the service
of Russian lies and manipulation, a threat to peace and
22-33025

26/04/2022

security. That is not good for the Council, not good for
the United Nations and not good for the world.
We respect the Council. We think it has a vital role
to play in questions that make a difference between
life and death. Indeed, that is the reason we asked for
Member States’ support to serve in that esteemed organ.
But we see up close how that organ can be used for the
short-sighted interests of specific countries, against
the common interests of humankind, of the billions of
people who want to live in peace and dignity.
The abuse of the veto undermines the legitimacy
of not only the Council but also of the entire United
Nations. That opens the gates to the fragmentation,
disintegration and decay of the rules-based international
order. We cannot let that happen. And we are glad that
we were able to speak with one voice against such
an anomaly.
Seventy-six years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations included the veto as a guarantee that great
Powers would never disagree to the point of returning to
war. They would resort to the veto, that special privilege,
with responsibility when their crucial national interests
were involved. But as we have seen over the years, the
veto has been used and abused and many times without
any clear reason or justification. Therefore, we need to
make sure, to the best of our abilities, that the veto is
used not as an exclusive privilege but rather as a heavy
responsibility. The use of the veto as an exclusive
privilege without responsibility is a violation of the
spirit of the historic compromise that created the veto.
It betrays the aspirations of the world to attain peace
and security.
And this resolution is doing exactly that, bringing
a sense of responsibility to the use of the veto. The
resolution sends a clear message to the world that the
wider membership of the United Nations retains its
jurisgenerative capacity to make law and strengthen
multilateralism by closing the gap between two major
organs of the United nations: the Security Council and
the General Assembly.
Mr. Murillo Quesada (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Liechtenstein for its leadership on this
initiative, of which we are co-sponsors and a member
of the core group. We joined the effort because the
veto has failed as a tool of international law. The veto
is not a right. It is a privilege that is too powerful to
exist. It is an anachronistic privilege that creates odious

A/76/PV.69

differences both within the Council and among the
membership — differences to which we should not
contribute to increasing but, on the contrary, work
together to limit and eliminate.
Frequently, a so-called hidden veto is used to block
or dilute to the lowest common denominator draft
resolutions intended to save lives. Every time it is used,
a veto can easily become a death sentence for millions
of people. Its mere existence hinders and paralyses the
United Nations in its role as a guarantor of peace and
security. Instead of acting, the veto forces the United
Nations to watch from the sidelines, and that discredits
the Organization incredibly.
Unable to intervene to prevent and resolve
conflicts, the Security Council is transformed into
a council of global insecurity, leading to serious and
costly consequences in the form of protracted conflicts
and loss of life. Its use has undermined the legitimacy
and credibility of the Council, as well as of the
Organization itself.
The veto is not the cornerstone of the United
Nations, but its tombstone. It is but an old ghost of
a world that ceased its existence long ago. It is an
immoral practice in its nature, which has confirmed
Costa Rica’s belief that it is necessary to place limits on
its unrestricted use.
With resolution 76/262, which we just adopted
today, a mechanism is established that provides for a
debate to be held before the General Assembly each time
a veto is cast in the Security Council. This mechanism
also requests the Security Council to submit a special
report on the veto prior to the debate in question, and
provides for the inclusion of the item “Use of the veto”
in the agenda of the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly.
This resolution is a historic step towards
accountability and, above all, transparency. It
embodies the legitimate demand of Member States that
the Security Council be accountable to those on whose
behalf it acts, all of us Members of the Organization. It
also honours principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, such as accountability, the clarification
of responsibilities, transparent information and
functional balance.
With regard to the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, like many other
countries that have also mentioned this here in Hall,

22-3302519/32

A/76/PV.69

we are aware that much remains to be done. This is a
complementary, two-way relationship in which, on the
one hand, the Council acts on behalf of the Member
States and, on the other, the Member States provide
recommendations on the issues the Council deals with
and the methods it applies in the decision-making
process. Until now, that relationship has been an
exclusive monologue, never a dialogue. From now on,
things will be different.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): The General Assembly
is the only fully universal and therefore most
representative organ of the United Nations. As the very
embodiment and soul of multilateralism, the Assembly
has priority and power over all other organs of the
United Nations. Indeed, under Article 15 of the Charter
of the United Nations, all organs of the United Nations
system are mandated to submit reports to the General
Assembly for its consideration, and, according to
Article 24 of the Charter, the Security Council acts on
behalf of the Member States which together comprise
the General Assembly.
The Member States confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, on many
occasions, unfortunately, we have seen the Security
Council fail to carry out its mandate. By not providing
timely and adequate responses to crises, it could not
maintain international peace and security.
As we all know, the veto power is the very reason
for the frequent paralysis we have witnessed in the
Security Council. It is not uncommon to see the
permanent members exercise the veto to pursue their
own self-interests. And most of the time, the use of the
veto has far-reaching consequences that can lead to or
deepen humanitarian crises and give rise to risks to the
security and safety of all humankind.
Today, we, the States Members of the United
Nations, have adopted a historic resolution (resolution
76/262). As of this day, the General Assembly has one
more tool to address matters pertaining to international
peace and security. This is an important step in
enhancing the role of this vital organ in accordance
with its mandate under the United Nations Charter.
Likewise, it is an important step towards making the
Security Council more accountable and efficient.
Turkey is proud to have been in the core group of
this initiative since its inception two years ago. We will
20/32

26/04/2022

continue to work with other Member States to realize
the promise of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Today, the General Assembly has adopted
a resolution of unquestionable significance (resolution
76/262). Although it may appear to be a modest
initiative, it is in fact an important step forward in
strengthening the United Nations.
We have suffered from the absence of an effective
system of accountability, justified by the argument
that the principal organs of the United Nations are
equal and therefore not subordinate to one another.
The importance of the responsibility vested in an organ
of limited membership, such as the Security Council,
should be more than sufficient reason for an effective
system of accountability.
In any case, the thesis of equality among the principal
organs of the Organization is belied by the practice,
albeit recent, of the General Assembly debating and
commenting on the reports of the International Court
of Justice and the Security Council, each of which is a
principal organ. This practice has resulted in the Court,
in contrast to the Council, submitting increasingly
substantive reports. Both the General Assembly and
the Court agree that this practice does not jeopardize
the judicial independence of the latter and that, on
the contrary, it supports the latter’s work. In this way,
we have fostered greater collaboration and dialogue
between two principal organs of the United Nations.
Improving this interaction has also been a priority
for Mexico in its current participation as an elected
member of the Security Council, which resulted in
the adoption last November of presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/23, in which the Security Council
expresses its ongoing commitment to fostering
interaction on a regular basis among all principal
organs, including the General Assembly. Today’s
resolution therefore serves to pave the way for greater
and better collaboration between these two principal
organs, and even more so when it comes to an issue that
is of interest to the international community as a whole,
namely, the exercise of the veto. In this context, we
have also strengthened today the mandate derived from
Article 24, paragraph 1 of the United Nations Charter,
a mandate which, by providing that the Security
Council acts on behalf of all the Member States of the
Organization, ascribes to it thereby a responsibility
on behalf of us all. And if this is so, how can it be
22-33025

26/04/2022

justified that the permanent member or members that
have decided to resort to the veto do not explain to the
rest of the Member States the reasons that led them
to prevent the Security Council from carrying out the
primary responsibility entrusted to it by the Charter of
the United Nations?
Beyond the explanations of vote offered within the
Security Council, from now on there is a mechanism
that recognizes and enforces the right of each and every
Member of the Organization, as well as the obligation
of the permanent members, to receive and provide,
respectively, an explanation of the reasons that led them
to veto a draft resolution on any issue. For, when the
veto is exercised, it is not only the action of the Security
Council that is truncated or halted; it is, in fact, the
entire membership, having delegated responsibility to
the Council, that falls victim to the decision of one or
more permanent members.
As we all know, the veto stops action, the veto
does not promote the unity of the Security Council,
and the veto does not promote the search for collective
understanding. The veto has become the most
outrageous face of the power of the user: the exercise
of the veto always reveals the weak position of the one
who failed to persuade others through reason. Blocking
the will of others is the last resort when arguments fail.
Whoever wields the veto, therefore, does not offer
solutions, but simply obstructs action. In other words,
those who resort to the veto prefer to prevent any
movement, instead of confronting a problem with a
view to solving it. Those who use the veto take refuge
in the interposition of an insurmountable obstacle when
the course of action being vetoed is contrary to their
interests, and not to the interests of the international
community as a whole.
All of the foregoing should lead us to endorse
a principle that has been recognized since 1945 and
which we have often forgotten. That principle has been
repeated many times this morning: the veto is not a
privilege, but a responsibility — a grave responsibility.
That principle was inscribed in a joint declaration issued
by the five future permanent members of the Council
and read by the representative of France on 7 June 1945,
at the San Francisco Conference, which states:
“It is not to be assumed, however, that the permanent
members, any more than the non-permanent
members, would use their ‘veto’ power wilfully

A/76/PV.69

to obstruct the
(S/Procedure/79).

operation

of

the

Council”

It is common knowledge that Mexico, as a founding
member of the United Nations, opposed this prerogative
at the San Francisco Conference. But it is equally well
known that the historical context of the time gave no
option for avoiding the incorporation of the veto into
the Charter.
However, our decision to accept the veto was and
is based on the principle of responsible use of the veto.
An example of this is the initiative that we, jointly
with France, have been promoting for several years,
with regard to the voluntary restriction of the veto
when the Security Council is faced with situations
of mass atrocities. This initiative now has 105 States
signatories, and we would like to take advantage of this
opportunity today to invite all States that have not yet
done so and that supported the resolution we have just
adopted to also support the Franco-Mexican initiative,
on the understanding that the two are complementary
and mutually reinforcing.
For all the foregoing reasons, Mexico was also
part of the core group from which the initiative that
brings us to this Hall today arose and was, with deep
conviction, a sponsor of resolution 76/262. In short,
we have ensured that the veto does not have the last
word. The last word once again belongs to the General
Assembly, which is the expression par excellence of the
universal conscience.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): I would like to start by
congratulating us all on the adoption of resolution
76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for a General
Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the Security
Council” and to especially thank Liechtenstein for its
outstanding leadership.
With resolution 76/262, we have just contributed
to strengthening not only the role of the General
Assembly, but also the effectiveness of the United
Nations as a whole. Through Article 24, paragraph
1 of the United Nations Charter, the States Members
of the United Nations have conferred on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that,
in carrying out its duties under this responsibility, the
Security Council will act on their behalf, meaning on
our behalf.

22-3302521/32

A/76/PV.69

However, the use of veto has been the cause of the
increasing inability of the Security Council to carry out
those responsibilities and act on our behalf in instances
of serious threats to and breaches of international peace
and security. Such instances as Syria, climate and
security, and, most recently, the illegal, unprovoked
and unjustified military aggression against Ukraine,
have made the need for today’s resolution all the
more important. When the Security Council fails to
act, it is not just a failure of the Security Council; it
is perceived as a failure of the United Nations and of
us all. The resolution just adopted provides us with the
opportunity to hold any Security Council member who
has cast a veto more accountable as to the reasons why
his or her country has chosen to prevent the Security
Council from acting.
Bulgaria is proud to be among the initial sponsors
of this resolution, as we are convinced that it empowers
us all to be more responsible Members of the United
Nations and that it strengthens multilateralism and the
international rules-based order. It is my hope that the
procedures outlined in resolution 76/262 will never
have to be activated and that the Security Council will
be able to effectively exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
But from now on, should that not be the case, all of
us, through the General Assembly, will be able to
seek explanation and not just be mere spectators, and
that makes for a more accountable and more effective
United Nations.
Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): As a sponsor
of resolution 76/262, just adopted, I would like to
thank Liechtenstein and Ambassador Wenaweser of
Liechtenstein for his tireless work for over two years
on this important initiative. This is a testament to the
essential contribution of all members to the effective
work of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has spoken today with
authority. It was not a vote, but it represents a profound
consensus that reflects the expectation that we in the
General Assembly have of the Security Council acting
on our behalf to maintain international peace and
security. We expect more and better, and we have made
that clear today.
(spoke in English)
I am not sure what I can say about the veto that will be
more eloquent than what has been said by my colleague
from Mexico, whom I congratulate on his description
22/32

26/04/2022

of the problem. I also congratulate my colleagues from
Costa Rica and Turkey for their statements. But I just
want to add this point: that the veto power that is held by
the five permanent members of the Security Council is
as anachronistic as it is undemocratic. It has prevented
the Security Council from doing its job.
I could not disagree more with the representative
of Russia when he said that he believed that it was the
veto that allows the Security Council to do its job. It
does not. It prevents the Security Council from doing
its job. The recent deadlock over Ukraine has happened
at precisely the moment when the world needs the
United Nations — and that includes the Security
Council — the most.
The use or threat of the veto in situations where
atrocity crimes are being perpetrated — in Syria and
Myanmar and Mariupol, for example, or in situations
where a permanent member of the Security Council
has launched a war of aggression against another
State Member of the United Nations, as the Russian
Federation is now doing in Ukraine — is not only
shameful; it is also contrary to obligations under the
United Nations Charter and to international law and
to our commitment to the responsibility-to-protect
principle, which was endorsed, not only by the General
Assembly (resolution 63/308), but also by the Security
Council (resolution 1674 (2006)). Even veto-wielding
permanent members of the Security Council are not
above the law. None of us is above the law. No one is
above the law. The law is above all of us.
It is therefore both right and necessary that the
General Assembly will now convene a debate whenever
a veto is cast at the Security Council. And may I say
that the permanent members of the Security Council
have no one to blame but themselves and their own
conduct for the fact that the General Assembly now
feels obliged to do this. The General Assembly itself
has a say in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Together with the rest of the United Nations
Organization, we have an obligation, as a General
Assembly, to step up when the Security Council has
actually sidelined itself. As the International Court
of Justice has ruled, the Security Council’s “primary
role” does not mean that it has an “exclusive role”, and
that is precisely why resolution 76/262, adopted today,
can help us achieve something that is very important,
namely, a United Nations that is actually less exclusive,
a place where the voices of all 193 members of the
22-33025

26/04/2022

General Assembly will now be heard when a veto is
cast at the Security Council.
This is an important moment — a necessary
moment — for transparency, for fairness and for
equality at the United Nations. We have now learned,
sadly, because we can see it happening in real time — we
all watched it happen in the most recent example of its
use over the unprovoked aggression against a member
of this Assembly, Ukraine, by the Russian Federation.
We know that the use of the veto can in fact end up
sidelining the Security Council, but it cannot sideline
or deadlock the entire United Nations.
We have to show an ability to be nimble, to innovate
and to change. When something is broken and refuses
to fix itself, we need to show that we have a capacity
for collective action. No Member State has the right to
inflict chaos or paralysis on the entire world, or on the
United Nations or the General Assembly.
We all know that there is at the heart of the United
Nations a Charter that has an inherent imbalance.
As George Orwell might have put it, and I would
recommend to all members, if they have not been
reading Orwell lately, that they read him now, because
he has a lot to teach us and a lot to tell us. He might
have put it this way if he was watching us. He would
say, well, I guess all Member States are equal, but
some Members are more equal than others. That is the
dilemma of the Charter: what Article 2 giveth, Article
27 taketh away. That is the problem and the dilemma
that we have been dealing with since 1945.
We may not be able to get rid of that imbalance
entirely, because, as we all know, the permanent
members themselves have a veto over reform of the
Charter. But we should nevertheless still try to achieve
the abolition of the veto. It should be our objective. But
until that happens, we have to continue to take steps, as
we have today, of further circumscribing, defining and
limiting the use of the veto, or at least raising the cost
of its use, especially in those situations where global
peace and security are at stake or where mass atrocity
crimes may be threatened or are being committed.
We are having this debate and discussion at the
same time, in real time, as we are watching on television
or on our iPhones, or however we get our information,
the destruction of cities. We are watching the killing of
women and children. We are seeing the destruction of
the entire infrastructure of a country, and we are seeing
a country fight back.

A/76/PV.69

The Security Council may not be able to act. That
does not prevent us from having an ability to act. The
world is watching, and the world is expecting us to act,
and so act we must.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan welcomes the
adoption by consensus of resolution 76/262, which we
consider to be a step forward in enhancing the role of
the General Assembly and thereby strengthening the
United Nations.
The recent veto by Russia made the United Nations
look as if it were irrelevant, but it is not. The Security
Council, like the United Nations as a whole, is far from
flawless. However, pending reform of the Security
Council, we have to make use of it, and this resolution
can be a useful tool to that end.
Japan commends Liechtenstein for its tireless work
and is honoured to have co-sponsored the resolution.
From now on, vetoes cannot be cast without providing
an explanation to the entire United Nations membership
in General Assembly meetings to be convened either
under this resolution or under resolution 377 (V),
entitled “Uniting for Peace”. The permanent members
of the Security Council could also embrace that
resolution and recognize that they must face a higher
level of accountability commensurate with their
heavier responsibilities.
Japan also supports several other important vetorelated initiatives such as the French-Mexican political
declaration on the suspension of veto powers in case of
mass atrocities, as well as the Code of Conduct proposed
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group. Japan believes that we must go even farther to
make the United Nations more effective. We should
advance discussions on the reform of the Security
Council in the intergovernmental negotiations.
Indeed, Japan is happy to engage with Member States
on any ideas on how to strengthen the United Nations.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States knows that the veto is controversial. It was
controversial from the very beginning, with heated
debates on that issue when the Charter of the United
Nations was negotiated, in San Francisco in 1945. The
veto has continued to be controversial to this day, which
is the reason why the topic remains front and centre at
the United Nations, as we are hearing in this debate and
in the broader public debate.

22-3302523/32

A/76/PV.69

The United States takes its responsibilities as
a permanent member of the Security Council very
seriously. In Article 24 of the Charter, the States
Members of the United Nations conferred on the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
By granting to each of the permanent members of
the Council the ability to prevent the adoption of a
resolution, the Charter entrusted them with a sombre
and a solemn duty. There are times when a Permanent
Five member will conclude that a particular resolution
will not advance international peace and security, and
it is within the authority granted by the Charter for that
member to veto that resolution.
I agree, however, with my Mexican colleague that
such authority comes with enormous responsibility,
and it must be used wisely, judiciously, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
and with full consideration for the advancement of
international peace and security. At the very least, when
a Permanent Five member casts a veto, that member
should be prepared to explain why the resolution at
issue would not have furthered the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Therefore, the United States sees the virtue of
automatically convening a General Assembly meeting
when a veto is cast. We agree that the matter should
be formally debated in the General Assembly, and we
believe that the Permanent Five member that casts
a veto should be given the opportunity to explain its
decision to the full General Assembly membership in
this very Hall.
We note the provision in resolution 76/262, which
was adopted today, that there would be no General
Assembly meeting convened on the casting of a veto
if the Assembly had already met on the same situation
at a meeting of an emergency special session. Whether
the General Assembly convenes an emergency special
session or another meeting, we support this forum
discussing the matter and would be willing to participate
if it is the United States casting a veto.
We also note that it is clear that not every “no” vote
cast by a Permanent Five member is a veto. Rather, a
veto is a “no” vote that prevents the adoption of a draft
resolution that would otherwise have been adopted due
to it having received nine or more votes in favour.
As we have heard from many others in this Hall,
we are deeply concerned about the abuse of the right
24/32

26/04/2022

to veto conferred on the Permanent Five members. In
particular, we are extraordinarily troubled by Russia’s
pattern of abusing its veto right over the past decade.
It is a long and shameful list. The Russian Federation
has vetoed draft resolutions seeking accountability
in Syria, including draft resolutions that would have
continued the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism on chemical weapons. Russia has vetoed
a draft resolution referring the Syria situation to the
International Criminal Court. It has vetoed a draft
resolution that would have established a criminal
tribunal on the downing of Flight MH-17 over Ukraine.
And it vetoed a draft resolution when Russia attempted
to illegally annex Crimea. Recently, and most
outrageously, the Russian Federation vetoed a Security
Council resolution deploring its aggression against
Ukraine, deciding that the use of force should end and
deciding on the withdrawal of all Russian forces from
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine.
In short, Russia egregiously violated the Charter of
the United Nations and then blocked the effort by the
Security Council to address the situation. We agree that
the veto was not intended as a carte blanche for impunity
for the Permanent Five. It was not meant to confer
automatic protection from accountability in perpetuity.
By abusing the veto and by preventing the international
community from holding Russia to account, Russia has
diminished the role and the reputation of the Security
Council; it has undermined the Charter of the United
Nations; and it has tarnished the United Nations as
a whole.
We welcome this resolution as a step towards
placing greater attention on the appropriate use of the
veto, the solemn responsibilities of the Permanent Five
members and the primary role of the Security Council
to maintain international peace and security. For all the
aforementioned reasons, the United States was pleased
to co-sponsor resolution 76/262.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the State of Qatar welcomes the adoption
of resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for
a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council”.
We were pleased to have participated in the core
group of sponsors of the resolution since the initiative
was introduced two years ago. We believe that it is high
time for the General Assembly to take this important
step to promote the role entrusted to it pursuant to the
22-33025

26/04/2022

Charter of the United Nations. It is a step widely accepted
by the Member States, as reflected in the large number
of delegations that supported the draft resolution.
We would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Liechtenstein and other partners
that introduced this initiative. We have been keen
to hold intensive consultations with all Member
States. We wanted the process to be transparent and
inclusive given the importance of the resolution and its
inclusive nature.
The State of Qatar’s rationale for supporting
this initiative was its commitment to the principle of
multilateralism as well as the importance and centrality
of the role of the General Assembly as the most inclusive,
representative organ of the United Nations. We believe
that the resolution that was adopted by consensus
today will promote the role of the General Assembly in
accordance with its mandate under the Charter, which
gives the Assembly authority in matters related to the
maintenance of international peace and security. As
clearly stated in its preambular part, the resolution is
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter as
well as its Articles 10, 12, 24 and 27. The resolution also
does not infringe on the intergovernmental negotiation
process pertaining to the Security Council reform and
the veto power. It does not prejudge the outcome of the
process concerning the right to veto.
In conclusion, we hope that this historic resolution
will be an important step towards strengthening the main
purpose of establishing this international Organization,
namely, the maintenance of international peace and
security, especially in cases where the United Nations
cannot stand idly by but must respond effectively.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the adoption of resolution
76/262, which it co-sponsored together with more
than 80 Member States. We thank Liechtenstein for
its leadership and its valuable hard work over the past
two years.
Current events show that it is vital for the main
organs of the United Nations to work together in
a complementary manner to ensure efficient and
effective multilateralism. If one cannot act, the other
can and must step in. The resolution underscores the
role of the Assembly as a representative and inclusive
organ of the United Nations, including in matters of
international peace and security. It faithfully reflects
the responsibilities and competencies of the principal

A/76/PV.69

organs of the United Nations as defined by the Charter
of the United Nations.
We therefore support the standing mandate created
by the resolution for a debate in the General Assembly
when a veto is cast in the Security Council. However,
we hope to see this happening as little as possible.
Together with our partners, we have been advocating for
a more transparent and effective Security Council for
nearly two decades. Advocacy for a more responsible
and restrictive use of the veto is a key element of that
work, including through the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, which is coordinated
by Switzerland.
Within the framework of the Code of Conduct
promoted by the group, we support efforts to encourage
permanent members to renounce the use of their
right to the veto, particularly in cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We see this
resolution as a further call to restrict the use of the veto,
as it enhances accountability and transparency when a
permanent member of the Council exercises its right
thereto. The mechanism introduced by the resolution
does not alter the obligation to seek convergence of
positions, address divergent views and work in good
faith towards consensus in the Security Council.
A strong and united message from the Security
Council is crucial to maintaining international peace
and security when it comes to calling on all parties to
respect international law, protect civilians and ensure
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian actors.
The Security Council must also insist with one voice
on the peaceful settlement of disputes and on dialogue.
As a candidate for membership in the Security Council,
Switzerland will remain fully committed to dialogue
and the peaceful resolution of conflict.
Switzerland’s commitment to the United Nations is
guided by the firm conviction that multilateralism offers
us the best path to a safer future and a more sustainable
planet. We the Member States are constantly called upon
to strengthen, improve and revitalize the structures that
allow us to tackle together the pressing problems of our
times. There is a sense that multilateralism is at stake,
and we must do better to strengthen it. Today we have
seized an opportunity to take a step forward.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The founding Members of the United Nations vowed to
save generations that followed them from the scourge

22-3302525/32

A/76/PV.69

of war. They conferred the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security on the
Security Council.
The Charter of the United Nations, in giving that
solemn duty, gives the permanent members the power
of veto. That is a heavy responsibility, to be used in the
interests of securing the peace and security that people
around the world seek and the United Nations was
established to provide. It is not to be used lightly and
should not, we believe, be used without accountability.
It should not prevent the Council from fulfilling its
mandate, which is why we voted in favour of resolution
76/262 today.
Russia has used its veto 17 times since 2011 to block
the Council’s efforts to protect the Syrian people. Russia
used its veto to prevent the Council from taking action
in response to its illegal and unprovoked war in Ukraine.
Russia has done that in isolation from other Council
members, reflecting the lack of international support.
The United Kingdom therefore welcomes the call
for Member States that hold a permanent seat on the
Security Council to explain their use of veto to the
General Assembly.
For our part, the United Kingdom has not exercised
our veto since 1989. We listen carefully and negotiate in
the Security Council to try and find agreement.
We prefer to win votes rather than use our veto
to block Council action. The United Kingdom is
a signatory to the Accountability, Coherency and
Transparency group Code of Conduct, where we have
pledged not to vote against any credible draft resolution
intended to prevent or halt mass atrocities.
By adopting this resolution today, we take a step in
pursuit of upholding international peace and security,
which is what the United Nations is here to do.

26/04/2022

more democratic and credible. It empowers us all as
united nations.
This resolution is an attempt to respond to the
excessive use of the veto power, which is negatively
perceived in the eyes of international public
opinion. The members of the Security Council were
entrusted by the States Members of the United
Nations with the power of the veto in order for them
to assume greater responsibilities as guardians of
the Charter of the United Nations. This resolution
underlines that the veto power must be regarded as a
responsibility — not a privilege — by all permanent
members of the Security Council.
The initiative that led to the adoption of today’s
resolution started several years ago and was not meant
as a reply to the current setting. But given the current
peace and security situation in Eastern Europe, the
reaction of the international community proved timely
and pertinent. The Russian aggression against Ukraine
illustrates how the capabilities of the Security Council
can be thwarted in cases where swift and decisive
action is needed.
A situation where a permanent member of the
Security Council that is responsible for disrupting
international peace uses its veto power to evade
responsibility for its wrongdoings and to continue to
enjoy impunity is simply unacceptable to the societies
that we represent.
In the light of that, today is a very important day
for the United Nations membership, as it constitutes
another significant step towards democratizing our
Organization, strengthening multilateralism and
contributing to international peace and stability.

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland is proud to be
among the main sponsors of resolution 76/262, on the
veto initiative, and welcomes its adoption today, which
will be considered an important step towards stopping
the abuse of the veto power and strengthening the entire
United Nations system by doing so.

Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala did not hesitate to become a co-sponsor
of resolution 76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for
a General Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the
Security Council”, considering that the maintenance
of international peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council and that any
decision or inaction by the Security Council has global
consequences and impacts.

The resolution on the veto initiative will contribute
to enhancing the role of the General Assembly and
multilateralism, increasing the transparency of the
decision-making process within the Security Council
and, thus, making the entire United Nations system

We have seen on several occasions how the
use of the veto has prevented the Security Council
from addressing real situations related to threats to
international peace and security. The States Members
of the United Nations have conferred upon the Security

26/32

22-33025

26/04/2022

A/76/PV.69

Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, recognizing that
the Council acts on behalf of the entire membership,
in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Therefore,
the decisions and resolutions adopted — and even
rejected initiatives — as well as the representation and
performance in such a high-level organ, are intrinsically
related to the high degree of responsibility that comes
with being a member of the Security Council, which
represents the entire membership.

Council, in accordance with the Charter, whenever there
was a need to protect populations from mass atrocities.

We believe that the resolution adopted is a
transparency mechanism that will give the General
Assembly opportunities to address issues that the
Security Council has not considered in a comprehensive
manner in the course of discharging its responsibilities
when the veto has been used. We thank the delegation
of the Principality of Liechtenstein for leading the
efforts to adopt this resolution.

For those reasons, Kenya supports this initiative
and voted in favour of resolution 76/262.

Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): The United Nations was
created with the primary purpose of saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and protecting the
dignity and worth of the human person, as well as their
fundamental human rights.
Under Articles 24 and 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Member States conferred upon the
Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
further agreed to accept and carry out the decisions of
the Security Council in accordance with the Charter.
In similar fashion, the International Court of
Justice has determined that the powers and functions of
the General Assembly include the general competence
of the Assembly to consider questions relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation is of the considered view that in all
situations where a threat to, or breach of, international
peace and security arises, members of the Security
Council, including the permanent members, must act
responsibly to stop or prevent that threat or breach
from occurring or continuing. That responsibility is
especially important when an armed conflict or an act
of aggression involves mass atrocity crimes.
At the 2005 World Summit for Social Development,
the States Members of the United Nations further
expressed their readiness to take collective action in
a timely and decisive manner through the Security

Kenya is also of the considered view that the
Security Council should not be prevented from acting
responsibly following the exercise of the veto power
when effective measures are needed for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We furthermore
believe that adherence to this initiative would enhance
the ability of the United Nations to live up to its primary
purpose — to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.

Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the adoption of resolution 76/262, entitled
“Standing mandate for a General Assembly debate
when a veto is cast in the Security Council”.
New Zealand actively supported this initiative
from its inception, and we are a proud member of the
core group. We did so steadfast in our belief that the
General Assembly has a legitimate interest in situations
where the use of the veto has resulted in paralysis in
the Security Council’s decision-making responsibilities
and has a political responsibility to address them.
As has already been noted by so many others
this morning, the use of the veto is a privilege that
comes with profound responsibility. Its arbitrary use
in the pursuit of national interests, rather than in the
advancement of international peace and security,
contributes to poor decision-making. The casting
of the veto by a single member, or small number of
members, stymies the majority of the Council from
carrying out its functions on behalf of the wider United
Nations membership. As a result of Security Council
inaction, responsible States — often the neighbouring
States — have frequently been left a heavy burden that
should have been shared more evenly by the wider
international community.
The veto is the most undemocratic element of the
United Nations. It is arguably the single-greatest source
of criticism of the United Nations by the communities
we serve. New Zealand has been a vocal opponent of
the use of the veto since the Organization’s inception in
1945. That remains unchanged.
We have witnessed amazing support from across
the United Nations membership this morning. That
demonstrates the timeliness and necessity of this

22-3302527/32

A/76/PV.69

initiative. We too commend Liechtenstein and the core
group for their thought leadership and active outreach
on this initiative.
The resolution adopted this morning provides a
mechanism to ensure accountability among the organs
of the Organization, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Ultimately it is about strengthening
inclusive multilateralism and the effectiveness of the
United Nations.
If in future — and, as others have said, we hope
it is only if — this resolution is activated, it will
be important that we, the members of the General
Assembly, take advantage of the opportunity afforded
by this resolution to exercise our collective political
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
address matters of international peace and security.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): At the outset, let me
say that, as Russia’s unprovoked, unjust and illegal
invasion of Ukraine has painfully illustrated, the
international rules-based order underpinning global
stability, security and prosperity is under significant
strain. Together, we must find ways to ensure that
the United Nations acts effectively and expeditiously
to address complex challenges to our collective peace
and security.
As a core group member, Australia was very
pleased to join more than 80 States in sponsoring this
important resolution 76/262, establishing a standing
mandate for a General Assembly debate when a veto is
cast in the Security Council.
Every year since the Organization’s founding,
the equity and effectiveness of the veto has been the
subject of intense debate, and rightly so. Too often we
see the veto considered by some permanent members
to be an unimpeachable right, rather than a solemn
responsibility. Too often we are told that the General
Assembly, despite being the most representative United
Nations organ, has no responsibility for international
peace and security — that the views of this organ,
regardless of the number of countries represented, do
not carry weight.
In fact, the Charter of the United Nations is clear.
While the membership has conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Charter does
not preclude the General Assembly from debate and
28/32

26/04/2022

deliberation when the Council is unable to act on behalf
of the wider membership.
It is that responsibility that brings us here today.
Australia led opposition to the establishment of the veto
at the San Francisco Conference. Since that time, we
have consistently called for better standards governing
its use, specifically that the use of the veto be both
limited and transparent.
To that end, we remain steadfast supporters of
efforts to limit the use of the veto, particularly in
situations of mass atrocity crimes, and encourage all
delegations to commit to the Accountability Coherence
and Transparency code of conduct and the FrenchMexican initiative.
We consider today’s resolution distinct from, but
complementary to, those efforts. Resolution 76/262
does not seek to directly limit or curb the use of the veto.
Rather, it is an important and long-overdue step towards
bringing greater transparency and accountability to its
use. By providing an open and transparent forum for
the veto user to explain its veto and a platform for all
Member States to express their views, we believe it will
help strengthen Council deliberations and decisions
over the long-term.
In conclusion, we very much welcome the
overwhelming support for this resolution and express
our sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative
and the Permanent Mission of Liechtenstein for their
leadership on this important initiative over the course
of more than two years.
We can say that today was a very good day at
the office.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Singapore co-sponsored
and actively supported resolution 76/262, which aims
to create a standing mandate for the General Assembly
to hold a debate whenever a veto is cast in the Security
Council. We are pleased to note that more than 80
countries joined as co-sponsors, and we welcome its
adoption by consensus.
Singapore has always taken a clear and consistent
position that greater transparency and accountability
in the work of the Security Council will improve the
Council’s credibility and the legitimacy of its decisions.
That, in turn, will strengthen the legitimacy and
credibility of the United Nations as a whole, as well
as that of the multilateral system. We supported the
resolution because it establishes a mechanism to ensure
22-33025

26/04/2022

greater transparency and accountability every time a
veto is cast by any permanent member.
Singapore recognizes the right of permanent
members to use their veto power granted by the Charter
of the United Nations. This resolution does not question
or limit that right. However, casting a veto is a decision
with major implications. Once taken, we believe that
it is the responsibility of a permanent member to
explain its decision to the General Assembly. We also
believe that it is important for the permanent member
that has cast the veto to hear the views of the members
of the General Assembly, including the views of
small States, which often do not have a voice on such
matters. This resolution will therefore strengthen the
General Assembly and enhance its cooperation with the
Security Council.
This resolution will also provide a direct
mechanism for the General Assembly to take a stand
on critical issues of international peace and security
when the Security Council is unable to act because of
a lack of agreement among its permanent members.
That will enhance the credibility of the United Nations.
The adoption today of this resolution without a vote is
an indication that there is overwhelming support for
greater transparency and accountability on the use of
the veto. The resolution is not only timely, but also a
substantive and meaningful contribution to the work of
the United Nations.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland is very proud
to have been a member, from the outset, of the core
group of States led by Liechtenstein, which today
proposed this historic resolution — resolution 76/262.
For too long, the veto has left us with a Security
Council that is unable to take action in the face of
some of the most pressing challenges facing our world
today — from the impact of climate change on conflict
and security to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine. We
have all seen, and Ireland has witnessed first-hand
as an elected member, how the abuse of the veto has
undermined the spirit of cooperation intended by the
Charter of the United Nations, with any one permanent
member State being in a position to override the will of
the majority of Council members.
The adoption by consensus of this resolution this
morning, supported by such a significant cross-regional
group of co-sponsors, shows the importance of this
matter to the United Nations membership as a whole.
The success of today’s resolution means that the General

A/76/PV.69

Assembly and the wider United Nations membership
have been given a voice when the Security Council is
silenced. It recognizes that the use of the veto is not
just a matter of concern to those sitting in the Council
Chamber but to all Members of the United Nations.
Ireland has long viewed the veto as an outdated
instrument designed for an outdated version of the
world. We have consistently called for its abolition.
Although this resolution does not prevent the use of the
veto, it will mean that States wielding the veto will now
need to defend their actions to the wider membership.
Those that block the Security Council’s essential work
will be held to account here in the General Assembly.
In conclusion, I want to thank Liechtenstein for its
tireless work, and a big thanks goes to all States that
supported this vital historic initiative in the lead-up
to today.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the President for
convening this important meeting of the General
Assembly on an innovative initiative that we have
been following for almost three years and which today
resulted in resolution 76/262. We welcome the adoption
of this unique resolution, which mandates a General
Assembly debate 10 days after the casting of a veto.
I take this opportunity to express my appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein,
Ambassador Christian Wenaweser, and his team for
the way they managed this initiative, which resulted
in today’s formal adoption of the resolution by the
General Assembly.
The State of Kuwait is among the States that has
supported this initiative since its inception, and we
were part of the core group. We are convinced that
this resolution adds greatly to the work of the General
Assembly. As a State of the Arab region — where
related items on the Security Council’s agenda have
significantly suffered for decades from the use of the
veto — and as a State that was a member of the Council
in 2018 and 2019, a period during which we witnessed
the veto used nine times by three permanent members
against six draft resolutions, we are well aware of the
consequences of the use of the veto. We are convinced
that today’s resolution will strengthen the role of the
General Assembly and help to enhance transparency
and accountability in the relationship between two
major organs of the United Nations — the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

22-3302529/32

A/76/PV.69

When the right to veto is used by the five permanent
members of the Council, they should be in a position to
explain and justify their casting of the veto before the
entire General Assembly. That will also allow Member
States to comment on the use of the veto and explain
their viewpoint with regard to using it. It is natural that
there will always be some in favour and others against
the veto. This resolution will ensure that there will be
a transparent and constructive debate in that regard,
and will enable us to exchange views and listen to
various opinions.
The arbitrary use of the right of the veto by some
of the five permanent members has in many cases
contributed to undermining the credibility of the
decision-making process in the Security Council and,
at times, has rendered the Security Council incapable
of shouldering its responsibilities and led to frustration
among peoples of the world given the Security Council’s
inability to take the measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security.
We believe that the right to the veto is an exceptional
and unusual privilege, which only five States in the
world have enjoyed since the establishment of the
United Nations in 1945 and which is first and foremost
a responsibility.
In conclusion, since our meeting today coincides
with the International Day of Multilateralism and
Diplomacy for Peace, I reiterate the complete faith of
the State of Kuwait in the multilateral system and our
support for any and all measures that seek to strengthen
and consolidate it. The State of Kuwait is of the view
that the resolution that we adopted today will help
to preserve and strengthen multilateralism and the
effectiveness of our Organization, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta proudly joins today’s
vote as a member of the core group promoting resolution
76/262, entitled “Standing mandate for the General
Assembly debate when a veto is cast in the Security
Council”. Malta is honoured to have formed part of
the core group, led by Liechtenstein, since the origin
of this initiative two years ago and is pleased to see it
adopted by acclamation today. Malta is pleased to see
that the voice of the international community stands
with reason, with rationality and with relevance to
today’s current global realities. Today the international
community has spoken. We will now have a General
30/32

26/04/2022

Assembly that is stronger and whose role is further
enhanced vis-à-vis the Security Council.
We now have a resolution that will seek to request
a debate of the General Assembly within 10 working
days of the casting of a veto in the Security Council.
Those debates will be called in a manner that will
see the wider United Nations membership express its
position on the use of such a veto — a mechanism that
is not just a privilege but a conscientious responsibility
for those that hold it.
The initiative, which now has 83 co-sponsors, is
a mechanism that will solidify our cause for further
harmonization between two major organs of the
United Nations — the General Assembly and the
Security Council — as well as more transparency,
accountability and relevance on veto use to the wider
United Nations membership.
In that manner, the view of the majority will be
heard. That is exactly what we are doing today with
a large number of delegations in favour, and therefore
in favour of multilateralism. Calling a debate of,
and by, the General Assembly to discuss veto use is
not calling for a change to the use of the veto. That
discussion is not in the purview of this resolution.
Instead, it remains in the hands of another important
process, known as a reform of the Security Council,
and therefore fundamentally crucial to our overall pleas
for the reform and revitalization of the United Nations
as a whole.
On the other hand, this initiative is driven by
our passion for the democratic principles of the
United Nations, especially the General Assembly.
Formed organically by the belief and inspiration of
multilateralism, the core group that initiated this
resolution is as cross-regional as one can get — a mix
of Latin American, European, Arab and small island
developing States. Our group is a reflection of how
strong the initiative is, going beyond borders and
national interests. The voice of all of us has multiplied
twofold with this initiative because, by addressing in
the General Assembly the use of a recent veto in the
Security Council, one is also addressing matters that
pertain to members and regions that are traditionally
underrepresented on the Council.
In conclusion, we look forward to the resolution’s
next steps. By joining today’s votes, the international
community has joined a noble, meaningful cause of
taking effective stances and action against threats to
22-33025

26/04/2022

international peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations is clear. The Security Council is there
to work on behalf of the membership and, when it is
prevented from doing so, the international community
should be given the tools to discuss this. That can now
be done thanks to this resolution.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): We have heard many
wise words today regarding the right of the veto in the
Security Council, notably from the representatives of
Mexico, Canada, Singapore and, just now, Malta, as
well as many more. That permits me to be brief.
Indeed, the veto is an anachronism from a time long
past that creates undemocratic inequality in the United
Nations. The veto is part of the system of the Charter
of the United Nations, to which we signed up and that
we respect. But, to warrant our respect, the right of
the veto must be used with responsibility and with the
intent to further peace. The practice in the Security
Council has not always lived up to that standard, and,
recently, we were disappointed by Russia’s use of veto
on the situation in Ukraine.
Austria therefore welcomes this initiative, under
the leadership of Liechtenstein, and co-sponsored
resolution 76/262 as a contribution to strengthening the
effectiveness of the Security Council and enhancing
the role of the General Assembly when it comes to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We also support other proposals, such as the
French-Mexican initiative on veto restraint in the case
of mass atrocities, as well as the code of conduct of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
not to vote against any draft resolution intended to end
mass atrocities.
Today’s resolution strengthens the role of the
General Assembly, and therefore of the whole United
Nations membership, in the area of peace and security.
In no way does it restrict the permanent members’ veto
right or the competence of the Security Council with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. The additional references in the resolution,
which were included in response to the feedback
provided by Member States in last week’s consultations,
reflect that intention and stress the compatibility with
the division of competencies foreseen in the United
Nations Charter.
All Member States have an obligation to uphold
United Nations principles. Therefore, and in line with

A/76/PV.69

the United Nations Charter, we support the fact that the
General Assembly will automatically be convened to
hold a debate on the situation when a veto is cast in the
Security Council. The United Nations cannot remain
inactive when the Security Council does not fulfil its
task of upholding international peace. Austria therefore
commends this resolution as a positive advancement of
the United Nations system and thanks Liechtenstein for
all the efforts in that respect.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): Ukraine is proud to be
among the main co-sponsors of resolution 76/262,
adopted today.
This resolution is of particular relevance and
importance to Ukraine and other Member States
that uphold the Charter of the United Nations and its
principles. The mechanism adopted today is clear and
transparent. It is not politicized or selective. It will be
invoked automatically each time when the Security
Council is paralysed by a veto. The permanent members
of the Security Council have an extraordinary power
granted to them under the United Nations Charter. It is
not a privilege, but a responsibility.
In recent years, the veto was used while ongoing
aggression or atrocity crimes were being committed.
Such vetoes prevented the condemnation of those
crimes, investigation and prosecution, as well as
other required measures. There is no indication in the
drafting history of the United Nations Charter that the
veto power was supposed to be used in that way.
Let me recall that almost every Security Council
draft resolution on the Russian aggression against
Ukraine was blocked. It happened due to the abuse of
the veto by the country that occupies the Soviet seat
in the Security Council — the Russian Federation.
The most recent case happened two months ago, when
Russia alone vetoed a draft resolution (S/2022/155)
in response to its full-scale invasion of Ukraine (see
S/PV.8979).
Can we consider the use of the veto in such cases
as a demonstration of responsibility? That is rather a
rhetorical question.
That is why Ukraine supported this resolution and
continues to support other existing initiatives aimed
at limiting the use of the veto and strengthening the
responsibility for its casting.
Let me reiterate that permanent members of the
Council that are responsibly carrying out their duty of

22-3302531/32

A/76/PV.69

maintaining international peace and security should
have no problem with committing themselves to this
and other respective initiatives. Moreover, the United
Nations Charter imposes obligations on the Security
Council to act in accordance with the purposes
and principles.
Unfortunately, too often in recent history, the
abuse of the veto right has undermined the Council’s
ability to respond to challenges to international
peace and security, proving the need to address the
current mechanism in order to make it more efficient
and credible.
Every veto with respect to crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide is a manifestation
of the utmost disregard for those who have been killed
or injured, as well as those who could be killed, in

32/32

26/04/2022

particular because Russia considers the veto as a green
light for such crimes.
We are also convinced that the use of the veto
should be restricted when a permanent member is
directly involved in a conflict under the consideration
of the Council.
Today’s adoption reconfirms that the wider United
Nations membership is not going to further tolerate
the abuse of the veto and seeks the strengthening
of accountability.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this morning. We
shall hear the remaining speakers this afternoon in this
Hall at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

22-33025
