Re110Jqtiom1 adopted on the reports of the First Committee

reviews on the activities and resources of various international organizations and bodies relating to the peaceful
uses of outer space, on national and co operative international space activities, on bibliographies and abstracting services, and on education and training;
3. Notes v.n"th appreciation that a number of Member
States have, on a voluntary basis, co-operated extensively with the programme of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by providing information
on their space activities, and 1m~es other Member States
to do so;
4. Supports the request of the Committee on th<:'
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the SecretaryGeneral disseminak on a continuing l::1sis information
received from Member States on the needs and facilities
for education and training in space-related subjects:
5. N ates also with appreciation that certain Member
States have contributed to the goals of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as laid down
in its reports, by establishing educational and training
programmes, and urges other Member States to do so;
6. Notes the decision of the Committee on the Pe;icetul Uses of Outer Space to convene. on 18 January
1966, the Working Group established to examine the
desirability, organization and objectives of an international conference or meeting to he helrl in 1967 on
the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space, as
well as to make recommendations on the question
relating to the participation in that meeting nf the
appropriate international organizations;
7. Accords United Nations sponsorship to India
for the continuing operation of the Thumba international equatorial sounding rocket launching facility,
which is eligible for such sponsorship and such assistance as may he requester! in :ircordance with the
basic principles endorsed hy tlw c;enera 1 Assembly in
its resolution 1802 (XVTT) of H OecnnhPr 1962:
8. Takes note of the resoltition adopted by the Committee on Space Researc-h at its seventh session, held in
May 1964, on the basis of the report of its Consultative
Group on Potentially H::i.rmfol Effects nf Space Experiments;
9. N ates with appreciation that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 De
cember 1961, the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public registry of objects launched into orbit
or beyond on the basis of information being furnished
hy Member States;
10. Notes with satisfaction the growing measure of
co-operation among many Member States in the pf'ace ful exploration and use of outer space;

11. Urges that space activities be carried out in such
a manner that States may share in the adventure and
the practical benefits of space exploration irrespective
of the stage of their economic or scientific development:

12. Noles with appreciation the progress reports
submitted by the World Meteorological Organization17
and the International Telecommunication Union 18 on
their _activities in the field of outer space and invites
these organizations to make progress reports to the
Committee on the Pearefol Use~ of Outer Sp;ice in
1966;
17 Transmitted under the symbol A/AC.105/L.lQ
l8 Transmitted under the ,ymbol E/41H7/<\rld. L

11

III
I. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and making use of the available resources of the Secretariat, and in consultation with the specialized agencies
and in co-operation with the Committee on Space
Research, to prepare and consider during its next
session suggestions for programmes of education and
training 0{ specialists in the peaceful uses of outer
space to assist the developing countries, and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session ;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in this
and previous General Assembly resolutions and to
report to the i\ssemhlv at its twenty first session.
1408th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2131 (XX). Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of
States and the Protection of Their Independence and Sov.-reignty

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the international
situation and the increasing threat to universal peace
due to armed inh•rventinn and other direct or indirect
forms of interference threatening the sovereign personalitv and the political independence of States,
Considering that the United Nations, in accordance
with their aim to elirr;inate war, threats to the peace
and acts of aggression, created an Organization, based
on the sovereign e<juality of States. whose friendly
relations would he hased on respect for the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
on the obligation of its Members to refrain from the
threat or 11se of force against the territorial integritv
nr political inrlependence of any State,
·
Recognizing that, in fulfilment of the principle of selfdetermination, the General Assembly, in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960. stated its conviction that all
peoples have an inalienable right to complete freedom,
the exercise of their sovereignty and the integrity of
their national territnry, and that, hy virtue of that right,
they freely determine their political status and freelv
pursue their economic. social and cultural development,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights the General Assembly proclaimed that recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal anrl
inalienable rights of all members of the h11man fomilv
is tht> foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world, without distinction of any kind,
Reaffirming the principle of non-intervention, proclaimed in the charters of the Organization of American
States, the League of Arab States and the Organization of African Unitv and affirmed at the conferences
held 'at Montevideo: Buenos Aires. Chapultepec and
'Rogota, as well as in the decisions of the Asian-African
Conference at Bandung. the First Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
Belgrade, in the Programme for Peace and International
Co-operation adopted at the end of the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries at Cairo, and in the declaration on
subversion adopter! at Accra by the Heads of State
and \Tovernrnent of the Afriem States.

12

General AHembly-Twentieth Session

Recognizing that full observance of the principle of
the non-intervention of States in the internal and external affairs of other States is essential to the fulfilment of the purposes an~ principles of the United
Nations,
Considering that armed intervention is synonymous
with agg:i;ession and, as such, is contrary to the basic
principles on which peaceful international co-operation
between States should be built,
Considering further that direct intervention, subversion and all forms of indirect intervention are contrary
to these principles and, consequently, constitute a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful that violation of the principle of non-intervention poses a threat to the independence, freedom
and normal political, economic, social and cultural
development of countries, particularly those which have
freed themselves from colonialism, and can pose a
serious threat to the maintenance of peace,
Fully aware of the imperative need to create appropriate conditions which would enable all States, and in
particular the developing countries, to choose without
duress or coercion their own political, economic and
social institutions,
In the light of the forepoin.r, rnnsiderations, solemnly
declares:

1. No State has the right to intervene, directly or
indirectly, for any reason whatever, in the internal or
external affairs of any other State. Consequently, armed
intervention and all other forms of interference or
attempted threats against the personality of the State
or against its political, economic and cultural elements.
are condemned.
2. No State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce
another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights or to secure
from it advantages of any kind. Also, no State shall
organize, assist. foment, finance, incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities directed towards
the violent overthrow of the regime of another State,
or interfere in civil strife in another State.
3. The use of force to deprive peoples of their
national identity constitutes a violation of their inaliernible rights and of the principle of non-intervention.
4. The strict observance of these obligations is an
essential condition to ensure that nations live together
in peace with one another, since the practice of any
form of intervention not only violates the spirit and
letter of the Charter of the United Nations but also
leads to the creation of situations which threaten internationa 1 peace and security.
5. Every State has an inalienable right to choose
its political. economic, social and cultural systems, without interference in any form by another State.
6. All States shall respect the right of self-determination an·d independence of peoples and nations, to be
freely exercised without any foreign pressure, and with
absolute respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Consequently, all States shall contribute to

the complete elimination of racial discrimination and
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations.
7. For the purpose of the present Declaration, the
term "State" covers both individual States and groups
of States.
8. Nothing in this Declaration shall be construed as
affecting in any manner the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, in particular
those contained in Chapters VI. VII and VIII.
1408th plenary rneeting,
21 December 1965.

2132 (XX). The Kort>an qut>stion
The General Assembly,
I-I aving noted the reports of the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, signed at Seoul, Korea, on 26 August 196419
and 3 September 1965, 20

Reaffirming its resolutions 112 (II) of 14 November
1947, 195 (III) of 12 December 1948, 293 (IV) of
21 October 1949, 376 (V) of 7 October 1950, 811
(IX) of 11 December 1954, 910 A (X) of 29 November
1955, 1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957, 1180 (XII) of
29 November 1957, 1264 (XIII) of 14 November 1958,
1455 (XIV) of 9 December 1959, 1740 (XVI) of
20 December 1961, 1855 (XVII) of 19 December 1962
and 1964 (XVITT) of 13 December 1963,
Noting that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations
resolutions have in greater part already been withdrawn,
and that the Governments concerned are prepared to
withdraw their remaining forces from Korea when the
conditions for a lasting settlement laid down hy the
General Assembly have been fulfilled.
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to repel aggression, to restore peace and security,
and to extend its good offices to set>king a peaceful
settlement in Korea,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations
in Korea are to bring about, by peaceful means, the
establishment of a unified, independent and democratic
Korea under a representative form of government, and
the full restoration of international peace and security in
the area;

2. Calls upon the North Korean authorities to accept
those established United Nations objectives which have
het>n repeatedly affirmed by the General Assembly:
3. Urges that continuing efforts be made to achieve
thos~ objectives;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly.
1408th plenary muting,
21 DPCember 1965.
19 Official Records of the General .4ssrm/,/y, Ninetcrnt/1 S!'-<'sion. S11pp[e111ent No. 12 (A/5812).
20 !bid .. Twentieth Sessinn, S11ppln11ent No. 12 (Aj(,012)
