V111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. For each post open to recruitment a dossier shall be established comprising:
(a) A list of all potential qualified candidates, indicating name,
nationality, sex, age and qualifica•· ~<- this list shall be drawn from
the roster;

Their ranking by -rder of preference established by the substantive department concerned in consultation with lhe Office of Personnel Services;
(b)

(c) A summary of the interviews of the candidates considered most
suitable.
This dossier shall be made available to the Appointment and
Promotion Committee and the Appc,int,nent and Promotion Board.
15. For the evaluations of the candida, ·s, the Office of Personnel
Services, in consultation with the substantive c ·;,artments concerned,
shall take into account the t.argets indicated in the annual recruitment
work plan.
16, If the substantive department and the Office of Personnel Services agree on the selection of one candidate, this recommended candidate will be proposed for appointment, in accordance with the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. If there is no agreement,
the matter shall be submitted for advice to lhe Appointment and
Promotion Committee and the Appointment and Promotion Board. If
no solution is found, the Secretary-General or his designated representative will take the final decision.
17, The qualifications, nationality and sex of selected candidates
shall be indicated on a list to be published twice a year and communicated to the delegations of Member States.

35 /211.

Establishment of the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative,
Finance and Personnel Areas

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the letter dated 8 November 1980 from
the Secretary-General to the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, 41 in which he indicated that a committee of
experts should be established to evaluate the preseTit administrative structure of the Secretariat,
I. Decides, as an exception to its resolution 35/5 of
20 October 1980, to establish a Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the
Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance and Personnel Areas, which should submit a report prior to the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint sc:venteen experts through consultations with regional groups
and with due regard to equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Committee to take fully into account
the views expressed in the Fifth Committee during the
discussions of the relevant items on the agenda of the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, pending and
without prejudice to the decision to be taken by the
General Assembly during its thirty-sixth session on the
above-mentioned report, to take such interim measures,
within the existing administrative structure, as to ensure
that the Office of Personnel Services has the authority
necessary to implement effectively the personnel policies
outlined in the relevant resolutions of the Assembly.

35/212.

Respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the statement by the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination in annex I to its annual
overview report for I 979 /80, 42
Mindful of Article 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which each Member State has undertaken to respect the exclusively international character
of responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff
and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of
their responsibilities,
Mindful also that under the same Article of the Charter the Secretary-General and the staff shall not, in the
performance of their duties, seek or receive instructions
from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization,
Reaffirming the relevant Staff Regulations of the
United Nations,
A ware of the absolute necessity that staff members be
enabled to discharge their tasks as assigned to them by
the Secretary-General without interference on the part
of any Member State or any other authority external to
the Organization,
Recalling that, under Article I 05 of the Charter, officials of the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of
each of its Member States such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their
functions in connexion with the Organization, which is
indispensable for the proper drscharge of their duties,
Realizing that staff member~ of the specialized agencies enjoy similar privileges and immunities,
Mindful of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February I 946';
and of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947,4'
Concerned about reports alleging that the privileges
and immunities of officials of these organizations have
been encroached upon,
I. Appeals to all Member States to respect the
privileges and immunities accorded to officials of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies by the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations of 13 February 1946 and by the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system with the
request to furnish information on cases in which there
are clear indications that the status of the staff members
of such organizations has not been fully respected;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, on behalf of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
a report to the General Assembly containing any cases
in which the international status of the staff members of
the United Nations or of the specialized agencies has not
been fully respected.
99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

99th plenary meeting
/ 7 December 1980
'

1

A/C.5/35/48.

239

,, E/1980/34.
'' Resolution 22 A (I).
" Resolution 179 (II)
