S/PV.9078

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9078

th meeting
Monday, 27 June 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Kambangoye Ankassa
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ravindran
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40240 (E)
*2240240*

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Ms. Bushra Alhodiri,
President and Operations Manager of Fezzan Libya
Organization, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on recent developments
in Libya.
On the political front, I am pleased to report that,
since the most recent briefing to the Council on 20 June,
there has been some progress on the constitutional
track. The third and final round of consultations of the
House of Representatives and the High State Council
regarding a constitutional basis for elections was held in
Cairo from 12 to 20 June. The representatives reached a
broad consensus on most of the contentious articles in
the 2017 constitutional proposal. However, differences
remain on measures governing the transitional period
leading to the elections. Nevertheless, the progress
achieved is commendable. The meeting was the first
time that the House of Representatives and the High
State Council engaged in a serious review of the
constitutional proposal since its adoption in 2017.
We are encouraged that the leaders of both
Chambers have accepted the invitation of Special
Adviser Stephanie Williams to meet in Geneva from
28 to 29 June in order to discuss and reach agreement
on measures governing the transitional period leading
to elections. We are firmly convinced that elections
are the only path to settle the disagreements over the
democratic legitimacy of all Libyan institutions. Let me
recall that the House of Representatives was elected in
2014 for a four-year term, and the High State Council,
2/18

27/06/2022

which is the legacy body of the Libyan General National
Congress, was elected nearly 10 years ago, in 2012.
vI encourage the Security Council and all of Libya’s
international partners to call on the leadership of the
two Chambers to seize the opportunity presented by the
agreement reached in Cairo. It is high time to agree on
outstanding issues and make the elections happen.
We remain committed to supporting Libyan
national reconciliation efforts, working closely with our
partners, including the African Union. In that regard,
we welcome the launch, on 23 June, of the Presidency
Council’s strategic vision for national reconciliation.
We appreciate the document’s focus on addressing the
root causes of conflict. At the same time, we reiterate
the need for a reconciliation process that is inclusive,
victim-centred, rights-based and grounded in the
principles of transitional justice, with a focus on truth,
accountability and reparations.
Continued political divisions are contributing to
a tense security environment in and around Tripoli.
The issue of the executive has yet to be resolved. As
armed groups continue to position themselves in
support of either Mr. Dbeibah or Mr. Bashagha, the
risk of escalation increases. I reiterate the readiness
of the United Nations to facilitate dialogue between
Mr. Dbeibah and Mr. Bashagha. I again call on all Libyan
political and security actors to exercise maximum
restraint and address all disputes through dialogue.
I also welcome the recent resumption of the
activities of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
(JMC) and the Chiefs of Staff and commend their
joint call for maintaining calm and stability in the
country. On 7 June in Tunis, Special Adviser Williams
co-chaired — with France — a plenary meeting of the
Security Working Group of the Berlin process, with
the participation of the JMC. The discussion focused
on the need to strengthen the ceasefire, including by
ensuring progress in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups and militias and the
withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign
forces from Libya.
The meeting also provided a valuable opportunity
for the Libyan ceasefire monitors from the east and
west to hold their first discussions to operationalize
the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring
mechanism. With the facilitation of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the JMC and the
local monitors plan to meet again in Tunis on 28 and
29 June. Meanwhile, UNSMIL ceasefire monitors
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

continue to be based in Tripoli, pending approval by
relevant authorities of accommodation and workspace,
among other conditions necessary for the monitors to
operate from Sirte.
On the economic front, the partial shutdown
of Libya’s oil sector continues. Since 16 April, the
shutdown has reduced Libyan oil exports by one third
and cost the country $3.1 billion in lost revenue. In
addition, the disagreement over the control and use
of public funds that triggered the partial shutdown
continues and could lead to further oil field closures in
the near term. The suspension of oil revenue transfers
could negatively impact the ability of the Government of
National Unity to pay salaries and meet other spending
needs, including for basic social services.
On a positive note, I am pleased to report that, on
7 June, the United Nations and the Ministry of Planning
signed the first Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, covering the period 2023 to 2025. The
Framework serves to guide the peacebuilding and
development work of United Nations entities in Libya,
in alignment with national priorities and in support of
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The human rights situation in Libya remains
alarming. Nine civil society and humanitarian workers
who were arrested between November 2021 and
February 2022 for peacefully exercising their right
to the freedom of expression remain in detention. On
8 June, four of those arbitrarily detained persons were
not permitted to attend a scheduled court hearing.
Moreover, the hearing fell far short of fair trial standards.
I remain concerned that civic space is consistently
being eroded. Arbitrary restrictions continue to be
imposed on civil society organizations. Politically
active women and men defending human rights are
targeted with hate speech and incitement to violence,
compromising their safety and security.
Since May, UNSMIL has received further reports
of serious allegations of torture against Libyans,
migrants and asylum-seekers in detention facilities
and prisons. Libyan authorities must investigate all
allegations of torture and other human rights violations
in detention centres, including those facilities under
the control of the Ministry of Interior’s Department
for Combating Illegal Immigration. Those responsible
for grave human rights violations, including atrocity
crimes, must be held accountable domestically or, as
applicable, by international justice mechanisms such as
the International Criminal Court.

S/PV.9078

Regrettably, for many victims and survivors,
justice and accountability — including remedies and
reparation — are elusive or painfully slow. For example,
on 14 June, the Tripoli Appeals Court referred the 1996
Abu Salim massacre case to the military justice system,
asserting that it lacked the competency to process the
case. The most recent judgement, coupled with the
time lapsed, suggests that the Libyan criminal justice
system is unable or unwilling to try individuals for
atrocity crimes.
To that end, the extension of the mandate of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya is essential
to the investigation of, and reporting on, violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The Fact-Finding Mission’s role will
serve to advance human rights, contribute to securing
sustainable peace and foster rights-based national
reconciliation in Libya.
As of 14 June, the United Nations had recorded
the return of an additional 10,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs) to their places of origin since the start
of the year. The total number of IDPs now stands at
159,000. However, threats of forced evictions of IDPs
remain of concern. In Tripoli on 15 June, about 90
displaced families were threatened by members of
armed groups with bulldozers. They were ordered to
evacuate the buildings where they reside within 10 days.
That warning follows forced evictions of three camps
hosting displaced Tawerghan families in May. Increased
efforts are needed on the part of the Government, with
the support of United Nations partners, to find durable
solutions for those who remain internally displaced, in
line with international standards.
In conclusion, let me stress that Libya has made
significant progress in the past few years towards a more
inclusive society. For the sake of the Libyan people, we
should not allow that progress to dissipate. The United
Nations priority in Libya remains to facilitate a return to
the electoral process, based on a sound and consensual
constitutional basis for elections. That is what the Libyan
people have asked for. The outcome of the Cairo talks is
a step in the right direction. It is my hope the upcoming
meeting to be held in Geneva between the heads of the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State
will result in a final agreement that will lead to the
holding of elections at the earliest possible date. Let me
stress that the Security Council’s continued and united
support for those efforts is essential.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

22-402403/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

I now give the floor to Ms. Alhodiri.
Ms. Alhodiri: My name is Bushra Alhodiri, and
I am the Operations Manager of the Fezzan Libya
Organization. I address the Security Council from the
south of Libya in the city of Sabha. I thank Council
members for giving me the opportunity to brief them on
the participation of women in political space and public
service and the obstacles they encounter.
Since being appointed in 2016 to the position of
Operations Manager at the Fezzan Libya Organization,
a local non-governmental organization, I have managed
more than 30 projects in areas ranging from social
cohesion to the empowerment of young people and
women, local governance capacity-building and much
more. As I lead community meetings and engage with
local authorities on a daily basis, I almost always
find myself the only woman in a male-dominated
environment. The traditional norms and habits and the
male nature of the society makes it difficult for women
to be included in reconciliation efforts and to be among
the decision-makers.
In managing those projects, I was required to meet
with local authorities, tribal elders, religious officials
and high-ranking members of the community in order
to analyse conflict indicators and design the best
intervention approach to bring community members
together. At the beginning, some of those people
refused to participate in a meeting led by a young
woman — there was an unwelcoming atmosphere — and
most of them did not take my words seriously. However,
I was determined to make sure they understood that I
was their only alternative for regaining stability and
improving the provision of services in the city. It took
them a long time to embrace me and pay attention to
what I had to say.
The issues surrounding female participation in
Libya are complex. Socially speaking, women are still
seen as weak and are allowed to work in only a few
kinds of job. In terms of the economy, employment
policies and the workplace discriminate against women.
The political participation of women also continues
to face significant challenges. Women in Libya have face
systemic violence from the Government and, as a result,
remain second-class citizens. Women who attempt
to increase their participation in peace negotiations
are often rejected, as was the case when the Minister
of State for Women’s Affairs announced Libya’s
withdrawal from the memorandum of understanding
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
4/18

27/06/2022

women and peace and security, which had been signed
with UN-Women.
The memorandum of understanding had sparked
widespread controversy, a backlash from community
members and assumptions by religious leaders that the
memorandum and the resolution itself contravened the
religious principles, norms and habits of the community.
More than a decade has passed since the peaceful
revolution turned to an armed internal war. Those of
us who live in Libya nowadays struggle to survive,
especially women and young people.
One of the biggest issues in Libya that impedes
women’s participation in politics, prevents gender
equality and marginalizes women’s future engagement
is their insecurity. Civil society organization activists,
women human rights defenders and journalists continue
to be the targets of social media harassment, physical
attacks, kidnappings and murders. Such concerns have
serious implications for the future of women’s rights
in Libya and affect their inclusion in the country’s
democratic process.
Since 2011, we have had many Governments
dominated by men, but recent Governments in Libya
have taken positive steps by appointing more women
to higher positions, such as those of Minister of Justice
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, which has never been
achieved before.
In that context, tremendous progress has been made
for the benefit of Libyan women. For the first time in
the nation’s history, Libyan women participated more
actively in preparations for the national elections held
in 2021. There were two female presidential candidates,
and many Libyan women joined political parties. There
are also other clear signs showing that Libyan women
are actively participating in politics.
Increasing the number of women in public service is
an excellent starting point, but achieving the meaningful
participation of women also requires adopting prowomen legislation. It is time for Libyan policymakers
and the international community to understand that
achieving true democracy, justice and equality for
everyone requires women’s significant participation. In
that regard, we hope that the Council will endorse the
following recommendations concerning Libyan women.
First, efforts to encourage women’s participation in
the political sphere and in peacebuilding in Libya must
continue, regardless of the obstacles. The continuous
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

support for, and engagement of, women at the national
level in peace negotiations are essential.
Secondly, improving women-centred services
is essential. Women are in general far removed from
Government programmes. Greater coordination among
Governmental bodies, non-governmental organizations
and the international community is required to improve
the programmes delivered for women at the national
and local levels.
Thirdly, we must increase women’s meaningful
participation in decision-making at the national and
international levels in order to give Libyan women a
meaningful voice in decision-making and governance.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the position of women
through legislation and increase the quota of women in
the upcoming parliamentary election to 50 per cent, with
even greater participation in legislative committees.
Lastly, in order to strengthen the ideals of equality,
justice and democracy it is important to promote and
disseminate a culture of gender equality that prioritizes
women’s participation. The support of the authorities of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to create a
national framework for promoting the personal growth
of displaced women and female victims of domestic
violence in rural areas is essential.
The President: I thank Ms. Alhodiri for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I also thank
Ms. Alhodiri for reminding us of the importance of
women’s participation in matters of peace and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General Stephanie
Williams for all her work on Libya accomplished
over the past few years and to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to appoint a Special Representative.
We look forward to a prompt appointment.
I will make four points today.

S/PV.9078

First, the United Nations has been clear that,
although the December election did not go ahead,
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map has
not expired. We acknowledge the focus by some
stakeholders on the perceived deadline of the road map,
but parallel Governments and parallel institutions are
not in the interests of the Libyan people, and neither is
unconstrained spending. We urge all parties to recognize
that Libya’s resources must be managed in a transparent,
responsible and accountable manner throughout the
country for the benefit of the Libyan people.
Secondly, we welcome the progress made during
the talks in Cairo between the joint committee of the
House of Representatives and High State Council,
facilitated by Special Adviser Williams. The onus is
now on the leaders of the two Chambers to urgently
finalize the legal basis for elections and deliver on
the Libyan people’s desire to choose their leaders. We
therefore welcome plans for the meeting to be held in
Geneva in the coming days. Both leaders must now put
the interests of Libya first. Stability in Libya can be
achieved only through an inclusive political process
that includes the holding of credible, transparent and
inclusive parliamentary and presidential elections as
soon as possible.
Thirdly, it is more important than ever that we secure
the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries
from Libya, including the Wagner Group. Their
continued presence is detrimental to peace and security
in Libya and the broader region. All foreign forces
and mercenaries should leave Libya without delay. We
support the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
to implement the October 2020 ceasefire agreement
and urge further progress on its implementation. All
parties involved should engage with the United Nations
and the Commission to honour the commitments made.
Lastly, the United Kingdom reaffirms its readiness
to work with Libya and all international partners to build
a more peaceful and stable future for the country and
for the Libyan people. We will be in touch with Security
Council members in the coming days on the upcoming
mandate renewals of the Panel of Experts and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
As everyone knows, we have faced difficulties over the
past nine months in agreeing a substantive mandate. I
that hope all Council members are ready to engage in
a constructive discussion on the future of the Mission
and to agree a longer-term mandate to provide UNSMIL
with the stability it needs.

22-402405/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council, namely,
Gabon, Kenya and Ghana.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Bushra Alhodiri for their briefings. We
welcome the participation of our colleague Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya.
(spoke in English)
The past few weeks have seen great efforts to
break through the protracted transition period, which is
currently further encumbered by a debilitating political
stalemate. We commend the achievement of the joint
committee of the House of Representatives and High
State Council for the progress they have made so far
in seeking a constitutional basis for elections. We
urge that the momentum be sustained to overcome the
pending issues. We acknowledge the work of Stephanie
Williams, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General, in
that regard.
The peace process involves the resumption of
dignity for a people who can move forward the course
of their nation from decisions born of inclusive dialogue
and an inclusive national reconciliation process. A
truly Libyan-led and -owned peace process cannot
be achieved without mainstreaming dialogue and
reconciliation at all its stages. That is why we insist
on continued dialogue and the comprehensive national
reconciliation process, which is also espoused under
resolution 2510 (2020). In that regard, we laud the Libyan
authorities for the launch of the strategic vision for the
national reconciliation process. We firmly believe that
the foundations on which the elections are held and the
elections themselves should constructively fit within
that outline. We would like our Libyan brothers and
sisters to remember that the peace process is therefore
not entirely about elections.
Nevertheless, we would encourage the holding of
an election that ensures the full participation of Libyan
women and young people. We caution against any
attempt to dictate how Libyans should forge a peace
path. Rather, as the Security Council, we are dutybound to ring-fence all the achievements of the peace
process so that they may harden into solid blocks
that can guarantee sustainability. We also encourage
international support to that end. We acknowledge
the African Union’s commitment, including as
reaffirmed during the 23 June launch of the strategy,
and we welcome the African Union Peace and Security
6/18

27/06/2022

Council’s meeting to be held on 29 June to discuss the
situation in Libya.
We are concerned about reports of violence in
and around Tripoli. We caution against any resort to
violence and urge restraint and calm, especially in such
a delicate period. We also call on all parties to desist
from inflammatory rhetoric. The continued presence of
foreign fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries and the
blatant violations of the arms embargo are, despicably,
providing an enabling environment for tensions. In that
regard, we call on all foreign fighters, foreign forces
and mercenaries to depart from Libya immediately. We
also welcome the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks
held last week in Cairo and the resolve to ensure that
departure, as well as the unification of the military.
We urge the Security Council to support that
resolve through a sustained push for the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement and adherence to the arms
embargo. We recall the ravaging effects that the conflict
has had on the Sahel region. We must remain conscious
that the Libya peace process is inextricably linked to
the stability of the region.
Consultations with neighbouring States and States
in the region are therefore critical. International support
should also be extended to cross-border cooperation on
tackling arms trafficking and human smuggling and
trafficking, inter alia. We further urge that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts not
only be focused within Libya but also be undertaken in
a collaborative approach with neighbouring States and
regional organizations. The cross-border angle must
also take into account the conducive environment that
the conflict provides for terrorism to grow. There is a
need to include deliberate counter-terrorism capacitybuilding and support in security sector reform and
DDR efforts.
The inhumane treatment of migrants, refugees
and asylum-seekers transiting Libya to Europe is
despicable. The preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations stipulates our determination, as the peoples of
the United Nations, to “reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women”. That
is unfortunately a fable for our brothers and sisters
fording the Mediterranean waters every day as they
seek a better life.
We urge that all migrants, refugees and asylumseekers be treated with dignity, whether on land or at
sea, and be treated equally everywhere in the world. We
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9078

also call on all those enabling their inhumane treatment
to desist from directly or indirectly doing so. That
includes targeted funding and information-sharing
for their detention under inhumane conditions and
information-sharing for their interception at sea and
return to Libyan ports.

reiterate the importance of holding presidential and
parliamentary elections at the earliest opportunity. It
has been about half a year since the missed milestone
for holding elections, as decided by Libyans themselves.
It is important that the stalemate not be allowed
to continue.

It is necessary that the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) be clearly structured and
led to enable the Council to support Libya in a wellcoordinated manner. We therefore look forward to the
position of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral being filled, and we welcome the recent
nomination of an African by the Secretary-General
for consideration in that regard. We also urge fellow
Council members to commit to building consensus
and delivering a substantive UNSMIL mandate to the
people of Libya in July.

The priority right now is to ensure that elections
be held at the earliest opportunity in a free, fair,
inclusive and credible manner. We hope that all parties
in Libya can unite around that common purpose. It is
important for the Security Council and the international
community to support the Libyan people as they
prepare for the elections. Violence in any form could
undermine the progress achieved since 2020 and should
be strongly opposed.

Finally, we urge that any action on Libya’s frozen
assets be taken in consultation with the Libyan
authorities in order to ensure that all of Libya’s frozen
assets be preserved for the eventual return and benefit
of the people of Libya.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to a
truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process, with
respect for Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Mr. Ravindran (India): I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for her briefing. I also thank
Ms. Bushra Alhodiri for her remarks, and I welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya
at today’s meeting.
We note with concern that not only is the progress
we saw after the signing of the ceasefire agreement in
danger of coming to a halt but there are also indications
of a risk of backsliding. We noted with a high degree of
concern the reports of armed clashes and mobilization
of armed groups in and around Tripoli.
It is also regrettable that there is still no agreement
on the constitutional basis for holding elections. In
that regard, we note that the Speaker of the House of
Representatives and the President of the High Council
of State are scheduled to meet in Geneva tomorrow
to discuss the draft constitutional framework for
holding elections.
We urge all the parties concerned to strive to resolve
all outstanding political issues peacefully, keeping the
larger interests of the Libyan people in mind. We hope
that all parties will work together to maintain peace and
stability in the country. In that regard, we once again

It is also important to see concrete progress in the
full and complete withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries. It is regrettable that, more than a year and
a half since the signing of the ceasefire agreement, we
have yet to see tangible progress in that regard. The
continued presence of foreign forces and mercenaries
is detrimental to the peace and stability of the country
and the region.
In that regard, we would also like to stress that,
as noted very clearly by the Panel of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) in its recent report, the so-called military
training provided by some countries and the presence
of their troops on Libyan soil is also a clear violation
of Security Council resolutions, more specifically of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1970 (2011).
It is important to ensure that the political process
in Libya be fully Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, with
no imposition or external interference. In that context,
let me also stress the importance of planning for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed groups and non-State armed actors. Libya
also needs an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process.
It is important for the international community
to focus its attention on the threat of terrorism in
Africa, particularly in the Sahel region. The reports
of the Secretary-General and of the Panel of Experts
have highlighted the presence of training camps of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its
affiliates in southern Libya. ISIL’s continued ability to
launch attacks is deeply concerning. The focus of the
Council should be on eliminating every threat posed
by ISIL and other terrorist groups anywhere in the

22-402407/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

world. Terrorism is a growing threat to Africa, and it is
important that the Security Council focus on that issue
before it is too late.
India has traditionally enjoyed close and mutually
beneficial bilateral ties with Libya, and we remain
committed to supporting Libya and its people in their
endeavour to bring about lasting peace in the country.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and Ms. Bushra
Alhodiri for her insightful remarks.
Let me start by reiterating our support for the
United Nations and for Special Adviser Williams, in
particular for her efforts to facilitate talks in Cairo
between the House of Representatives and the High
Council of State. We are encouraged by the progress
achieved during the most recent round of negotiations
towards agreeing on a constitutional framework for
elections. We call on the leaders on both sides to hold
follow-up meetings to resolve outstanding issues. We
are pleased to learn that such a meeting will be held in
Geneva this week. The aim must be to hold free, fair
and inclusive national elections as soon as possible.
We are worried by the increased tensions in recent
weeks, especially in and around Tripoli. It is essential
that all actors in Libya contribute to upholding the
ceasefire and preserving the calm. The progress
achieved since 2020 must not go to waste. Libya needs
stability, not another violent conflict. We are therefore
worried by the rapid deterioration in public services,
particularly the education and health services, as well
as about the significant protection challenges. The
further destabilization of political dynamics might
threaten the ceasefire agreement and the Government’s
viability, thereby risking a resumption of the conflict.
Let me also reiterate our concern about the
situation for civil society and human rights defenders in
Libya. The Libyan authorities must uphold their human
rights obligations.
Lastly, Norway supports the extension of the
mandate of the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on
Libya. It is important that the Mission can continue
its work to advance compliance with human rights
obligations and a rights-based reconciliation process
in Libya.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I
also want to thank our civil society briefer for her very
helpful and insightful report and recommendations.
8/18

27/06/2022

The United States is gravely concerned about the
situation in Libya. It is appalling that small cabals of
men, in most cases backed by weapons rather than
popular legitimacy, have spent the past six months
cutting deals and crafting schemes to determine who
will be in power and who will get which spoils, while
some 3 million Libyans are still waiting to exercise
their right to vote for Libya’s leaders.
Libya has reached a critical moment, and its leaders
must choose a trajectory — whether to build consensus
and foster unity that can lead to fair elections and
stability or to wallow in the status quo and consign
the Libyan people to uncertainty, stagnation and
potential violence.
Pronouncing that the road map of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum has expired does not in any
way change the facts on the ground in Libya or break
the political impasse. It in fact increases uncertainty
and the potential for violence. It is also a distraction.
For too long, Libyan leaders have given excuses and
sought to delay elections in order to extend their time
in power. A new fight over leadership will only delay
elections further and prolong the instability.
The major achievement of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum was an agreement to hold elections.
That goal is not only still valid and achievable, but
reflects the freely expressed will of the majority
of Libyan citizens. We, too, are encouraged by the
progress made by the joint committee of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council towards
establishing a constitutional framework for presidential
and parliamentary elections.
We welcome the news that the Speaker of the House
of Representatives, Aguila Saleh, and the President of
the High Council of State will convene in Geneva this
week to discuss the draft constitutional framework for
elections. We urge them to work in good faith to bridge
the remaining differences. That sort of leadership is
desperately needed in Libya. It can be a catalyst that
sets the country on the path to free and fair elections.
Let me join other speakers in also offering our
gratitude to Special Adviser Stephanie Williams for
answering the United Nations call, first, to work with
the Libyans to help bring about the 2020 ceasefire
and the stabilization that followed and then again to
convene and support the parties towards the brink
of an agreement on the constitutional framework
for elections. We call on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to fully implement the
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

recommendations made by the independent strategic
review to better position itself so that it can effectively
carry out its mandate and support the people of Libya in
their demand for stability, peace and prosperity.
In conclusion, it is now also time that the
Security Council provide UNSMIL with a clear and
comprehensive one-year mandate so that the Mission
can work confidently to address the many issues facing
Libya. UNSMIL needs the Council’s backing if it is to
be most effective, and a substantive mandate renewal
for a full year is the best way to convey that support.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Ms. Bushra Alhodiri for their briefings. I also
welcome the delegation of Libya to this meeting.
I will comment on three aspects today.
The first aspect is the ongoing political talks. We
welcome the agreement between the High Council
of State and the House of Representatives that led
to meetings to be held in Geneva tomorrow and on
Wednesday. We hope that the Libyan stakeholders will
reach common ground on the outstanding constitutional
issues and together build a framework for elections in
the short term.
The second aspect is the reconciliation endeavours.
We endorse the continued relevance and legitimacy of
the road map of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
We also welcome the strategic vision of the National
Reconciliation Project that the Presidency Council
announced last week. We hope that the Project will be
thoroughly implemented in the near future. Above all,
we support the angle from which Libyan stakeholders
are addressing that issue.
The third aspect is peace and security. Unfortunately,
acts of violence in Libya are still a matter of concern.
That is why we reiterate how crucial the 2020 ceasefire
agreement is. Indeed, the action plan of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission is a cornerstone feature of the
ceasefire implementation. We commend the efforts to
unify Libya’s armed forces, which are also led by the
5+5 Joint Military Commission. We support considerate
institution-building in Libya, led and undertaken by the
Libyans themselves, with full national ownership, and
we firmly believe that those institutions will strengthen
Libya’s capacity to foster peace and security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for her briefing.

S/PV.9078

France is concerned about the evolution of the
situation in Libya, which risks reversing the progress
made in recent years. In a context marked by the
coexistence of two rival Governments, the risk of
destabilization, or even the partition of the country,
must not be taken lightly. The status quo therefore
cannot be an option. The priority must be to resolve
the crisis in the executive branch so as to establish a
unified Government capable of leading the electoral
process throughout Libya.
With the date of 22 June now behind us, it is
essential that all Libyan actors respect the ceasefire
ahead of the presidential and parliamentary elections,
as requested by the Libyans, whose commitment
remains unchanged.
France fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations to reach an agreement between the two Houses
on a constitutional basis. That dialogue is necessary to
define a new road map for holding the elections as soon
as possible. The progress achieved at the Cairo meetings
is a start. We now encourage the two Speakers of the
Houses to finalize the agreement on the constitutional
basis at the meeting in Geneva on 28 and 29 June and to
enable its entry into force as soon as possible.
Such a dialogue is also needed to ease tensions
and preserve stability in terms of security. That is
necessary for the continued implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, in particular the withdrawal of all
foreign forces and mercenaries as soon as possible, with
the aim of reuniting Libyan institutions, particularly
military and security institutions.
In that regard, France welcomes the resumption
of the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. We
remain ready to contribute to the implementation of a
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process,
in conjunction with Libyan and regional actors. We
recall the obligation of all Member States to respect the
arms embargo.
France remains concerned about the continuing
oil blockade. We support the proposals to freeze oil
revenues and stand ready to help the Libyans to enable
the transparent and fair management of the country’s
resources for the benefit of the entire population.
France calls for the renewal of the Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, whose work is crucial
in the light of the alarming violations of human
rights, specifically migrants’ rights and violations of
international humanitarian law.

22-402409/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

The Security Council must contribute to resolving
the crisis by actively encouraging the resumption
of an electoral process, which is crucial to lasting
stabilization in Libya. We welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to appoint a special representative
as soon as possible and call on the members of the
Council to cooperate to facilitate a meaningful renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya next month.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I, too, would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
Mexico deplores the fact that the political process
in Libya continues to be weakened by the lack of a
genuine compromise on the holding of the elections.
The situation has simply become unsustainable.
We note a concerning contradiction between the
legitimate desire of almost 3 million Libyan citizens
and the attitude of political groups, which, putting their
individual interests above the collective interests, have
resorted to all kinds of tactics to delay and obstruct
the transition.
We hope that the leaders of the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State will
shoulder their historic responsibility and reach
agreements on the outstanding issues during their
meeting in Geneva.
Mexico encourages and supports the United
Nations in the process of political facilitation and of
promoting the inclusion of those Libyan stakeholders
that are genuinely willing to resolve the problems that
have hindered the elections process since December
last year.
In the current context, we see a clear need to
strengthen the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
through robust leadership and a substantial mandate,
in line with the challenges that the country is facing.
We acknowledge the efforts of the Secretary-General
to attain those goals, and we call on members of the
Council to be guided by a constructive approach to the
strengthening of the Mission.
In the area of security, we deplore the violent
clashes that have been seen over the last few weeks
on the outskirts of Tripoli, and we call on all factions
to fully respect the ceasefire agreement. Those events
show how urgent it is to move towards the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups
and to respect the arms embargo. As Mexico has said
10/18

27/06/2022

on prior occasions, so long as weapons are widely
available, certain actors will opt for violence over
political dialogue.
We welcome the resumption of the work of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission and urge it to take concrete
steps forward in coordination with the region aimed
at the withdrawal of foreign fighters. We would recall
that the action plan on that issue was agreed in Geneva
last October; to date, we have not seen any concrete
steps forward.
In addition, Mexico underscores the importance
of more information being available about the specific
contribution of the United Nations component of the
ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We hope that future
reports of the Secretariat will contain more information
about the results achieved.
Turning to the economic situation, Mexico
condemns the actions that have been taken to boycott
the exploitation and sale of Libyan oil. That boycott
is unjustifiable, because the irresponsible behaviour
of a few is depriving the Libyan people of resources
that are essential to financing basic services and to
address the difficult humanitarian situation prevailing
in the country.
Finally, my country urges the Libyan authorities to
ensure the protection of the rights of the most vulnerable
groups in the conflict. Measures must urgently be taken
to protect the rights of migrants and refugees. Work
must also be done jointly with civil society to ensure
that women and young people play their rightful role in
Libya’s political life.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Libya.
The deadline set by the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum for political resolution expired on 22 June. Over
the past 18 months, the ceasefire in Libya has generally
held, and the political process has achieved many
positive results. However, not all of the transitional
tasks set out in the road map for political dialogue have
been fulfilled. Differences still exist among all Libyan
parties on such key issues as elections.
The end of the political transition period does not
mean the end of the peace process. All Libyan parties
should continue to put the interests of their country
and people first, abide by the general direction of the
political settlement, exercise the necessary restraint,
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

safeguard the hard-won peace and stability, continue
to strengthen dialogue and consultation, and keep the
peace process moving in the right direction.
In the light of the current situation and the
briefing by the Secretariat, I wish to make the
following observations.
First, we need to maintain the positive momentum
of dialogue. Recently the House of Representatives and
the High Council of State held three rounds of dialogue
in Cairo and achieved positive results. The leaders
of two institutions will continue to hold a dialogue
in Geneva. China welcomes that development and
appreciates Egypt’s positive and constructive role in
that regard.
China encourages all parties in Libya to maintain
the current momentum of dialogue and resolve a
package of issues through consultation, including on
future political arrangements, the constitutional basis
for elections and oil-revenue distribution.
The United Nations is the main channel for
mediating the Libyan issue. It is essential to appoint
a special representative as soon as possible and to
resume the full functioning of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). China continues
to support the appointment of an African candidate as
the Special Representative.
Secondly, we need to maintain security and stability
in Libya. The current security situation in Libya is as
sensitive as it is complex, with conflicts occurring from
time to time in the western region. China is deeply
concerned about that. Under current circumstances, all
parties in Libya should exercise maximum restraint and
refrain from any action that could escalate tensions so
as to create an atmosphere favourable to the political
process. Countries with influence to bear in Libya
should play a positive role in that regard.
China welcomes the resumption of the meetings of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in the near future
and looks forward to the full and speedy deployment of
the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring team.
Thirdly, we must remain committed to the Libyanowned and -led principle. Ultimately, the Libyan issue
can be resolved only autonomously by the Libyan people
themselves, in the light of their national conditions,
through a comprehensive dialogue. The international
community should fully respect Libya’s sovereignty and
ownership, fully heed and accommodate the concerns

S/PV.9078

of all Libyan parties, provide constructive assistance
and refrain from imposing external solutions.
External military and political interference is
an important reason why the Libyan issue is mired
in difficulties. The international community should
draw profound lessons from that fact and refrain from
repeating past mistakes.
Fourthly, it is imperative to comprehensively
advance the peace process. The economy and
people’s livehoods and the peace process are mutually
reinforcing. Petroleum is an important source of
income in terms of economic development and
improving people’s livelihoods. China urges all parties
to strengthen consultations on the distribution of
oil revenues and the promotion of the early and full
resumption of oil production.
Comprehensive national reconciliation is the key to
lasting peace and stability in Libya. China welcomes
the strategy and the five guiding principles for
national reconciliation recently released by the Libyan
Presidency Council and encourages all parties in Libya
to strengthen cooperation with the African Union, the
League of Arab States and other regional organizations
in that regard.
Libya has long been concerned about the losses
resulting from assets being frozen and has made
specific demands. The Security Council and its
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya should actively study and
respond to that request.
As we speak, Libya has once again come to a
critical juncture. Regrettably, the Council has failed
to reach consensus on a draft presidential statement.
We hope that the Council can maintain its unity on
the Libyan dossier, speak with one voice and play a
positive and constructive role in advancing the Libyan
peace process.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her very helpful briefing. I want to
thank our civil society briefer, Ms. Bushra Alhodiri, for
the valuable insights and practical recommendations
she has given to the Security Council. It is very
much appreciated.
I want to begin today with the most important
message I could convey to the Libyan parties. We
implore them to set aside differences and narrow
interests. We implore them to agree, as soon as possible,
on a political framework. That framework should be a

22-4024011/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process facilitated by
the United Nations, and it should pave the way to free,
fair and inclusive national elections. To the members
of the Security Council and the wider international
community, we ask them to hold true to the letter and
spirit of the Berlin process, relevant Security Council
resolutions and the conclusions from subsequent
regional and international meetings on Libya towards
realizing a peaceful, stable and prosperous Libya.
We note the third and final round of the United
Nations-facilitated negotiations of the joint committee
of the House of Representatives and the High Council
of State last week. The Special Adviser’s efforts have
been instrumental to the progress achieved so far. But
there is more to do. We therefore call on the two sides to
avoid unilateral actions, and we warmly welcome that
the parties have accepted Special Adviser Williams’
invitation to meet in Geneva this week to discuss the
draft constitutional framework for elections.
We call on all parties to ensure women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in all aspects of Libya’s
political transition and peacebuilding efforts. We
condemn all threats, reprisals and violence, both online
and offline, targeting women, in particular women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders, which, as
Ms. Alhodiri set out for us, really put Libya’s democratic
future at risk today. Greater efforts must be made by the
Libyan authorities to prevent those abhorrent acts so as
to hold perpetrators accountable and review measures
that restrict the work of civil society organizations.
The two reports of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya contained stark findings on human
rights violations that impede Libya’s democratic
transition. We call on the Libyan authorities to
investigate all violations of international law and ensure
that those responsible are held to account. We strongly
urge the renewal of the Mission’s mandate so that it can
continue its vital work.
We are concerned that, as the political stalemate
drags on, the overall security situation in Libya
grows increasingly unstable. That was evident in the
deplorable violence witnessed in Tripoli in recent
weeks. One thing remains abundantly clear: the Libyan
people do not want a return to conflict.
We call on all actors to respect and uphold the
October 2020 ceasefire agreement. We are pleased
that the 5+5 Joint Military Commission continues to
undertake its important work. We call for progress
on the full withdrawal of all foreign fighters, foreign
12/18

27/06/2022

forces and mercenaries, according to the action plan
and in close cooperation with Libya’s neighbours.
Addressing the underlying causes of conflict
is also crucial to restoring peace and prosperity for
all Libyans. That means ensuring the transparent,
accountable, fair and equitable distribution of public
wealth and resources for the Libyan people. It also
means prioritizing national reconciliation to address
deep political divisions and build sustainable peace
from the bottom up.
In conclusion, we express our full support for the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Its critical role in the current electoral and political
impasse is absolutely essential. We therefore urge
Council members to support a substantive renewal of
its mandate next month that can give it predictability
and agency to facilitate the political process.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Stephanie Williams for her steadfast efforts to bridge
the gap between the parties. We eagerly await the
nomination of a new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to lead UNSMIL at this important
moment for Libya and its people. Council members
must fulfil their responsibilities and enable leadership
of the Mission.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing. We also thank
Ms. Bushra Alhodiri for her valuable briefing, and
we welcome the participation of Ambassador Taher
Elsonni in today’s meeting.
At the outset, we emphasize that this critical
juncture in Libya, following the expiry of the timeline
set out in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road
map, requires Libyans to continue to engage in a
responsible national dialogue and commit to full
de-escalation. We therefore welcome the progress
made by the Libyan parties after the conclusion of the
third round of consultations of the constitutional track
committee in Cairo. We look forward to the meetings
that will be held this week, which we hope will lead
to consensus on the points of contention. That will
enable our Libyan brothers to take concrete steps based
on a constitutional framework to facilitate the holding
of free, fair, inclusive and credible parliamentary and
presidential elections on a date agreed upon by Libyans
themselves. In that context, we value the tireless efforts
of the United Nations and the Arab Republic of Egypt
in facilitating those consultations and encourage active
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

follow-up to those endeavours over the coming period
to maintain the current momentum.
Paving the way for stability requires the removal
of all obstacles to calm and ending the political divide
between the Libyan parties. The most important of those
obstacles is tackling the causes of insecurity, especially
in the light of the escalation and recurrence of clashes
among armed groups in Tripoli and the military buildup in its vicinity.
As a matter of priority, security and military
institutions should be consolidated, and disarmament
issues must be addressed. In that context, my country
supports the initiative of the Libyan Presidential
Council on national reconciliation, as well as efforts to
address the general situation with a view to protecting
Libyan civilians, particularly women and children. We
also support the statement by the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States calling on all Libyan
parties to maintain the ceasefire agreement, prevent its
collapse and warn against the use of weapons.
In that context, we welcome the resumption
recently of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission under
the auspices of the United Nations. That is a positive
development in the light of the complex situation. In
that vein, we stress the need to implement Security
Council resolutions on the withdrawal of foreign forces,
fighters and mercenaries from Libya in a simultaneous,
phased, gradual and balanced manner.
Security vacuums must not be left for exploitation
by extremist and terrorist groups that are waiting for
any opportunity to expand and extend their control in
Libya. We therefore continue to support the efforts of
the Libyan forces in combating terrorism, especially
by securing the southern Libyan borders. In addition,
political differences must not be a reason for the spread
of hate speech or incitement of violence and infighting.
Efforts should be intensified to combat such discourse
in all its forms, in support of achieving peace and
stability in Libya.
We look forward to renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya next month
with a substantive draft resolution that strengthens the
Mission’s mandate and enhances its capacity to support
Libya. Similarly, we look forward to the appointment
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to Libya at the earliest opportunity, in line with the
requirements of the current situation.

S/PV.9078

In conclusion, we call on all our brethren in Libya
to safeguard the achievements made since the ceasefire
agreement, while unifying all vital Libyan institutions
and avoiding disputes. The protracted transition
period must be brought to an end in order to provide a
dignified living for all Libyans in a unified, secure and
stable country.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her comprehensive briefing on the situation in Libya
in the context of the activities of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We also listened
carefully to Ms. Bushra Alhodiri.
As of today, the situation in and around Libya
continues to become destabilized. The country is unable
to cope with the fallout from the Western aggression in
2011, which caused Libyan statehood to collapse and
triggered a political crisis that continues to this day.
The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map
expired last week. That was a benchmark document
designed to determine the direction for the ongoing
political settlement process, including a qualitative
transition on matters regarding unifying the
administrative and security structures of the former
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya so as to bolster the economy
and social sector. Unfortunately, a number of the tasks
set out therein, including completing the work on the
country’s constitution and the conduct of nationwide
elections, were not fulfilled on time. Nevertheless, the
spirit of the road map and its principles remain relevant
for Libya’s future. The fact that the document expired
is no reason to throw caution to the wind.
In that connection, we note the commitment of
the representative of Prime Minister Fathi Bashagha,
elected by the House of Representatives, and his Office
to pursue efforts for the welfare of the country, and we
welcome the steps taken in that regard. Most important,
that enthusiasm was constructive. There is still much to
be done to establish consolidated governance bodies,
unify State mechanisms and financial and economic
institutions and create united security forces. However,
the most important challenge facing the Libyan people
is overcoming the burden of mutual mistrust — the
consequence of the protracted conflict.
We strongly condemn the increasingly frequent
outbreaks of armed violence among armed groups in
Tripoli and other parts of the country, as well as road
closures along the coastline. We call on the parties to
refrain from reckless acts that could further exacerbate

22-4024013/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

the rift. We believe that all international stakeholders
that can bring influence to bear on Libyan actors should
prompt them to engage in constructive cooperation
with the aim of seeking compromise solutions to the
accumulated problems solely through political and
diplomatic means. The alternative to that — an escalation
of armed hostilities — must certainly be avoided.
We welcome the progress made on the political
settlement track, including a third round of talks
held in Cairo, where members of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council negotiated
a draft constitution. The talks yielded significant
results, but unfortunately no final agreement has yet
been reached. We can only hope that the upcoming
meeting between Aguila Saleh and Khaled Al-Mishri
in Geneva at the end of the month will help resolve the
remaining disagreements.
It is reassuring that the ceasefire is still holding and
that the 5+5 Joint Military Commission is continuing
its work. The issue of evacuating foreign forces
from Libya remains pressing. We have consistently
advocated for a synchronized, well-balanced, gradual
and phased withdrawal of all non-Libyan armed groups
and military units, in line with the agreements reached
by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in Geneva last
year. That is the only approach that can prevent the
deterioration of the security situation.
More than ever, international efforts on the
Libyan track need to be consolidated. Libya must not
be an arena for competition or for the advancement of
one-sided parochial agendas. It is therefore regrettable
that those who destroyed Libya in 2011 apparently
have completely different plans. Maintaining the unity
of the Security Council on the Libyan dossier is but
a smokescreen for them. Otherwise, it is difficult to
explain the very unconstructive position of our Western
colleagues, first and foremost the British penholder
on the Libyan dossier, regarding the Security Council
draft presidential statement proposed by Russia, which
sets out the general position of the Council in support
of stability and resilience for the political transition in
Libya. We regret that, even at this critical juncture, our
British colleagues were overcome by banal jealousy over
their penholdership, which prompted them to advance
patently unacceptable revisions that prevented the
Council’s adoption of the statement. At the same time,
the day before, a standalone statement from a number
of Western Security Council members was circulated.
That statement largely duplicated the content of our
proposed draft. That left us no doubt that, behind our
14/18

27/06/2022

Western colleagues lofty rhetoric about the importance
of a Council speaking with one voice, there is nothing
more than barefaced double standards, which have
caused so much suffering in Libya.
Due to the persistent intra-Libyan differences and
the egotism of our Western colleagues, the situation
in Libya risks spiralling out of control. We therefore
underscore once again that there is no alternative to
a resolution of the Libyan dossier in a manner that
reflects Libyan realities and under the auspices of the
United Nations. UNSMIL has an important role to play
as a key mediator in such a configuration. However, the
Mission has remained decapitated for quite some time.
Without a leader, UNSMIL cannot deliver on its crucial
mandated functions of facilitating national dialogue.
We note the effective stewardship of Stephanie
Williams at the helm of UNSMIL as a Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General, who is not accountable to
the Security Council. We believe that her leadership
of the Mission is being dragged out artificially despite
repetitive assurances that this is a temporary measure. In
that regard, we see evidence of the fact that our Western
colleagues, in the spirit of neocolonialist thinking, wish
to impose on Libya their script of what the future of the
country should look like and who should be in charge
there. We believe that approach to be cynical and
unacceptable. The United Nations envoy should have a
relevant Security Council-authorized mandate. We will
proceed from these considerations during negotiations
on a Security Council draft resolution on the renewal
of UNSMIL’s mandate in July. The egotism of Western
States, the self-appointed arbiters of Libya’s fate, must
be put to an end. That is long overdue.
At the same time, we note the Secretary-General’s
determination to resolve this matter. We call on him to
approach the issue in a balanced and careful manner.
It is also necessary, not only to ensure consensus on
the choice of a Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in the Security Council, but also to take into
account the views of internal Libyan stakeholders and
regional players and not to succumb to the dictates of
the West, which views Libya as its backyard.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
remarks and valuable insights, especially at this critical
time, and thank Ms. Alhodiri for her realistic overview
of the situation of women in Libya. I would also like
to acknowledge the participation of the Permanent
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

Representative of Libya, Ambassador Elsonni, in
today’s meeting.
I would like to make the following four brief points.

S/PV.9078

their efforts towards the concrete implementation of
the ceasefire agreement, including the withdrawal of
foreign fighters, foreign forces and mercenaries.

First, our first and shared priority should remain
avoiding any military escalation and overcoming
the current political and institutional impasse of the
country. Rivalry and pressure with armed men can take
the country only backwards. It should not be allowed. It
should not happen. The Libyans do not want it.

Thirdly, the human rights situation in the country
is deteriorating. We deplore the detention and unfair
trials of a local staff member of the Norwegian Refugee
Council and other civil society and humanitarian
actors because of the restrictions issued recently by the
Tripoli-based Civil Society Commission.

A Libyan-led and Libyan-owned process leading
to free and fair countrywide national elections under
a constitutional framework as soon as possible is the
only sustainable way forward to maintain stability
in the country. Progress has been made thanks to the
commendable efforts of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, Ms. Stephanie Williams, and her
excellent work in very challenging conditions, but
much remains to be done. We call on the leaders of the
House of Representatives and the High Council of State
to engage in good faith to bridge outstanding issues in
the meeting called by Special Adviser Williams, which
is to be held in Geneva tomorrow.

We call on Libyan political actors to uphold
meaningful human rights commitments and not
undermine them because of short-term political
gains. We believe that the reconciliation process
involves Libyans themselves. A rights-based, victimcentred reconciliation process is crucial to preventing
conflict from recurring in the country. Therefore,
Albania reaffirms its support for the extension of
the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. The
Mission should continue its critical work in advancing
human rights and security and enhancing rights-based
national reconciliation in the country.

The Libyan people have clearly expressed their
willingness to cast their votes, freely choose their
leaders and rule over their destinies. It is high time for
us to hear their voices and respect their will and their
legitimate rights. We urge the Libyan stakeholders to
pursue an inclusive political compromise to overcome
the impasse of the executive in order to guarantee an
environment conducive to organizing fair, credible,
inclusive and transparent elections. There is no space
for violence in that process, and the Security Council
will not condone any attempt at the creation of parallel
institutions or bids to take power through force and
violence. Those undermining the elections must be
held accountable.
Secondly, maintaining stability on the ground is a
prerequisite for a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political
process that is facilitated by the United Nations. We
are concerned about the increasing tensions among
militias. The ceasefire must be respected. No effort
should be spared in preventing conflict from flaring up
on the ground.
We welcome the resumption of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, which has already proven to be
pivotal in securing progress on the military track and
preserving the ceasefire of October 2020. We urge all
Libyan political and institutional actors to redouble

Finally, oil production in the country has yet to
return to normal, and no progress in that regard has
been made. National wealth should benefit all Libyan
people. The situation created by the shutdown of
more than 30 per cent of the oil fields in the country
is undermining the Libyan economy and hindering
investment in critical infrastructure and even the
provision of basic services vital to the population.
While we reiterate our thanks to Special Adviser
Williams for her tireless efforts and meaningful
contribution, I reiterate Albania’s support for
the Secretary-General’s efforts to appoint a fully
empowered special representative for Libya and to
adopt a robust, renewed mandate for the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya next month.
In conclusion, we would like Ms. Alhodiri and
every citizen of Libya to live and to thrive, not just to
survive. No one can change things for the Libyans; only
they can more the country forward. It is therefore time
to build on the progress made and open a new chapter
for the country and its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

22-4024015/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

27/06/2022

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I take the floor
again because the Russian representative referred
to the importance of Security Council unity and yet,
over the past nine months, one Council member has
consistently blocked consensus on Libya and attempts to
substantively renew the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), in addition to
blocking the original candidate of the Secretary-General
for the position of Special Representative. The United
Kingdom remains committed to delivering a more
peaceful and stable future for the Libyan people, and
that objective is the basis of all our efforts as penholder
on Libya and in brokering constructive negotiations on
Council products.

product must take into consideration the views of all
Council members in an objective manner.

With respect to the Russian draft statement, the
most recent Panel of Experts report provided detailed
evidence of the activities of the Wagner Group in
Libya, including those that led to the deaths of civilians,
which were unlawful under international humanitarian
law. The ongoing presence of the Wagner Group and
other entities has a corrosive effect on the stability
of Libya and the wider region. We continue to call
for the immediate departure of all foreign forces and
mercenaries from Libya, and we proposed edits to the
Russian draft statement that reflected that.

Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and
I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing. Through her,
I thank Ms. Williams for her recent efforts. I also
thank Ms. Bushra Alhodiri for her statement and for
explaining her point of view, thereby expressing the
views of a certain segment of Libyan women.

We also note the extensive evidence of Russian
breaches of the Libyan arms embargo set out in the
most recent report of the Panel of Experts.
We look forward to engaging with Council
colleagues over the coming days and weeks to help
support efforts to deliver peace and stability in Libya,
including by providing support for UNSMIL’s work.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I will be
brief. I too feel the need to respond to comments made
by the Russian delegation today.
The United States categorically objects to
accusations of obstructing a Security Council product
on Libya today. To the contrary, the United States joined
the majority of the Council in submitting constructive
edits to strengthen a product, including by lending
support to the United Nations efforts in Geneva this
week. Those were legitimate and supportive edits aimed
at strengthening a Council product, not obstructing it.
I would remind our Russian colleagues that Council
members who wish to lead Council efforts on a Council
16/18

I would also like to point out and echo the comments
just made by the representative of the United Kingdom
and to note that, contrary to the wild claims made
about a neocolonialist plot, the United States has never
blocked the appointment of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. We have welcomed the appointment
and supported several candidates. I do not believe the
same can be said of the Russian delegation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.

We emphasize that the widespread and active
participation of women has begun in Libya, with
positive steps. We have seen Libyan women
representing the Libyan people in the Parliament. We
have seen their presence in political debates. We have
seen women judges and women in security and military
posts. On top of all that, we are working to increase the
participation and representation of women, who make
up half of our society.
Since our previous briefing to the Security Council
nearly one month ago (see S/PV.9047), at which we tried
to convey the voice of the Libyan people, their suffering
and their needs, free from any political debate, we
have unfortunately not seen any progress to speak of.
The political situation remains at an impasse, and the
suffering of the people is getting worse.
Most Libyan regions are currently experiencing an
energy and electricity crisis. The people are becoming
angrier. I doubt that any Libyan would care to follow
this meeting. I would therefore like to apologize to
the men and women of Libya if I repeat today what
they have already heard at previous meetings. I know
that we are in a vicious cycle. The truth is that what
we say today will not change much in terms of their
daily suffering.
As Council members heard today, we welcomed
the recent talks between the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State, held in Cairo. I take this
22-40240

27/06/2022

The situation in Libya

opportunity to thank the members of both chambers for
their efforts to reach consensus. Unfortunately, they
were unable to reach an agreement during the third
round of talks. Contentious critical issues remain that
must be resolved, as they are preventing the conclusion
of the constitutional process, or the constitutional
preparations. Even establishing the appropriate
terminology is a cause of contention among the parties.
However, we look forward to the meeting between
the House of Representative and the High State Council
to be held in Geneva tomorrow. We hope that they will
reach an agreement on all the outstanding issues in
order to overcome the current political stalemate and
prepare for the holding of credible presidential and
parliamentary elections as soon as possible, while
guaranteeing the greatest participation among all
political factions and not excluding anyone. That would
enable us to reach a truly Libyan-owned and Libyanled solution.
Our past experiences and various political
agreements, such as the Skhirat and Geneva
agreements, have demonstrated that the Libyan crisis is
not related to a legal document, road map or deadline.
It is a purely political crisis, as it relates to the conflicts
among several regional and international Powers that
are competing in my country.
In that context, although the High Electoral
Commission announced on many occasions that it was
ready to organize the holding of elections, we have yet to
agree on the necessary legislation. Therefore, we call on
the Security Council once again to mandate the United
Nations and its various agencies to support the electoral
process, send teams to assess our needs immediately
and support the High Electoral Commission in helping it
to prepare for the elections at every stage, as soon as we
agree on the corresponding legislation and timetable.
We need technical and logistical support, as well
as international and regional monitoring, in order to
maintain the current momentum. The electoral process
should be transparent, fair and agreed by all parties,
and we should avoid any falsification, manipulation or
questioning of the results.
We have seen once again the extent of the divisions
within the Council, as evidenced by the debate we
have heard on the matter. The future of the Libyan
people is undermined by such divisions. Our people
have become hostage to the disagreements of Council
members and some regional Powers, which even go
as far as to intervene directly in Libyan affairs. To

S/PV.9078

date, no consensus has been reached on the mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya or the
appointment of a new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. It is not the first time that has happened, and it
is unlikely that it will be the last.
On previous occasions, we reiterated that the crisis
in Libya does not depend on the selection of envoys
or their capabilities. We believe that international
disagreement, external interference and the divisions
within the Council are what actually account for the
failure of all previous Mission mandates, regardless of
the Head of Mission.
In that regard, we would like to express our
objections and reservations concerning the current
mechanism for the appointment of the Special Envoy,
which gives the Security Council control over the
appointment process. We, the State concerned, are
only notified of the person’s name and have no say in
selecting the appointee.
In order to ensure that the work of any envoy or
international mediator is successful, we call on the
Secretary-General to consult first with the Libyans on
the appointment of the candidate and obtain the approval
of the relevant political actors before proposing a name
to the Security Council, since he or she will be an
envoy or representative of the Secretary-General, not
the Security Council. We assure members that Council
members will not reject a candidate if they know that
there is local consensus to select him.
Concerning the working methods of the Security
Council, we would also like to express our reservation
about the Council’s procedure for adopting draft
resolutions and presidential statements. Again, the
Council fails to take into account the position of the State
concerned because Council members and penholders
are not obliged to include the State concerned in their
consultations or discussions. They only consult with
us informally, as if we were not directly affected by
their decisions.
It is time to make those mechanisms more
transparent and fairer, not only with regard to Libya but
also all the countries on the Council’s agenda. Those
mechanisms are based on the Council’s long-standing
customs and not on rules or regulations.
Despite all the challenges and difficulties, we
remain hopeful that we will overcome the current crisis.
We welcome any initiative that aims to unite Libyans
and end the conflict.

22-4024017/18

S/PV.9078

The situation in Libya

In that context, we ask the Council to support the
strategic vision for national reconciliation launched
by the Presidency Council a few days ago, which
is supported by several national institutions and
international and regional organizations. The Speaker
of the Parliament, the President and members of the
Presidency Council, the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the United Nations all participated
in launching the strategic vision. It is something that
should be implemented, and we hope to build on it and
obtain support for it.
National reconciliation is as important as the
political process. It is no exaggeration to say that, if
the strategic vision is implemented effectively, it will
enable us to realize the aspirations of the Libyan people
to achieve stability and peace. We need good faith and
de-escalation to reach a genuine consensus. The deep
conflict among the various Libyan stakeholders, the
complex political landscape and the lack of international
will to resolve the crisis make the Libyan people fear
for their present and their future.
We have found only superficial solutions to today’s
problems, which will definitely recur and create
more suffering because of the current disagreements,
with no effective solutions in sight. Therefore, we
hope that the strategic vision will achieve its goals,
including comprehensive national reconciliation and
the establishment of a stable environment in which
the people can live in security without discrimination
or exclusion.
Before concluding. I would like to make some
remarks about national reconciliation, and I will
address the Council in English so that members can
clearly understand my meaning.
(spoke in English)
Despite all the initiatives and dialogues and
everything that we have gone through in past
years, national reconciliation has never been

18/18

27/06/2022

effectively addressed. We note that all the tracks
that have been introduced have been either political,
military or economic — we can call them technical
tracks — but none have addressed the root cause of the
problem, which is national reconciliation. We have been
stuck in a vicious cycle since 2011. Every initiative that
has been introduced has been fragile, and none of them
have been sustainable. We are now entering the same
cycle again. It is therefore vital to introduce and support
a national reconciliation track. We call on the African
Union to launch that process and on the United Nations
to complement the African Union’s efforts. Every
initiative and idea that has been provided has taken a
top-down approach, when we should really be looking
at the base, at the people. We need to heal the nation,
or nothing we are doing will succeed. That process
should complement every effort, including political
efforts, aimed at creating a constitutional framework
and finalizing all that we have been working towards
in recent years.
(spoke in Arabic)
In conclusion, we call on our people to support every
initiative and proposal aimed at building trust, rejecting
violence and hate speech and achieving a radical end
to the crisis without depending on foreigners. We must
work hand in hand in order to put an end to every kind of
foreign presence. We have all seen, day after day, how
States that once were enemies have agreed, reconciled
and prioritized their own interests. Today we must
therefore prioritize our own national interests, because
that is the only way we can overcome the vicious cycle
of the conflict and build a modern Libyan State on the
basis of institutions and the rule of law.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

22-40240
