United Nations

S/PV.6664

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6664th meeting
Tuesday, 22 November 2011, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Portas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Crivano Machado
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2011/641)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-60396 (E)

*1160396*

S/PV.6664

The report describes a calm situation in which the
overall trend is positive and the country continues to
make progress towards sustainable peace and
development. When UNMIT was established in 2006,
Timor-Leste was marked by a fragile security situation,
a weak institutional framework for the Polícia Nacional
de Timor-Leste (PNTL), and thousands of internally
displaced persons in camps throughout the capital.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (S/2011/641)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Australia, Japan, Nauru,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and
Timor-Leste to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to welcome the presence at this meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and
Her Excellency Mrs. Vera Lúcia Barrouin Crivano
Machado, Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of the
Ministry of External Relations of Brazil.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/641, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Ms. Haq.
Ms. Haq: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to
introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/641) on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period from
8 January to 20 September 2011. I would like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa.

2

Today, Timor-Leste is a very different place.
Much has been achieved. Political leaders across the
board are unequivocal about the need for continued
peace, dialogue and stability. The PNTL has resumed
responsibility for police operations throughout the
country, and UNMIT police has intensified its focus on
providing support for further institutional development
and capacity-building of the PNTL. Dili is a vibrant
and safe city. With the Government’s Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030, there is along-term
vision for the further development of the country. The
electoral management bodies have significantly
strengthened their capacity since 2006 and are
spearheading preparations for presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. Nevertheless,
significant challenges remain, including in the areas of
institutional capacity-building, further strengthening of
the security sector, and such socio-economic issues as
youth unemployment.
President José Ramos-Horta, President of
National Parliament Fernando “Lasama” de Araújo,
Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, and Frente
Revolucionária
do
Timor-Leste
Independente
Secretary-General Mari Alkatiri deserve much credit
for contributing to an environment in Timor-Leste of
continued progress towards the consolidation of peace,
development and stability. They and other political
leaders from across the spectrum have consistently
reiterated the importance of promoting tolerance,
mutual respect, and commitment to the democratic
process. Since the report’s closing date of
20 September, I have held two of my regular meetings
with all political parties, and one meeting with women
party representatives. During these meetings, I have
been heartened to hear party representatives describe
their own responsibilities towards ensuring that this
constructive political climate persists.
As the Secretary-General’s report notes, good
progress continues to be made in all areas of UNMIT’s
mandate. Let me first focus on two key elements for
continued peace and stability in Timor-Leste that are

11-60396

S/PV.6664

also critical aspects of UNMIT’s mandated support:
policing and elections.
In the area of policing, the PNTL’s resumption of
responsibility for the conduct, command and control of
all police operations in the country on 27 March was a
milestone. As I mentioned earlier, since then UNMIT
police support has focused on strengthening capacitybuilding and training of the PNTL within the
framework of the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan. The Plan sets out a comprehensive
programme of capacity-building activities in the key
areas of administration, discipline, legislation,
operations and training. UNMIT police have also been
providing operational support to the PNTL as required
and requested, and will maintain this capacity
throughout the electoral period. UNMIT police are
already supporting the PNTL in preparing for the 2012
elections, including through ongoing training in the
areas of operational planning and incident command
and control, as well as assistance in developing a joint
operations plan for elections.

violence, which continues to be the second highest
reported crime in Timor-Leste after assault. Continued
efforts to engage in community policing can assist in
tackling this issue, which UNMIT continues to
promote in all our work with the PNTL.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
the PNTL continues to face a challenge in meeting all
of its logistical requirements. I urge the Government
and Parliament, including in the context of the current
2012 budget discussions, to work together to ensure
adequate financial allocations for the PNTL to
overcome existing logistical gaps and to maintain any
assets UNMIT might eventually transfer to it. Those
gaps are also being discussed in the High-level
Committee on Transition, on the basis of detailed
analysis of requirements and costs.

A key challenge for meeting our goals in the
policing area is retaining UNMIT police officers and
selecting others with the expertise needed for the
effective implementation of the Joint Development
Plan. Here, I appeal to police-contributing countries to
provide officers qualified for specialized advisory
positions, and reiterate the Secretary-General’s request
that the countries concerned approve extensions of
deployment for police officers serving in key UNMIT
positions.

The parliamentary and presidential elections in
2012 will undoubtedly be another major milestone for
Timor-Leste. Although the electoral calendar has not
yet been announced, preparations are proceeding. The
Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration has
drafted subsidiary electoral legislation, including the
rules and procedures for candidate nomination, polling
and counting and campaigning, as well as codes of
conduct for media, observers and party representatives,
all of which are currently under review by the National
Electoral Commission. United Nations support to the
elections, provided through the joint UNMIT and
United Nations Development Programme electoral
support team, is a key example of United Nations
integration in action.

Since the PNTL’s resumption of policing
responsibilities on 27 March, PNTL officers have
effectively addressed incidents, and there has been no
impact on the continuing low crime rate. In the longterm, the PNTL’s enduring effectiveness will depend,
to a large extent, on its ability to maintain the trust of
the Timorese public. As noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Office of the Secretary of State
for Security completed its review of the 199 officers
with pending criminal or disciplinary issues, with
criminal and/or disciplinary action recommended
against 121 officers. The importance of the PNTL’s
continuing efforts to enhance internal disciplinary
mechanisms — demonstrating its commitment to
transparency and the rule of law — cannot be
overstated. Another essential element of maintaining
trust among the population is to serve its most
vulnerable members, including the victims of domestic

I would like to highlight that, while the
representation of women in Parliament — 21 out of
65 members — is already commendable, Parliament’s
approval of the amended parliamentary election law
providing for an increase in the quota of women on
party lists of candidates to one in every three reflects
the widespread commitment to women’s participation.
To enhance women’s participation in the elections,
both as voters and as candidates, a national steering
committee has been established, comprised of members
of Parliament, the Secretariat of State for the
Promotion of Equality, the electoral management
bodies, civil society organizations, United Nations
agencies and UNMIT. On 7 and 8 November, the
steering committee hosted a national workshop,
entitled “Women’s leadership leads us to peace and
stability”, to discuss strategies to bolster women’s
participation in the elections.

11-60396

3

S/PV.6664

Nevertheless, challenges remain. While women
are currently playing important roles in a number of
key Cabinet, State and other leadership positions, it is
encouraging that multi-pronged efforts are being made
by the Government and local authorities, civil society
and the United Nations to increase the level of
women’s participation in political, electoral and other
decision-making processes. During my discussions
over the past months, I have appealed to all entities
concerned, including State institutions and political
parties in Timor-Leste, to promote women’s full
participation in important forums and decision-making
processes that will influence the course of their
country’s future.
The elections are expected to be a major political
event next year. I encourage international partners to
again show their commitment to Timor-Leste by
sending observers for the elections and by providing
the financial support still needed for United Nations
electoral activities to be conducted at the request of the
Government.
Furthermore, the elections are widely expected to
lead to a peaceful transition to a new Government in
Timor-Leste, by the third quarter of 2012, with the
space for meaningful engagement of an opposition. It
is also expected that the PNTL will demonstrate its
capacity to manage security throughout the electoral
period. Based on those assumptions, and counting on
continued stability, I am optimistic that conditions will
allow for a smooth departure of UNMIT by
31 December 2012.
On 30 September, the Government submitted to
Parliament its proposal for the 2012 State budget, in
the amount of $1.76 billion, with the plenary debate
beginning on 9 November and expected to conclude by
25 November. Parliament’s discussions of that budget,
in which all parties, including the opposition, actively
participate, is yet another example of its role as a wellfunctioning forum for democratic debate.
As the Council knows, in July, Parliament
approved the Timor-Leste Strategic Development Plan
for the period 2011 to 2030, which sets out the
Government’s strategies and actions to transform
Timor-Leste into an upper-middle income country by
2030. As the implementation of the Plan proceeds, it
will be important for public investments to promote
inclusive, equitable and sustainable growth, so that all
segments of the population benefit from Timor-Leste’s

4

natural resources and growth. Creating increased
employment opportunities for young people will be
particularly important as an indispensable contribution
to long-term stability and prosperity.
Encouragingly, Timor-Leste’s leaders are tackling
those issues, making good progress on several of the
Millennium Development Goals and redoubling
attention to the targets that are currently off-track.
Furthermore, through its chairmanship of the group of
seven plus fragile States (g7+), Timor-Leste is at the
forefront of the global policy agenda on strategies for
enhancing aid effectiveness to fragile and conflictaffected states.
Finally, there have been advances in
strengthening the anti-corruption infrastructure. The
Anti-Corruption Commission, which became fully
staffed at the beginning of this year, has proceeded to
undertake investigations. Parliament also approved a
law establishing the Audit Chamber of the High
Administrative Tax and Audit Court, whose staff are
now being trained in Lisbon.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
the Commander of the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), Major General Taur Matan
Ruak, resigned on 1 September. On 6 October,
President José Ramos-Horta hosted a ceremony to
mark the transfer of command to newly promoted
Major General Lere Anan Timur, Major General Ruak’s
long-term deputy. That smooth transfer of command is
a promising sign for F-FDTL’s continued institutional
stability.
Timor-Leste has also continued to demonstrate its
commitment to human rights. On 12 October, TimorLeste’s national report, which highlights the progress
made and challenges faced in efforts to promote and
protect human rights in the country, was adopted at the
twelfth session of the working group of the United
Nations Human Rights Council, under the Universal
Periodic Review.
On 20 September, UNMIT launched the first
public report by a peacekeeping mission on the rights
of persons with disabilities, entitled “Of Course We
Can”. At that event, for the first time, UNMIT provided
persons with disabilities information in alternative
formats, including a Braille version of the report and
sign language.

11-60396

S/PV.6664

UNMIT’s transition is well under way. On
19 September, the President, the Prime Minister and I
signed a joint transition plan to guide the transition
process in seven focus areas. That was the first time
that a peacekeeping mission jointly established such a
mechanism with a host Government. It has been a
personal privilege for me to work so closely with the
Timorese leadership on this ongoing matter.
As part of the transition process, the Government
is proceeding with efforts to ensure that sufficient
resources are dedicated to strengthening its logistical
capacity in areas currently supported by UNMIT, such
as aviation services. In addition, UNMIT is increasing
its capacity-building activities, for both its almost 900
national staff and for various national counterparts. In
the context of the transition process, joint working
groups in each of the focus areas have also identified
areas of support currently provided by UNMIT that
should be handed over to United Nations agencies,
which in turn will need to raise the financial resources
required to expand their responsibilities between now
and the end of next year.
The planned and orderly conclusion of a
peacekeeping mission is only one aspect of a
successful transition. Equally important is establishing
the nature of the United Nations engagement that will
be needed thereafter by the country in question, in
consultation with that Government based on its
priorities and requirements. As the Secretary-General
has indicated in his report (S/2011/641), consultations
will continue on various options for a United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste following UNMIT, noting that
any option would need to be discussed with the
Government that will be formed following the 2012
elections.
The coming year will be an eventful one for
Timor-Leste. Just like the Timorese public, UNMIT
looks forward to what in Dili is sometimes called the
democracy-fest that is expected in 2012. Credible and
peaceful presidential and parliamentary elections
would further demonstrate to the world the progress
made by Timor-Leste in advancing sustainable peace
and development. The elections will also be a test of
the capacity of Timorese security institutions,
particularly the PNTL, to ensure public safety and
security across the country.
As I mentioned earlier, Timor-Leste still faces a
number of long-term challenges in order to achieve its

11-60396

development aspirations, including in terms of
enhancing
institutional
capacities,
further
strengthening the security sector and increasing human
resources. In areas such as access to justice, oversight
and accountability mechanisms, youth employment and
health, additional support will be particularly needed.
Yet, as the Secretary-General’s report reflects, there are
also many reasons for optimism. First and foremost
among them is the determination of the Timorese
people, without which none of the progress described
in the report would have been possible.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Da Costa, as the representative of the
Government of Timor-Leste, for our excellent
collaboration. I would furthermore like to thank all
political parties, including the opposition, as well as
civil society, for their continued collaboration. My
thanks also go to all staff of UNMIT and the United
Nations country team for their contribution towards our
mandated efforts to support Timor-Leste.
The President: I thank Ms. Haq for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Da Costa.
Mr. Da Costa (Timor-Leste) (spoke in
Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): It is with great satisfaction that I return
today to the Security Council to participate in this
debate on Timor-Leste. The relationship of the
Timorese with the United Nations dates back 36 years,
to the General Assembly’s adoption of its first
resolution on my country, on 12 December 1975. Since
then, that relationship has grown even closer and has
come to include the Security Council, which has been
decisive in safeguarding our sovereignty and
independence. For those reasons, on behalf of the
Timorese people and Government, of which I am a
member, I would like first of all to thank the members
of the Council profoundly and sincerely for their
attention and generosity towards Timor-Leste and its
people.
I would also like to mention the effort and
dedication of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Ameerah Haq,
who is present here. Her commitment has greatly
contributed to the evolution of the situation in TimorLeste and to our country’s excellent relationship with
the United Nations.

5

S/PV.6664

On 22 February, His Excellency Prime Minister
Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão gave a speech in the
Chamber (see S/PV.6485) in which he described
completely and transparently the path that Timor-Leste
has travelled during our Government and since the
United Nations Integration Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) was authorized and established under
circumstances that we all know. Political and social
stability, along with economic development, are a
reality in our country; they are the fruit of significant
public investment that has been directed to that end.
The path has been long, but we have overcome many
obstacles. Nonetheless, we humbly acknowledge that
other, even more difficult, obstacles still lie ahead of
us. We are aware of them, but it is important to note
that in 2012 Timor-Leste will celebrate just 10 years
since the restoration of its independence.
We also believe that the country is on a far more
stable foundation than it was five years ago. We know
that things overall have gone very well, but we must
also recognize that highly significant steps have been
taken in virtually all areas. As evidence of that, the
most recent United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report ranks Timor-Leste on its
Human Development Index just five places above the
last medium-development country, and above many
others that have been independent for decades and have
not experienced conflict.
The strong economic growth that has been
registered over the past several years — including with
regard to retirement, disability and old-age pensions, as
well as merit compensation for former combatants, and
infrastructure rehabilitation projects undertaken at the
level of districts and villages — has decisively
contributed to a period of social peace unprecedented
since the restoration of our independence.
There has also been concrete progress in
reforming the defence and security sectors, thanks to
both bilateral and multilateral support. UNMIT has
been a useful and valuable partner in that effort,
particularly since the PNTL assumed complete
responsibility for executive control of internal security,
which took effect on 28 March. Since then, the PNTL
has invested heavily in the training of its forces, as
well as in strengthening its logistics and infrastructure
in order to ensure the quality of its operational
activities. Next year, we expect the Prime Minister and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste to grant final certification to the PNTL,

6

which will signal the completion of that phase, which
will also be affirmed during the next presidential and
legislative elections.
The Government’s commitment to professional
training, logistics and operations for the PNTL is
clearly reflected in the national budget, which allocated
$20 million to that end and was approved by
Parliament last week. In addition to the budget, the
PNTL has strong support in this area through UNMIT’s
training and development programme in the context of
the joint development plan signed in February, and
through bilateral cooperation with Australia, New
Zealand, Portugal, Japan and the United States. In
addition to the reinforcements foreseen in the budget,
the PNTL is also committed to recruiting 250 new
members, who will begin training in January for
integration into the police force in the third quarter of
2012.
Finally, with respect to professional development
to ensure the excellence and professionalism of the
national police, the commission for monitoring the
PNTL promotions process has also focused on the area
of discipline. The new disciplinary regulations, which
were approved recently in the Council of Ministers and
are awaiting adoption, will help fill gaps in this area,
with training seminars and workshops to be conducted
with the support of United Nations police. We are
firmly committed to advancing the proceedings in the
199 cases of PNTL officers mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. I would like to inform the Council
that 195 of the cases are under investigation or
awaiting sentencing. Two were resolved through
dismissal and one through exoneration.
I am very pleased to be able to say that TimorLeste has the largest percentage of women in its police
service in the entire region; this is testimony to our
commitment to promoting gender equality and
opportunities to participate in the social, political and
economic life of our young democracy. The new
election law, enacted in June, mandates a quota of one
woman in every three candidates. Through its
Department for the Promotion of Equality and together
with civil society organizations, in partnership with
UN-Women, the Government is working to maximize
women’s participation in the 2012 elections. I would
also like to mention that the contribution of women is
broadly recognized at the national level — a Timorese
woman, Filomena Barros dos Reis, was recently
awarded an N-Peace Award for her contribution to

11-60396

S/PV.6664

peace — particularly in the border regions, through
cultural exchange and capacity-building in local
communities as conflict mediators and agents of peace
and economic development.
With regard to human rights, Timor-Leste
recently participated in October in a constructive
dialogue in the Human Rights Council on its first
Universal Periodic Review. I assure the Council of our
full
commitment
to
implementing
the
recommendations we received. We have also taken
significant steps to discipline the martial arts groups
that have been active outside the sporting spirit of their
activities. We have enacted legislation on such groups’
activities and established a code of conduct. The
Secretary of State for Youth and Sports is actively
promoting all measures necessary to avoid future
incidents among these groups. The isolated incidents of
violence that occurred in some places, such as
Zumalai, are the result of old issues among the
populations of neighbouring villages, involving
elements connected to the martial arts groups. Through
the Ministry of Social Solidarity, the Government has
restored normality among the affected families and
concluded an investigation that resulted in the
imprisonment of all the implicated parties.
Concerning the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste (F-FDTL), we continue to consolidate that
military institution. Last month, Major General Taur
Matan Ruak asked to retire and passed the baton to
Major General Lere Anan Timor. That in itself
demonstrates the maturity that the higher command of
the F-FDTL has attained with a peaceful, voluntary
transfer of command of our armed forces.
The defence cooperation agreements that have
been signed with New Zealand and Indonesia and are
to be signed with the United States and Australia are
examples of Timor-Leste’s commitment to working
within a new framework of relationships after the exit
of the international stabilization forces. On 17 January
2012, 12 members of the armed forces will participate
in a United Nations peacekeeping mission for the first
time as members of the Portuguese contingent of
engineers in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, and Timor-Leste begins its contribution to
peacekeeping with great pride. I note that two PNTL
officers are part of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and one
member of F-FDTL is a military observer in the
youngest country in the world, South Sudan.

11-60396

Today, Timor-Leste is unquestionably better
prepared to face its future than it was five years ago.
Many State institutions have been strengthened and
control mechanisms established to monitor State
employees’ activities, including the establishment of
the Anti-Corruption Commission, the Audit Chamber
and continued improvement in the justice sector as
pillars of a more just and reliable society. The progress
that has been made in these areas is of necessity for the
medium and long terms, and cannot be measured in
months or even years, as is also the case with the civic
education of a people who lived for 24 years under
oppression and violence. The traumatic consequences
of those practices at all levels do not disappear of
themselves overnight. We recognize that, while some
issues persist, we know that they do not have the same
social impact.
In that context, it is important to note that the
mechanisms created have been designed to grow
progressively stronger and to contribute to better
Government administration. Timor-Leste is the first
Asian country and only the third in the world to meet
the transparency criteria of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and has created an online portal
enabling free real-time access to the State’s budget
accounts. Social justice for the people of Timor-Leste
starts with the ambitious goals for sustained
development established in the Strategic Development
Plan approved by Parliament. The Plan defines
development directions through 2030 that involve
investing in human capital, infrastructure and the
economy, and in transforming Timor-Leste’s economy
from one essentially tied to oil into one that is non-oilbased.
We believe that 2012 will be a special year in the
life of Timor-Leste and the Timorese. We will hold
presidential elections in the first quarter. On 20 May,
we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of the
restoration of independence, and parliamentary
elections may be held at the end of June. We will also
celebrate the centenary of the Manufahi revolt, which
took place during the Portuguese occupation of Timor,
and, finally, the 500th anniversary of the arrival of the
first Portuguese on the island of Timor, which we will
celebrate in the enclave of Oecussi. We want our
elections to take place in a climate of peace, stability
and celebration. We know how important they are as
determinants of the consolidation of our young
democracy.

7

S/PV.6664

There are positive signs that political leaders on
all sides will be committed to acting with mutual
respect in the promotion of peace and in defence of the
democratic values of liberty and tolerance. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank UNMIT, the
United Nations Development Programme and bilateral
partners, including Portugal, Japan, South Korea,
Brazil and Mexico, for their important contributions to
the success of our elections.
This climate must continue to prevail as UNMIT
draws down at the end of next year. I commend the
joint work that has been done in the preparation of the
transition plan for UNMIT. Learning from our errors in
the past, which had a grave social, economic and
political impact on the country’s security and stability,
we must also pay special attention to monitoring the
evolution of the transition based on quarterly reports
submitted to the High-level Committee. As Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão noted when he signed the
Plan, it is a living document that can and must be
adapted from moment to moment to ensure its efficacy
and full completion.
At the regional level, Timor-Leste has made
major strides towards regional integration. In April, we
became an observer member of the Melanesian group.
We also welcomed with great satisfaction the decision
taken at the recent summit of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in Bali to consider
the membership application of Timor-Leste under the
criteria established in a letter from ASEAN. We
welcome the commitment and the full support of
Indonesia, among the various members of ASEAN, as
well as the friendly nations of the region and the world,
throughout the entire process of Timor-Leste’s
application to join that important regional organization.
We are sure that Timor-Leste will earn the
confidence and trust of the countries of the region and
join the great ASEAN family in a good time. We are
also confident that stability and security will continue
to prevail in Timor-Leste and that the coming elections
will take place in an atmosphere of liberty and
tranquillity and in accordance with international
standards. Thus, after the elections in 2012, we will be
able to begin a new phase with the gradual withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission and the gradual process
of integration into ASEAN.
In conclusion, I commend the members of the
Security Council and thank them for their support.

8

The President: I now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mrs. Crivano Machado (Brazil) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I
welcome you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the
Security Council. I reiterate Brazil’s support for the
Portuguese presidency and our satisfaction with the
holding of this debate on Timor-Leste. I would also
like to welcome Minister Zacarias Albano da Costa and
express my appreciation for his presence in the
Council. I thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq
for her briefing and congratulate her on her leadership
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (UNMIT) and for her efforts in support of the
country.
Timor-Leste has shown a remarkable capacity to
overcome the difficulties it has faced in the last
decades. Today’s debate gives us the opportunity to
acknowledge the country’s success in the course it has
chosen despite the many challenges along the way. The
current situation in Timor-Leste shows that those who
doubted the ability of the Timorese people to progress
towards political stability, security and development
were mistaken.
In the security sector, we welcome the transfer of
police responsibilities to the Polícia Nacional de
Timor-Leste. UNMIT’s efforts in the transition and its
capacity-building programmes have played an
important role in consolidating national police force.
The continuing calm and stability in the country are a
clear sign of the success of this process. The fact that
the goals to be reached by Timor-Leste are now of a
socio-economic and institutional nature is a
demonstration that the former challenges of conflict
and instability have been overcome.
Moreover, new obstacles are already also being
surpassed. Although there may still be need for
progress, Timor-Leste has made its way steadily
towards the necessary improvements. The country has
had accelerated economic growth and laid the bases for
investment and infrastructure development. Social
indicators have improved significantly.
In the institutional sphere, the Timorese
Government has made efforts to create mechanisms for
the protection of human rights, programmes for the
fight against corruption and for the promotion of
transparency. These are signs of the consolidation of an

11-60396

S/PV.6664

active political class and of a society that is conscious
of what the country needs to move forward.

community and the Security Council must continue to
support them on this path.

The increasing international integration of TimorLeste — for example, its membership in the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, as well
as through other initiatives, such as its drive to join the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which we
hope will be successful — is a springboard that will
benefit not only the Timorese, but the international
community as a whole. The integration of Timorese
military officers into Portuguese contingents in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon demonstrates
that the country is beginning to make its own
contribution to the efforts of the international
community.

The President: I thank Vice-Minister Crivano
Machado for her statement.

The greatest sign of Timor-Leste’s maturity is the
healthy political process that is in place in preparation
for the elections next year. The constructive and
peaceful political debate between the Government and
the opposition is exemplary. The fact that the country’s
third elections, to be held in 2012, coincide with the
tenth anniversary celebration of the restoration of
independence, is of great symbolic significance.
Brazil praises the important contribution of
UNMIT to the success of Timor-Leste. The Mission
has played a fundamental role in supporting the
country with the tasks necessary for its progress. Brazil
believes that it is important for Timor-Leste to extend
the positive results obtained with UNMIT’s support to
such areas as transition and capacity-building. The
joint transition plan is a positive measure that will
allow adequate planning for the post-UNMIT period
and the continuity of international cooperation in the
areas in which the Timorese Government identifies a
need for assistance.
Brazil has supported Timor-Leste through a large
number of bilateral and trilateral cooperation projects.
We will continue to work together on programmes in a
broad range of areas, including agriculture, education,
justice and security.
The Timorese have reason to be proud. Their
successful journey has not always been the rule in
similar situations. The case of Timor-Leste stands out
as an example in post-conflict situations. The Timorese
people and Government have been able to mobilize
their efforts, with the help of UNMIT, and rediscover
the way to peace and development. The international

11-60396

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Minister Portas for
his presence here today and for presiding over our
meeting. I should also like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, Mr. Da Costa, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Haq, for their comments.
China welcomes the fact that, during the period
under review, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste, with the assistance of the international
community, have made positive progress in the
building of the country. We would also note that TimorLeste, because of its fairly low point of departure in the
process, still faces challenges in terms of improving
living conditions and maintaining stability in the
country.
I should like to focus my statement on three
areas.
First, we hope that the leaders of the various
Timorese parties will continue to resolve their
differences through dialogue. China appreciates the
efforts deployed by President Ramos-Horta and Special
Representative Haq to promote dialogue between the
parties, and we call on the various parties in TimorLeste, in the interests of the people and of national
unity, to endeavour to resolve any differences through
communication and cooperation so as to enable the
people to concentrate their efforts on building the
country. We hope that the presidential and legislative
elections to be held next year will provide a fresh
opportunity to the people to consolidate their political
stability.
Secondly, we believe that Timor-Leste should
continue to strengthen its security and stability. The
national police has already fully assumed its security
functions. To date, the security situation has been very
stable throughout the country. There have not been any
serious incidents, and China welcomes this. We hope
that Timor-Leste will continue to strengthen its
autonomous security forces so as to ensure the security
of its people. It is important to ensure that the
presidential and legislative elections next year are
conducted under positive conditions, in an atmosphere

9

S/PV.6664

of security. We hope that the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), in its remaining
mandate, will train police officers as a priority in its
work, in order to help them to strengthen their
capacity.
Thirdly, in order to ensure lasting peace and
security in Timor-Leste, the economy must be further
developed and living conditions improved. China
supports the efforts undertaken by the Government of
Timor-Leste to develop the economy and create jobs
while continuing to maintain social stability and
concentrating their efforts on building infrastructure
and developing human resources. China calls on the
international community to continue to support TimorLeste in its development efforts in order to ensure that
it achieves sustainable development.
China very much appreciates the joint transition
plan developed jointly by UNMIT and the Government
of Timor-Leste, and we hope that the two parties will
cooperate closely in the transition process. We hope
that UNMIT will be able to withdraw as planned from
Timor-Leste under favourable conditions so that the
country can become a success story of the United
Nations with regard to both the deployment of
peacekeeping missions and exit strategies. China
believes that, after the eventual withdrawal of UNMIT,
the United Nations, in accordance with the wishes of
the Government of Timor-Leste, should continue to
provide it with assistance.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Mr. President, I wish to welcome you to the Council. I
wish also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste and the Vice-Minister of Brazil. I
extend my thanks to Special Representative Haq for
her briefing this morning and for her dedicated
leadership and commitment to solidifying peace in
Timor-Leste.
The collaboration among the United Nations,
bilateral partners and multilateral actors has paid
dividends in Timor-Leste. The continued cooperation
among all stakeholders will provide critical support as
this young country develops and prospers. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/641) provides us with
an important opportunity to discuss the needs of TimorLeste, to reflect on the progress of the planned
withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), and to begin long-term

10

planning for future United Nations engagement in the
country.
Allow me to address four issues today.
First, the United States is pleased and encouraged
that the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to
be stable and that security sector reform efforts
continue to bear fruit. The transition of primary
policing responsibilities last March from UNMIT to the
Timorese national police was a critical step in
developing the capacity of national institutions to
promote enduring security in Timor-Leste. We
appreciate UNMIT’s essential support to the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and recognize the
PNTL’s successes in strengthening its own capacity.
We also acknowledge and commend the commitment
of the Timorese defence forces to enhancing their
professionalism and building their readiness, including
their ability to respond to natural disasters and
humanitarian emergencies.
Work remains to be done, however. Continued
efforts to professionalize the national police and the
military are necessary. We encourage the Government
of Timor-Leste to focus on establishing well-defined
roles for the police and the military. This is especially
important as Timor-Leste moves towards elections in
2012. The United States is committed to supporting the
continuing development of the military and police
forces through professional exchanges, training and
exercises.
Secondly, as mentioned, Timor-Leste will hold
presidential and parliamentary elections in the first half
of 2012. The importance of organizing and holding
free, fair, transparent and peaceful elections cannot be
overstated. We urge all political parties to respect the
outcome of the democratic process and to conduct
political activities peacefully.
The United States is pleased to support the
request made by the Government of Timor-Leste for
election monitors and civic and voter education
programmes. We urge the international community to
provide additional support to the election process.
Thirdly, I would like to reiterate the importance
of Government institutions and capacity-building in
Timor-Leste. The strengthening of rule of law and
governance institutions is critical to the future stability
of Timor-Leste. We urge continued international
support for that effort. The increased participation of

11-60396

S/PV.6664

women in the national police and politics is laudable
and should be replicated across all institutions. Praise
is also due to the Government of Timor-Leste for its
progress in promoting anti-corruption and transparency
initiatives, including the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission, as well as other
initiatives.
We urge further work on institutionalizing
Government accountability, providing access to justice
and resolving truth and reconciliation issues, including
the establishment of a public memory institute. Strong
institutions devoted to the protection of human rights,
the promotion of national prosperity and the
achievement of accountability across all levels of
society are critical to long-term stability in TimorLeste.
Finally, I would like to highlight the impressive
level of collaboration between UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste in developing and
ratifying the joint transition plan. The plan will guide
the complete withdrawal of UNMIT by the end of
2012. We encourage UNMIT and the Government to
continue with its implementation consistently and
systematically.
As the 2012 elections approach, the intensity of
electoral preparations will increase and it may prove
difficult to maintain simultaneous preparations for the
eventual withdrawal of UNMIT. We urge UNMIT and
the Government of Timor-Leste to avoid delaying the
implementation of the transition plan and to continue
engaging international partners to ensure that
capability gaps are quickly identified and filled.
With UNMIT’s withdrawal a little over a year
away, we have the opportunity to think collectively
about the future engagement of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, in Timor-Leste. The
United States believes that international support for the
development of Timor-Leste will continue to be critical
to the country’s future. We remain committed to a
sustained dialogue with the Government and other
stakeholders with regard to a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence in the country. The good offices of
the United Nations and other international support
systems will be integral to the continued development
of Timor-Leste and will provide opportunities for
Timor-Leste to contribute to those institutions as well.
That mutually beneficial relationship is already
starting to develop. Timor-Leste has progressed from a

11-60396

country that needed a peacekeeping force to a country
that contributes to peacekeeping forces. Timor-Leste
police officers have served in overseas missions,
including in Kosovo in 2005 and this year in GuineaBissau. In July of this year, 12 Timorese defence force
engineers began a six-month training to prepare for
their eventual integration into a Portuguese contingent
that will serve with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.
We also commend the role Timor-Leste plays as
an international leader of fragile States, through its
founding and sharing of the group of seven plus (g7+)
post-conflict countries.
In conclusion, allow me yet again to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq
for her leadership and dedication, the peacekeepers of
UNMIT for their work and contributions, TimorLeste’s other supporters on the ground and abroad and
the Timorese themselves, for their continued dedication
to peace and security in Timor-Leste.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Mr. President, to warmly welcome you and to take
this opportunity to underscore the long-standing
interest your country takes in the maintenance of
international peace and security in various parts of the
world. Allow me also to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and
the Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of the Ministry
of External Relations of Brazil.
My delegation would like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her detailed and truly
comprehensive briefing, which helps us to understand
the main events in that country since the renewal of the
Mission’s mandate in January. We highlight her
ongoing leadership and commitment, which are
apparent too in the UNMIT staff. Her continued efforts
to promote peace, stability and development in TimorLeste have our full support.
We are delighted by what we have heard today.
When the Security Council meets and sees progress on
the issues on its agenda, we feel that the United
Nations system is getting stronger and that our work
has been worthwhile. This is one of those instances.
We welcome the progress in peacebuilding, stability
and development that we have hoped for in TimorLeste.

11

S/PV.6664

In that context, we appreciate the willingness
expressed by political leaders to guarantee stability
during the 2012 electoral process and to maintain
national unity and focus their efforts on long-term
socio-economic and development strategies. There is
no doubt that conducting free, transparent and peaceful
elections will be a milestone for Timor-Leste. We
therefore express our full support of the electoral
process. We stand ready to cooperate in any way that
Timor-Leste thinks would be helpful.
The interest shown by the various sectors in the
country in preserving space for ongoing and broader
dialogue — the “Maubisse II” initiative stands out in
that regard — is the proper path to take, for it allows
for an exchange of views on lessons learned and best
practices in maintaining security and stability during
and after next year’s elections. Respectful dialogue, an
outgrowth of real peace, is the path to genuine
reconciliation, harmony and well-being.
It is also encouraging to learn that the Timorese
police force has now taken over full responsibility for
police operations throughout the country, that the rate
of reported crime continues to drop and that stability
has been achieved. Although the 2012 election period
will be a significant challenge for the logistical
capacities of the Timorese national police force,
particularly in remote areas, we are nevertheless
confident that they will be able to respond to the
challenges that may arise. The support provided by
UNMIT in those areas will be critical.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the transition process being enacted by UNMIT and the
Government to enable the Mission to withdraw by the
end of 2012. Strengthening national capacities will
enable the leaders and people of Timor-Leste to
continue to move towards the achievement of common
goals aimed at fomenting an inclusive model of growth
that is fair and sustainable in the long term.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
Portugal’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, for presiding
over this debate. We also extend our appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq for her briefing on the situation in
Timor-Leste, to Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, to Mrs. Vera Crivano
Machado, Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of the

12

Ministry of External Relations of Brazil, and to the
Core Group for Timor-Leste for their presence at this
important debate.
My delegation wishes to commend the
Government and people of Timor-Leste for their
continued commitment to the consolidation of peace,
unity, stability and development in their country.
South Africa associates itself with the views
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2011/641) that the conduct of credible and peaceful
elections, for the second time since the 2006 crisis, will
be a critical milestone for Timor-Leste. Those elections
will see the participation of the largest numbers of
young people, between the ages of 17 and 24, who will
be first-time voters. The successful holding of the
elections will be a positive sign in efforts to
consolidate democracy in Timor-Leste. In that regard,
South Africa calls upon the international community to
assist Timor-Leste with its preparations for the election
process.
South Africa commends the work that has been
and that continues to be done by the United Nations
country team and the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in Timor-Leste. During the period under
review, the Special Representative continued to deal
with, among other things, issues related to governance,
accountability and broader security sector issues.
In September we received a report from Deputy
Prime Minister Guterres on progress attained in the
implementation of the joint strategic plans. Special
Representative Haq has alluded to progress in that area
with regard to the various working groups and the
continued high-level engagement with the President,
the Prime Minister and senior Government officials.
My delegation also welcomes the effort of the
Government of Timor-Leste to develop legislation to
promote the advancement of gender equality. We also
welcome its efforts to promote outstanding legislation,
most notably the electoral laws, as well as the 2011
State budget and the Timor-Leste Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030.
South Africa applauds the transfer of command
and control of policing operations to the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and the PNTL’s
resumption of those operations as an important step for
national law enforcement. We call upon the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to

11-60396

S/PV.6664

continue supporting capacity-building and institutional
development
of
the
national
police.
That
notwithstanding, the continuing skirmishes among
martial arts and religious groups remain a source of
concern. My delegation appeals to all parties to refrain
from the use of violence and to instead seek peaceful
means to resolve the situation.

2012 will be conducted in a satisfactory manner and,
equally important, that the losing candidates will
accept the choices made at the polls. The presence of
international observers will help to bolster that
credibility, if necessary. The elections will be the
opportunity for the country to show that it has
definitely turned the page on the 2006 crisis.

In closing, South Africa would like to wish the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste every
success in the planning and preparations for the
presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for
the first half of 2012. We are encouraged by the
ongoing planning being carried out by the Government
through the High-level Committee on Transition, in
consultation with UNMIT, in considering how
capacity-building activities can be taken forward in the
post-UNMIT phase. South Africa encourages the
careful calibration of drawdown after the 2012
elections, taking into account the material conditions
on the ground.

On the economic front, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/641) quite rightly highlights
the importance of the Strategic Development Plan for
2011-2030, which was recently approved by
Parliament.

We wish to express our satisfaction with the
successes achieved by the United Nations in TimorLeste. We encourage this Council to stay the remaining
course and to support the country in the finalization of
the transition.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing
and, more generally, for her work. I also thank
Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, for having made the trip
to take part in our debate today.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Since our last meeting, held in February (6487th
meeting), and the adoption of resolution 1969 (2011),
Timor-Leste has progressed on the way to stability and
return to the exercise of its full sovereignty. We are
impressed by the successful transfer, on 27 March, of
executive power from the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). Another source of
satisfaction is the continuing low crime rate.
The political maturity shown by the leaders, the
successful holding of their debates and the
establishment of electoral bodies have given hope that
the presidential and legislative elections slated for

11-60396

The Security Council, in its resolution 1969
(2011), set the course for a responsible drawdown of
UNMIT personnel, in tandem with a reconfiguration of
its functions towards support and training. That will
enable it to maintain a credible presence during the
elections and ensure its rapid departure thereafter,
which would then create a space for a new kind of
United Nations presence.
We commend UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste on the quality of their joint transition plan
to lay the groundwork for the Mission’s departure. The
plan is a great help in identifying the areas of
cooperation that we wish to see taken up in the future.
The number of deployed UNMIT police officers
was reduced from 1,480 early in January to 1,195 by
the end of September. It is important that there be
enough officers during the election to serve as a
deterrent and to intervene if requested to do so by the
authorities. Therefore, while we must consider
developments in the situation on the ground, we must
also have a strategic view of the pace and location of
the planned adjustments, in particular during the
post-electoral period.
Finally, I have a few words about the United
Nations presence following the withdrawal of UNMIT.
The four models identified in the report of the
Secretary-General show that many approaches are
possible and that each has its own merits. What is
important is to begin a dialogue with the Timorese
authorities following the 2012 elections so as to
determine which of the models to choose.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I am grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the Portuguese delegation for
convening this timely meeting of the Security Council
on Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank Mr. Da

13

S/PV.6664

Costa, the Timorese Minister for Foreign Affairs, for
his pertinent contributions to today’s discussion. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for her lucid
introduction of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/641). We appreciate her efforts and dedicated
service as Head of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
I will limit my remarks to three important issues,
namely, the political and security situation in TimorLeste, its economic and development agenda, and its
judicial and correctional systems.
Nigeria welcomes the climate of calm and
stability that continues to characterize the political and
security landscape of Timor-Leste. The prevailing
conditions manifest the commitment of the Timorese
leadership and stakeholders to sustainable peace.
Indeed, the Government’s initiatives on the road to
peace and national unity have helped not only to foster
dialogue and reconciliation, but also to facilitate the
focused implementation of the national development
plan.
The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled for early 2012 will be a major milestone in
the peace consolidation and democratic transition
processes in Timor-Leste. Under the circumstances, the
importance of peaceful and credible elections cannot
be overemphasized. The continuing constructive
interaction between the various political parties and
major stakeholders, which has guaranteed the
prevailing peace, should therefore guide the conduct of
the elections.
With the transfer by the United Nations of
command and control of all police operations to the
Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) on 27 March,
Timor-Leste has entered a new critical phase that will
determine the durability of the remarkable progress
made in the security sector since 2006. The low crime
rate is an indicator that the transfer is viable. Ahead of
the eventual withdrawal of UNMIT, its police should
continue to support the institutional strengthening,
capacity-building and professionalization of the PNTL,
as outlined in the PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint
Development Plan, signed on 23 February.
The development of a competent and credible
national military is also critical to the country’s
ongoing success. In that regard, we welcome the steps
being taken to further strengthen the institutional and

14

human-resource capacities of the Timor-Leste defence
force, with the support of UNMIT and other United
Nations and bilateral partners. A clear delineation of
authority between the Falintil-Forças de Defesa de
Timor-Leste and the PNTL, under effective civilian
control, would certainly help to prevent the incidence
of friction between the two forces.
On socio-economic development, given the
improved security, greater confidence in the country’s
leaders and the robust economic growth, Timor-Leste’s
social and economic revival is rapidly gaining traction.
We laud the Government’s effective and transparent
use of increased budgetary resources and the
promulgation
of
the
Timor-Leste
Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030. The Plan sets out an
economic growth and poverty reduction strategy. In our
view, if well implemented, the Plan will engender
growth and accelerate the pace of development in the
country. Still, there is an overarching need for the
Government to sustain its investment in rural
development and youth employment and to
communicate its goals and programmes to the
population more clearly.
On the judicial sector, Nigeria commends the
Government’s recent measures to strengthen the
capacity and effectiveness of the justice and
correctional sectors, including its adoption of the
Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste. Such
measures have undoubtedly enhanced access to justice,
reduced the number of pending criminal prosecution
cases and improved the prison infrastructure. To
underpin the notable progress already made, the
Government should emphasize combating impunity
and
strengthen
accountability
mechanisms.
Furthermore, adequate steps should be taken to
generate public confidence in the judicial system and
to ensure respect for the independence of the judiciary.
In closing, I would like to thank the UNMIT
peacekeepers, as well as the Timorese partners on the
ground, for their continued dedication to peace and
security in Timor-Leste. While the Timorese have made
giant strides towards peace and stability, the presence
and commitment of strong international partners will
remain vital for sustained progress in the country.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and through
you your delegation for organizing this meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Timor-Leste. We

11-60396

S/PV.6664

note with appreciation that Foreign Minister Mr. Paulo
Portas is here with us this morning. His presence and
that of His Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa,
Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, add even more
importance and standing to our debate this morning. I
would also like to note with appreciation the presence
of Vice-Minister Mrs. Vera Machado of Brazil. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General
for
Timor-Leste,
for
her
comprehensive briefing and for the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/641).
We are encouraged by Foreign Minister Da
Costa’s assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste. It is
a matter of great satisfaction that the overall situation
remains calm and stable and that the country is well on
its path to long-term peace, stability and development.
We appreciate the continued and active engagement of
all political parties in the democratic processes. Such
processes are essential to the consolidation of the
democratic framework, as well as to the rapid socioeconomic development of the country.
We are happy to note that the Polícia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has successfully assumed
responsibility for the conduct, command and control of
all police operations in the country. As the transition
progresses, it is necessary for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to remain
steadfast in its commitment towards the institutional
development and capacity-building of the PNTL.
Moving ahead, it is critical that the necessary
legislative and operational framework is in place for a
clear delineation of authority between the military and
the police, so that they can effectively discharge their
responsibilities under the civilian Government.
The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled next year will be a major milestone in the
consolidation of the democratic transition of TimorLeste. The United Nations must provide the necessary
technical and logistical support for the smooth conduct
of those elections, in accordance with the priorities
established by the Government.
We appreciate and fully support the efforts of the
Government to enhance regional engagement and to
address the developmental challenges confronting the
country. We note with satisfaction that economic
growth continues to remain robust and that public
expenditure, including the proceeds from the oil and

11-60396

gas sector, has continued to be a strong driver of
economic growth in the country.
India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute to the
country’s development by providing expertise and
training in areas where our competence would be of
use and where we see complementarities in their
application. India has extended its support to the
Government of Timor-Leste, including through
assistance for the purchase of equipment and materials
related to socio-economic development and the humanresource development sector.
As UNMIT moves towards a drawdown by the
end of 2012 and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner. The joint transition plan, which sets
out possible models for United Nations engagement
after UNMIT’s withdrawal, needs to be finalized in
accordance with the priorities of the Government. The
progress made so far gives us hope and confidence that
we are moving in the right direction. We appreciate the
efforts of UNMIT, the international community and
bilateral partners towards peace, stability and
development in the country.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep appreciation for the leadership of Special
Representative Ms. Ameerah Haq and for the
dedication and hard work of her team in supporting the
Government and people of Timor-Leste. I am confident
that we are well on the path to make UNMIT a real
success story.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, would like to thank Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for her briefing and for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/641). I welcome the
presence at this debate of Their Excellencies
Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and Mrs. Vera
Lucia Machado, Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of
Brazil, and thank them for their statements.
In my statement, I would like to focus on
democratic governance, the ongoing dialogue and the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

15

S/PV.6664

With regard to democratic governance, my
delegation welcomes the firm commitment of the
Timorese President to promote democratic values and
confidence among the political leaders. I also welcome
the steps taken by the Timorese Government, with a
view to the presidential and parliamentary elections of
2012, to support unity, mutual respect and women’s
participation. On that point in particular, we are
pleased to highlight the increase in the number of
women on the party lists of candidates.
Furthermore, we welcome the democratic
functioning of Timorese institutions, in particular the
open debate within Parliament, as well as the
commitment of political leaders to unity and stability.
The meetings organized by Ms. Haq between the
Government and the party leaders for the organization
of credible elections are proof of that. It is the wish of
my delegation to see the presidential elections of 2012
take place in a calm climate, with respect for the rules
and interplay of democracy.
With regard to lasting dialogue, my country
supports the continuation of the Maubisse initiative, to
which all the players in Timor-Leste, including heads
of parties and civil society, adhered in August 2010.
That initiative must be institutionalized, like the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Commission of Truth and Friendship.
With respect to security, I am pleased with the
calm prevailing in the country. We call for operational
capacity-building in law enforcement in certain areas.
We also hail the progress made in the judicial
framework, particularly the first results of the legal
proceedings in corruption cases. This helps strengthen
confidence and the struggle against impunity and
corruption.
I turn now to the mandate of UNMIT. My
delegation is of the view that it has achieved
significant objectives, such as reconciliation and
national unity, social cohesion, security, the transfer of
responsibilities for law enforcement to the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste, respect for human rights, and
integration of women. Social and economic
development is also moving forward, and we are most
pleased with this development.
Regarding that domain in particular, we
encourage the implementation of the Strategic
Development Plan approved by all parties, as well as
of good government practices so as to stay on track and

16

attain sustainable and integrated development in the
country.
Thanks to the assistance from the international
community, the Timorese people can now take in hand
most of the tasks that up to now have been carried out
by UNMIT. Therefore it is important to consider the
period after UNMIT. In that spirit we hail the adoption
by the Government and UNMIT of a joint transition
plan for the transfer of responsibilities to the Timorese
people. Next, Timor-Leste must present an assistance
plan that will enable the Security Council to transfer
the mandate to an appropriate structure that can help in
areas where Timor-Leste is still in need of support.
I conclude by reiterating Gabon’s support for the
actions of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste. We also express our appreciation for the
professionalism, dynamism and competence of
Ms. Haq, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and to all her team. Their contribution is that
of building a more stable, unified Timor-Leste, moving
towards development prosperity. Such endeavours have
become part of the history of this country.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate. We thank
as well the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste for being
with us here today and for his very helpful briefing,
and Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing and for all the
work that she and all her colleagues in the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
have been doing and continue to do to help TimorLeste.
The year 2012 will be pivotal for Timor-Leste
and its people, who will again be asked to elect a
parliament and a president. As Timor-Leste works
towards these important milestones, we are pleased to
note the continued stability in the security situation, as
well as the country’s encouraging economic growth. It
is especially pleasing to note that no discernable
increase in crime or disorder has resulted from the
handover of full policing responsibility to the Timorese
national police.
I would like to focus on three topics today. First
is the nature of the United Nations presence once
UNMIT has departed. Second is the role that the
United Nations will be expected to play in contributing
to the stability of Timor-Leste post-UNMIT. Finally,
there is the withdrawal of UNMIT personnel.

11-60396

S/PV.6664

We welcome the progress made in post-UNMIT
transition planning, as detailed in the recently released
joint transition plan. We comment the cooperation of
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste in
producing a detailed document of this nature.
Continuing that cooperation, the United Nations, with
the Government of Timor-Leste, also needs to present a
clear vision of the role that the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence will play in Timor-Leste. That vision
should focus on identifying priority areas of work and
setting benchmarks to measure success, avoiding the
United Nations commitment becoming open-ended.
In this regard we would welcome a United
Nations strategic assessment of the options contained
in the joint transition plan, drawing on input from the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Development Programme to help ensure the right
model with the right focus.
As UNMIT prepares to depart next year, it is
crucial that the Mission’s withdrawal is conducted
carefully and efficiently. A clearer timetable for the
post-election withdrawal of UNMIT personnel needs to
be articulated, along with robust contingency planning
in the event of any breakdown in security or stability.
We hope the Government of Timor-Leste, for its
part, and all Timorese political actors will continue to
refrain from any inflammatory rhetoric as they strive
for credible and peaceful elections in 2012. We also
expect the Government to continue to act to prevent to
impunity and to bring to justice those responsible for
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. The
Government will need to ensure adequate budgetary
provision for domestic policing to enable the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste to further establish itself as
the primary provider of security in Timor-Leste.
Next year will present a variety of challenges for
Timor-Leste and for the United Nations personnel who
continue to serve there. We are grateful for all that has
been achieved to date and ask the United Nations to
maintain its efforts and to move towards successful
completion and winding up of UNMIT and the
establishment of a follow-on United Nations presence.
While we hope that peace and stability will prevail in
coming years, we should also take this opportunity to
reassure the Government of Timor-Leste that the
withdrawal of UNMIT will not mean an end of the
Security Council’s interest in Timor-Leste.

11-60396

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you today, Mr. President. I also wish to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of TimorLeste, Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, and the ViceMinister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil, Mrs. Vera Lucia Barrouín
Crivano Machado. My delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641) and
Special Representative Ms. Ameerah Haq for her
briefing today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
significant progress that has been made in many
important areas in Timor-Leste during the reporting
period. As a young nation, Timor-Leste unquestionably
faces many challenges, and every achievement
demonstrates the continued commitment of Timorese
leaders, political parties, civil society and the Timorese
people in their quest for long-term peace, stability and
development.
We reaffirm our appreciation for the vital and
continued commitment of the United Nations in TimorLeste. The United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) has continued its important
work, with a view to assisting the people and the
Timorese Government in achieving self-sufficiency.
We believe that the resumption by the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary
responsibilities for the conduct and command of all
police operations represents a major step in ensuring
sustainable security in Timor-Leste.
With regard to the presidential and parliamentary
elections to be organized in 2012, we take positive note
of the progress made by the national electoral
management bodies, particularly in the area of
enhancing participation of women and youth in the
electoral process.
As democratic transition gathers momentum, the
successful organization and conduct of credible and
peaceful elections will be of paramount importance.
We believe that free and fair elections, as an outcome
of serious preparation, will confirm that the Timorese
people are moving forward in establishing a new
democratic political environment and culture. For that
reason, the United Nations must continue to support
the electoral process, including by providing technical
and logistical support as requested by the Government.

17

S/PV.6664

Now that the Timorese Government has fully
assumed its control over all policing operations, it is
imperative to ensure that the PNTL has the ability to
respond to potential security challenges in the electoral
period and beyond. We commend UNMIT’s readiness
to provide operational support to the PNTL, if required
and requested during this crucial period.
As conditions improve and political stability
continues, it is quite rational to start planning the
transition period and the Mission’s eventual departure.
We endorse the Secretary-General’s emphasis on the
need to optimize UNMIT’s effort and to focus on
priority needs and activities identified jointly with the
Government.
Lasting peace and stability in Timor-Leste
ultimately require the full trust of the Timorese people
in their politicians and confidence in the ability of the
State to uphold the rule of law. In this regard, we are
pleased to learn that notable progress has been made
towards meeting the objectives and benchmarks of the
medium-term strategy in the area of the rule of law,
justice and human rights.
In order to support overall political and social
transition processes, there must be sustainable
development in the country. In particular, additional
efforts are needed to sustain the envisaged growth by
promoting
rural
development,
infrastructure
development and the role of the private sector, which
should provide more employment opportunities, in
particular for the young.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confident that Timorese stability and social and
political harmony will grow stronger in the future. The
implementation of the process requires the determined
commitment and cooperation of the Timorese people,
Government and political parties. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will support their efforts as long as is
required.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, for his
statement, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Haq, for her briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We welcome recent developments in TimorLeste. The overall internal political trends are positive.

18

With the assistance of the Mission, the national
reconciliation process is moving forward, which is
particularly important in the light of the impending
2012 presidential and parliamentary elections. The
security situation is also stable. It was encouraging to
see the smooth transfer in March of law enforcement
responsibilities from the Mission in the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL).
Next year should be a milestone of State-building
in Timor-Leste. We hope that the elections will take
place calmly and that their outcome will demonstrate
the lasting nature of the results achieved in that
country. Next year will also be a kind of exit test for
UNMIT, too. Strengthening peace in Timor-Leste and
developing State institutions, including the PNTL, has
called for significant efforts, the results of which have
also been encouraging. We believe that the Mission
should continue to guarantee stability, safeguard young
institutions and, when necessary, provide operational
assistance in the maintenance of law and order during
the electoral process.
It is encouraging to note that the efforts of the
international community in crisis resolution and
post-conflict peacebuilding are producing results. The
situation in Timor-Leste is a worthy example thereof.
We believe, however, that any final decision on the
withdrawal of UNMIT in late 2012 should be taken
after the presidential and parliamentary elections have
been held, taking into account the prevailing political
and security situation. Arrangements of a subsequent
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste must be
subject to substantive discussion with the country’s
new Government.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express our deep appreciation to
you, Sir, for presiding over today’s meeting. I thank
Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing and for her work as
Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and
thank him for his briefing. I further welcome
Mrs. Crivano Machado, Vice-Minister for Political
Affairs of the Ministry of External Relations of Brazil.
The positive developments in Timor-Leste in the
areas of political stability, security and socio-economic
development have arisen as a result of the genuine
desire of all political parties within the Government
and the opposition to restore stability and prosperity to

11-60396

S/PV.6664

their country. UNMIT has undoubtedly proved to be a
success story for the international community, having
contributed alongside other United Nations agencies to
the consolidation of stability, the exercise of
democracy and the building of State institutions. In that
regard, I wish to make the following four observations.
First, Lebanon reaffirms its full support for
UNMIT as it strives to complete its work before its
mandate ends in late 2012. We welcome the joint
transition plan signed by the President of Timor-Leste
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, which will guarantee the Mission’s smooth
exit.
Secondly, building security institutions will be
key to consolidating sustainable security and the rule
of law. In that context, we commend the role of
UNMIT police in training and supporting the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) to assume its security
responsibilities throughout the country. We also stress
the importance of building and consolidating judicial
authority and institutions in order to ensure
accountability and prevent impunity.
Thirdly, we believe that the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for 2012 will be
milestones in the democratic progress of the
Government of Timor-Leste. We urge all political
parties to contribute constructively to the preparations
for the elections, and stress the importance that the
PNTL be prepared to maintain security and stability
during and after the electoral process.
Fourthly, we congratulate the authorities and
people of Timor-Leste on the approval of the Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030, aimed at the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and at raising the country to the rank of middle-income
State. We call on the younger generation of TimorLeste, which represents the overwhelming majority of
society, to participate actively in the process of
rebuilding and developing its country. We welcome the
effective and outstanding participation of women in the
political life and State institution-building of TimorLeste.
In conclusion, I thank the authorities of TimorLeste for the participation of their citizens in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. I take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to friendly
Portugal, which has provided training to those
elements to undertake their tasks.

11-60396

Mr. Berger (Germany) (spoke in Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the Portuguese delegation):
I would like to thank the Portuguese presidency for
convening today’s meeting.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Foreign Minister Zacarias da Costa in the Council
today. I thank him for coming the long way to New
York to report on the developments in his country. My
delegation also appreciates the presence of the
Portuguese Foreign Minister and the Brazilian ViceMinister. Let me also welcome Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ameerah Haq, whom I wish
to thank for her briefing and whose leadership of the
Mission I again commend. Germany thanks the entire
United Nations team, both in Timor-Leste and at
Headquarters, for their successful contribution to the
Timorese future.
Before I offer some national remarks, let me
underline that my Government aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later in the debate by the
observer of the European Union.
Germany takes note with satisfaction of the fact
that the overall situation in Timor-Leste remains calm
and stable. We share the assessment of the Timorese
Government and of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/641) that certain volatility remains but that
there is reason for confidence that the Timorese
institutions, in particular in the security sector, will
weather the upcoming electoral and post-electoral
seasons. We are also confident that continued capacitybuilding, if maintained at the current speed, will enable
the Timorese security forces to fully meet the security
needs of the country as international support is
reduced. Close coordination with regard to the
modalities of the drawdown of the international
stabilization force will also be essential.
My delegation is encouraged by the handover of
complete primary policing responsibility to the
Timorese police, so far without any negative impact on
the overall level of crime. However, it remains of
pivotal importance to continue to ensure the highest
standards that the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
committed itself to in its Joint Development Plan with
United Nations police, including through adequate
budgetary provisions.

19

S/PV.6664

Germany is confident that the remaining time
prior to the elections and before the end of the
transition will be used to continue to close the
remaining capacity gaps, including in the management
of logistics. While the strengthening of the Timorese
army is also ongoing, Germany learned with
appreciation that first Timorese military contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon is being prepared.
Against the backdrop of those encouraging
developments in the security sector, we welcome the
overall joint transition plan between the Timorese
Government and the United Nations, which represents
a true innovation. It outlines a comprehensive scenario
for the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), as well as an
understanding of the national budgetary consequences.
However, as my delegation pointed out here in
February (see S/PV.6485), the post-UNMIT phase is
fast approaching — if the current positive trends can be
sustained. We note that, for the United Nations, one
crucial question remains unanswered, namely, what
comes after the transition. While certain fundamental
decisions can only be made by the next elected
Government, Germany encourages maximum attention
to be dedicated to concrete planning for the
post-UNMIT phase. Obviously, the Timorese
Government will lead the way in that regard.
It is clear the United Nations has a long-term
commitment to Timor-Leste. The joint transition plan
ranks the continued fight against impunity at all levels
of society and the strengthening of public confidence
in the justice system among the long-term challenges.
In that context, we note some progress with regard to
the so-called certification of police officers who face
disciplinary and criminal charges. As identified by the
joint transition plan, other areas with considerable
further support needs include governance and
sustainable economic development. The role of women
in all that can hardly be overestimated.
In conclusion, Germany would like once more to
thank UNMIT for its highly committed and
professional work, as well as to assure the people and
Government of Timor-Leste of Germany’s continued
friendship and solidarity.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

20

(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the
Portuguese delegation)
I would like to begin by warmly welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, as well as Her Excellency
Mrs. Vera Lúcia Barrouin Crivano Machado, ViceMinister of Brazil. I also wish to convey a special
greeting to the non-members of the Security Council,
including the delegation of Angola, whose
representative will speak in its capacity as President of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and Ms. Ameerah Haq, Head of UNMIT and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Timor-Leste, for the excellent work on the ground. I
also thank all the staff and contributors to the Mission.
It is a happy coincidence that this debate is taking
place during the Portuguese presidency of the Security
Council one year before 2012, when, among other
things, we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of
Timor-Leste’s independence and the fifth centennial of
the encounter between the Portuguese and Timorese
with the arrival of Portuguese navigators to the island.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/641)
that has been presented today most appropriately
highlights the progress that Timor-Leste has made
during the period under review. In that regard, I would
like to focus on some of its most significant aspects
that provide so much hope for the future of TimorLeste, very clearly pointing to great progress and
promise. Here in the Security Council, I should like to
say that Timor-Leste is a success in the history of
United Nations efforts. As an Organization, we should
be very proud of that success.
With regard to the security situation, we
congratulate the Timorese authorities for taking over
responsibility for security throughout the entire
country — which the national police has done
effectively and without compromising stability. We
also note the positive developments in officer training
and in the area of discipline.
In this pre-electoral phase, we are pleased to note
the country’s political stability and the increasing
dialogue, and even consensus, with the opposition and
civil society. I would like to emphasize improvements
in public administration, the establishment of the Audit
Chamber and the increased capacity to absorb

11-60396

S/PV.6664

international support, both financial and in terms of
human resources training. Those developments reflect
growing institutional capacity and consolidation in
Timor-Leste.
The efforts that Timor-Leste has made in
economic planning are also noteworthy, as seen in the
adoption of the strategic infrastructure construction
plan for the period until 2030 and the investments in
the non-oil sector of the economy, which are essential
to ensuring sustainable growth for the benefit of future
generations.
I would like to welcome the adoption, in
September, of the joint transition plan, which is a good
example of the close cooperation that exists between
the Timorese Government and UNMIT. The plan is an
essential component in the future re-definition of the
partnership between the Government of Timor-Leste
and the United Nations.
We believe that the necessary conditions are now
in place for the presidential and parliamentary
elections to take place in 2012, which will include
150,000 new voters and take place in accordance with
recognized international standards. That will be a great
opportunity for Timor-Leste to demonstrate to the
world just how solid and deep its democracy is.
Portugal will extend its commitment of
Portuguese police personnel in positions that UNMIT
considers to be key, and calls on the other contributing
countries to respond in a similar vein to the SecretaryGeneral’s request.
Portugal has been and remains committed to the
exceptional framework of bilateral cooperation with
Timor-Leste, with particular focus on areas that the
Government has identified as priorities. In the area of
justice, we are working with Timorese institutions in
human resource development, and providing technical
assistance in the preparation of legislation and the
development of a legal lexicon in the Tetum language.
Education is another key area. During the past
10 years, we have developed technical cooperation
programmes in education by sending Portuguese
teachers, training Timorese teachers and providing the
educational materials required to teach in both
Portuguese and Tetum, the country’s two official
languages.
In the areas of security and defence, we have
contributed
to
the
education,
training
and

11-60396

professionalization of the armed and security forces. In
that regard, we note the new technical-military
dimension of the cooperation between Portugal and
Timor-East, represented by the signing of two
protocols in September establishing the inclusion of
Timorese military personnel in Portuguese contingents
taking part in United Nations and European Union
peacekeeping missions. Twelve members of the
defence forces of Timor-Leste are currently undergoing
training in Portugal in order to be included in the
Portuguese engineering company that will leave for
Lebanon at the end of the year to join the ranks of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon during the
first half of 2012.
In our opinion, that initiative is a good
demonstration of Timor-Leste’s desire to become an
active member of the international community and to
not shirk its responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, which are the primary
goals of the United Nations.
Timor-Leste is also a valued and active member
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), which is represented here today by a four of
its members. The CPLP and its member States have
also repeatedly expressed their commitment to
cooperating with and assisting Timor-Leste and to
contributing to strengthening the stability and
consolidation of their institutions. I endorse the
statement to be made by the representative of Angola
on behalf of the CPLP.
We are now approaching a new phase in TimorLeste’s development as an independent State with the
support of UNMIT as it makes the transition to a new
and different presence in the United Nations. It is up to
Timor-Leste, in dialogue with the United Nations, to
decide on the format and composition of the
Organization’s presence in Timor-Leste after UNMIT
withdraws. Portugal has absolute confidence that the
transition process will unfold as planned, guaranteeing
the transfer of capacities and competencies to Timorese
institutions, and that it will allow the country to
consolidate the work that has been carried out by the
current United Nations mission.
It is never superfluous to stress — and I wish to
do so on this occasion — the extraordinary progress
that Timor-Leste has made since achieving its hardwon independence. The determination of the Timorese
people and their leaders to overcome the greatest

21

S/PV.6664

challenges is today reflected in the remarkable progress
that the country has made, which has earned them the
international community’s full confidence in their
future.
I reiterate that Timor-Leste is a success story —
the success of its people, of its partners, of its friends
and of the United Nations — and an example of how
the international community can respond to the hopes
of a people and give freedom to its destiny. We know
and recognize, however, that Timor-Leste still has a
long way to go before achieving its legitimate
aspirations with respect to economic and social
development standards. It is therefore important that
the international community and the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, remain firmly
committed to that country. In that regard, I would like
to highlight the contribution of the European Union to
Timor-Leste. We align ourselves with the statement
that will be made shortly by its observer.
To conclude, we look forward with optimism and
confidence to developments in Timor-Leste in the year
ahead. It has been 10 years since independence, but
after 10 years of a resistance and a suffering unique in
the history of the freedom of peoples, Timor-Leste is
today a viable State under construction and a society
that has embarked on the search for development.
Rarely has so much been achieved in so short a time.
Portugal will remain bilaterally and multilaterally at
the side of Timor-Leste.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

its attention to the vital tasks of strengthening State
institutions, improving service delivery to its people,
building infrastructure and boosting the economy. Into
the future, growing Government budgets will provide
scope for greater public investment in health, education
and rural development. Agriculture requires particular
attention, and so of course do the employment needs of
youth.
Australia welcomed the Timorese Government’s
decision to take a longer view of its development,
which culminated in the Strategic Development Plan
released in July — an appropriately ambitious vision.
Australia will support the Plan’s objectives through
targeted assistance programmes in health, education,
infrastructure, rural development and other areas.
It is widely understood, of course, that next
year’s national elections will test the strength of TimorLeste’s institutions, in particular the country’s political
parties, security institutions and electoral authorities.
We have confidence in Timor-Leste’s ability to run fair
and transparent effective elections. We know that the
Timorese people hold their democratic institutions to
high account. We are impressed by the commitment of
political leaders to peaceful elections and to the
education of voters about their rights and
responsibilities with respect to strengthening TimorLeste’s young democracy. The Maubisse dialogues,
which bring Timor-Leste’s political leadership,
including opposition members, together, continue to
reinforce to leaders of all parties that continued peace
is in everybody’s interests.

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to join
others in welcoming Foreign Minister Portas and
Foreign Minister Da Costa, both very important
presences with us today, as well as Special
Representative Ameerah Haq, whose contribution,
together with that of her team from the United Nations
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), has remained
instrumental. I would also like to thank Portugal for
inviting non-Council members to participate. Australia
and Portugal have actually developed a closer
relationship through our joint cooperation in TimorLeste.

The election period will test the capacity of
security services, in particular the police. We have to
say that we have been concerned by the sporadic
outbreaks of violence perpetrated by martial arts gangs.
However, having said that, we are very encouraged that
the National Police of Timor-Leste (PNTL) was able to
contain recent incidents, such as the violence in
Zumalai in August. I note very carefully Foreign
Minister Da Costa’s reassuring comments on all that
earlier this morning. The resumption of full policing
responsibility by the PNTL in March coincided with a
concentrated period of mentoring and consolidation,
including focused capacity-building ahead of the
election period.

Timor-Leste has experienced an extended and
increasingly confident period of stability over the past
three and a half years, allowing the Government to turn

My own country has provided some of the
specialist trainers within the United Nations police and
will continue to support the development of the PNTL

I give the floor to the representative of Australia.

22

11-60396

S/PV.6664

through a separate capacity-building programme.
Looking ahead, adequate levels of Government
budgetary support for the PNTL, as well as continuing
a sustained programme of capacity-building, will be
needed to ensure that it develops into a professional,
resilient police force that is responsive to the
community it serves. The international security forces
also stands ready to provide support to Timor-Leste’s
security institutions and to United Nations police
during the elections, if that should in fact be necessary.
As many have already said today, the
performance of Timor-Leste’s democratic institutions
during next year’s elections will indicate critical
benchmarks for determining the timing of UNMIT’s
transition. For that and other reasons, it is important
that UNMIT’s mandate be extended until at least the
end of 2012 to support the consolidation of a new
Government.
Australia is optimistic about the conduct of next
year’s elections and the future development of TimorLeste. We encourage the conditions-based approach,
clearly outlined in the joint transition plan, as an
ongoing guide for the approach of the Council. We
acknowledge the work that the Government of TimorLeste and UNMIT have put into the joint transition
plan, and look forward to continued dialogue with the
Government of Timor-Leste and United Nations
agencies on its implementation. It will, of course, as
people have said, be an evolving plan, but its
innovativeness and deliberation is commendable.
While the joint transition plan should prompt some
preliminary discussions on a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence, we agree that the nature of that
presence should be guided by the views of the next
Government in Timor-Leste itself. We have taken
careful note of the views of political leaders that the
United Nations should have an ongoing role in
strengthening the foundations of Timor-Leste’s
democracy.
To conclude, 2012 will be a historic, landmark
year for Timor-Leste. Beyond the national elections
and the expected withdrawal of UNMIT, Timor-Leste
will celebrate the tenth anniversary of its
independence. Important challenges of course remain;
we all know that. But the people of Timor-Leste have
much to look forward to and are moving very much in
the right direction. My own country will continue to
work with Timor-Leste’s Government, other partners

11-60396

and the United Nations to assist in this crucial
transition phase and beyond.
Lastly, I would also like to commend Brazil for
its work over the past two years as chair of the core
group on Timor-Leste, and to welcome Vice-Minister
Crivano Machado’s presence today. We are very
grateful to Brazil for its leadership during this period.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to begin by
warmly congratulating His Excellency Mr. Paulo
Portas, Minister of State and Foreign Affairs of
Portugal, on presiding over the Security Council today.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and to
thank him for his statement. I am grateful to
Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing to the Council in her
capacity as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and for the presence here of Her Excellency
Mrs. Vera Crivano Machado, Vice-Minister for
Political Affairs of the Ministry of External Relations
of Brazil.
Japan shares the expectation of the international
community that the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will complete its work by the
end of 2012, marking a significant historical milestone
after a decade of assistance from the United Nations.
As all parties concerned will agree, the highest
measure of success in this undertaking will be the selfsustainability of Timor-Leste and — with due
consideration
given
to
the
elements
of
peacebuilding — the peaceful completion of United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Timor-Leste.
To achieve that end, it is essential that the two
elections planned for next year be conducted smoothly
and peacefully. Japan has already launched its
assistance for the elections by providing a grant of
approximately $1.66 million through the United
Nations Development Programme, possibly to be
followed by the dispatch of election observers to the
country. Japan appeals to the international community
to accelerate its support for a promising young country
at a historic juncture.
Japan highly commends Timor-Leste’s successful
assumption of all responsibility for policing, and
appreciates that a stable, calm situation has been

23

S/PV.6664

maintained ever since. The outstanding efforts being
made by the Timorese national police in this regard are
indispensable. At the same time, I would like to
highlight the supreme importance of security during
the elections. Japan calls for further improvement of
the capabilities of Timor-Leste’s police and armed
forces, as well as for enhanced efforts by the
Government and continued support from UNMIT in
this area.
Democratic elections are not simply a matter of
maintaining security and conducting votes. They are a
process by which a people entrusts its sovereignty to
its representatives. From that point of view, the
fundamental role played by trust among members of
society cannot be overemphasized. In order to foster a
sense of trust within a society, Japan believes that its
elections must be perceived as fair and transparent, that
all representatives selected in those elections must be
considered trustworthy, and that they are understood to
be respecting the results of a democratic process. In
that regard, while commending the efforts of the
Government and UNMIT to ensure the technical and
procedural credibility of the elections, Japan calls for
the political leaders of Timor-Leste to hold democratic
dialogue and to banish corruption from every sector of
the country. Japan encourages the expediting of this
process so that Timor-Leste can continue to develop
with the precious asset of mutual trust among the
members of its society.
As for the post-UNMIT discussion, Japan
welcomes the joint transition plan agreed between the
Government and UNMIT following extensive efforts
on the part of both parties. At the same time, we are
pleased to note that the plan provides for a certain
degree of flexibility, allowing for modification of its
details to reflect the situation on the ground. As the
Secretary-General wisely points out in his report
(S/2011/641), we will have to wait to see how the
post-election situation on the ground develops,
particularly in terms of security, before finally settling
the plan.
We hope that the best decisions for the country
will be arrived at through dialogue between the
Government and the United Nations. While the
transition process is owned by the people of TimorLeste, Japan stands ready to deliver any form of
support that the country may decide to seek from the
international community. I would like to conclude by
reiterating Japan’s continuing commitment to

24

consolidating the friendship between our countries and
cooperating with the Timorese people in support of
their nation-building efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Angola.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in
Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation):
I am addressing the Council on behalf of the members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP):
Brazil,
Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, TimorLeste and my own country, Angola, which is the
current President of the Community.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the
participation in this meeting of His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of TimorLeste, Mr. Da Costa, and of Her Excellency the ViceMinister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil, Mrs. Vera Crivano
Machado. We are pleased to participate in this
important meeting of the Security Council, which
includes Brazil and Portugal as non-permanent
members, dedicated to considering the situation in
Timor-Leste. We also take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641) on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).
It is with great pleasure that I take the floor today,
in particular because we are discussing the situation in
the most recent member of our Community, TimorLeste. The situation in Timor-Leste is one scenario in
which cooperation within the CPLP has proved to be
important to all members of the Community concerned.
We sincerely hope that the result of our joint efforts
will benefit the country.
With the support of Member States, Timor-Leste
and the Executive Secretariat of the CPLP have worked
to establish permanent representation of the CPLP in
Dili. We welcome the commitment of the Timorese
authorities to this process, as demonstrated by the
recent allocation of space for a representative and the
funds necessary for the construction of the mission. We
hope that these developments will allow for the early
implementation of the CPLP strategic plan in the
country, especially with respect to the promotion and
dissemination of the Portuguese language as a vehicle
of communication in every day work and business and

11-60396

S/PV.6664

towards institutional capacity-building in the areas of
justice and public administration.
It is with particular satisfaction that I recall the
importance of the eighth summit of CPLP Heads of
State and Government, held in Luanda in 23 July 2010,
where it was decided to reshape the future mandate of
the CPLP permanent representation in Dili to feature a
strong cultural component in favour of the use of
Portuguese in Timor-Leste, in addition to the political
component set forth in its original mandate. TimorLeste’s commitment to forging a strong relationship
with the CPLP has also been demonstrated in its
performance as the current President of the CPLP
Parliamentary Assembly, and in the good results
achieved at its third session, held in Dili in late
September.
The States members of the CPLP remain
committed to continuing the excellent cooperation with
Timor-Leste with a view to strengthening its stability,
consolidating its institutions and growing its economy.
This process has already contributed to the growing
affirmation of the country at the regional level, with
benefits that support the CPLP’s deepening
involvement in South-East Asia and the Pacific.
Coming possibly as early as 2014, the presidency of
the CPLP will be another interesting challenge for
Timor-Leste when it takes the helm of our Community
for the first time.
In this context, the recent acceptance by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations of TimorLeste’s application for membership in that regional
organization, together with the appointment of a
working group to consider the accession process, is a
further demonstration Timor-Leste’s progress in recent
years.
I also welcome Timor-Leste’s first steps as a
country that contributes to peace and security in the
world by the integration of Falintil-Forças de Defesa
de Timor-Leste soldiers (F-FDTL) into the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau, and the dispatch of a military observer in South
Sudan.
In addition, it is clear that by its example TimorLeste has contributed to the creation of a more peaceful
and secure world. I refer to the lessons learned and
shared by Timor-Leste in the peaceful demobilization
of veterans of the liberation struggle, in the recruitment

11-60396

of new soldiers, and in the new legislative framework
for the integration of the F-FDTL in the
professionalization of the country’s defence forces,
which should make all those who serve the people and
democracy of Timor-Leste proud.
Timor-Leste has consistently improved its
position in the human development index, as shown by
the latest United Nations Development Programme
report. In addition, the recently adopted National
Strategic Development Plan will certainly further boost
the country’s strong economic growth despite the
international crisis, help to modernize the country and
combat poverty.
The year 2012 will be of great importance for the
consolidation of Timorese democracy. The Community
I represent today has complete trust in the maturity of
the people and leaders of Timor-Leste as the country
takes its next political steps. We are certain that the
coming presidential and legislative elections will take
place in an atmosphere of peace and security, reflecting
the positive developments in the country in recent
years.
The CPLP maintains its solidarity with TimorLeste and has confidence in the people of that country
to maintain the peace and stability, which are necessary
to the economic and social development that will help
Timor-Leste to contribute to increased stability and
security in the region.
The President: I give the floor to the Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving the floor to the European Union (EU). We are
honoured to participate in this important meeting of the
Security Council under your leadership, Sir.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Iceland;
the countries of the Stabilisation and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.
As several speakers before me have stressed, the
general elections in 2012 will constitute an important
milestone for Timor-Leste, providing further evidence

25

S/PV.6664

that the country is firmly set on its path to a
consolidated democracy.
Let me start by congratulating Foreign Minister
Zacarias Albano da Costa with the progress described
in the excellent report of the Secretary-General before
us (S/2011/641). We commend his Government’s
leadership and strong political commitment to fostering
peace, unity and development.
I also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ameerah Haq for the quality and
insightfulness of her briefing. The European Union
commends her team’s efforts in ensuring good donor
coordination and in keeping development partners
briefed and consulted on the joint transition plan.
The preparations of the 2012 elections are
progressing in a positive manner. The constructive and
responsible way in which political leaders and civil
society have been interacting under the so-called
Maubisse initiative is particularly encouraging and
indicative of the broad commitment within TimorLeste society to democracy and dialogue.
Beyond its ongoing assistance in the preparations
of the elections, the European Union is currently
examining an invitation by the Government of TimorLeste to send an election observation mission. I can
assure the Council that we are considering this request
with a friendly eye. EU election observation missions
can be of tremendous value, as the missions in 2002
and 2007 have shown.
The maintenance of public security and the
progress made towards strengthening the security
institutions, as noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, are welcome developments. The successful
handover of primary policing responsibilities to TimorLeste’s national police without a negative impact on
the crime situation is particularly noteworthy. While
commending this progress, we would like to stress that
the security forces need to live up to the highest
standards of professionalism and integrity. In this
regard, we recognize the continued importance of a
comprehensive review and reform of the entire security
sector.
While recognizing the existence of potential
security challenges, we are confident that the election
process will be free and fair and held in a peaceful
context. We welcome the continued willingness of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

26

(UNMIT) to provide operational support to the national
police during this period, if required and requested by
the Timorese authorities.
Throughout 2011, considerable progress has been
made in the transition process. The joint transition
plan, which places capacity-building at its core, is very
welcome in this regard. The strengthening of
institutional and human capacities is of great
importance to a successful transition process. These
activities are therefore also at the heart of the EU
assistance programme.
Continued discussion of the architecture of the
future United Nations presence, an important element
of a sustainable transition, will be necessary. In this
regard, the Timorese authorities should be decisive in
the definition of the modality of a United Nations
presence in the country after UNMIT.
Timor-Leste’s constructive participation in the
Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review
deserves special mention. The efforts of both the
Government and non-governmental organizations are
to be praised.
Timor-Leste has also made further progress
towards improving accountability for past human rights
violations. We firmly believe, however, that
reconciliation remains an important precondition for
long-term stability. The National Parliament is strongly
encouraged to resume discussions on the two draft laws
on a memorial institute and reparations at the earliest
possible date, as well as on other steps to implement
the recommendations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
Timor-Leste has seen accelerated progress in
many aspects of its economic and social development.
At the same time, the country still faces challenges in
the process of fully realizing its potential for equitable
and sustainable development. In that regard, we
welcome the national strategic development plan 20112030, as presented by the Government of Timor-Leste
in July 2011. The plan represents a very valuable
framework that provides guidance for coordinating and
channelling our support, thus further improving aid
effectiveness. We are highly committed to supporting
the implementation of this plan in a spirit of
partnership, mutual trust and accountability, including
the increased use of reliable country systems.

11-60396

S/PV.6664

The recently announced creation of an
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
working group for Timorese membership in ASEAN is
a significant step towards developing Timor-Leste’s
closer economic, political and people-to-people ties
with South-East Asia.

peacekeeping mission, although the outcome of next
year’s elections will be crucial in determining whether
or not that road map will be followed. But the fact that
the seven focus areas have already been identified and
analysed will greatly facilitate the work of UNMIT in
the coming months.

Allow me to end by reiterating that we have stood
firmly by Timor-Leste’s side in the past and will
continue to do so in future. We look forward to the
2012 deliverables: successful elections and further
progress in the transition process.

The Philippine contingent to the United Nations
police within UNMIT now stands, from a high of 139,
at 86 police officers, 21 of whom are women, and three
military advisers. The three military personnel are
assisting mainly in humanitarian activities and in the
investigation of incidents and violations. Five of the
police officers hold key positions, while 29 serve as
advisers. They have been doing an outstanding job in
carrying out the mandate of the United Nations police
force within UNMIT, and we are proud of their
accomplishments in the security sector, particularly in
the areas of community policing, training and capacitybuilding. In fact, although they are expected to return
home in April next year, UNMIT has requested the
Philippine Government to extend the tour of duty of
those 34 Filipino police officers until the end of
December 2012, so as to ensure the fulfilment of
UNMIT’s mandate.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
would like to express my appreciation to Portugal and
the other members of the Security Council for this
opportunity to address this high-level meeting on
Timor-Leste. Indeed, Mr. President, the fact that your
Minister for Foreign Affairs is attending today’s
meeting attests to the importance of this issue.
Before I continue, allow me to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/641). I also
wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Zacarias Albano da Costa,
for sharing with us the latest developments in his
country. Lastly, I would also like to express our
delegation’s appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), Ameerah Haq, for her exhaustive briefing.
Since our last debate on UNMIT, in February (see
S/PV.6485), we have seen improvements in the
political and security situation in Timor-Leste. Since
the Timor-Leste national police took control of
policing responsibilities in March this year, the
security environment has remained calm and stable. As
a consequence, the vastly improved peace and order
situation has allowed UNMIT to downsize the number
of its police officers. The country, however, is still
vulnerable to politically motivated violence as the 2012
presidential and parliamentary elections draw near.
The Philippines commends the great strides made
by Timor-Leste in preparing itself for a post-UNMIT
scenario. The joint transition plan drawn up by the
Timorese Government and UNMIT is one of the most
detailed and comprehensive plans ever produced for
the smooth withdrawal of a United Nations

11-60396

The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the recent economic growth achieved by Timor-Leste,
which is largely due to the Timorese Government’s
excellent management of the oil industry and
investment in public infrastructure. The long-term
challenge is, of course, how to convert the country’s oil
wealth into human and physical capital in order to
build a strong economy and improve the quality of life
of the Timorese people. Indeed, socio-economic
development will remain a priority for a young nation
such as Timor-Leste even as the country consolidates
the gains made in the area of political stability with a
view to further deepening democracy and the rule of
law.
The presidential and parliamentary elections next
year will be a crucial test for the people of TimorLeste. They will also take place after the expiration of
UNMIT’s present mandate. The Philippines believes
that the UNMIT drawdown must be gradual and based
on an objective assessment of current and anticipated
requirements, especially in the light of the forthcoming
presidential and parliamentary elections. We do not
want, of course, a repetition of what happened in 2007,
when a premature United Nations disengagement
triggered chaos and violence.

27

S/PV.6664

In view of the inevitable withdrawal of UNMIT,
however, all stakeholders and partners concerned must
work closely together to make the transition to a
post-UNMIT Timor-Leste as seamless and smooth as
possible. At the same time, it provides a window of
opportunity to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste to show their readiness and capacity to
assume responsibility for their own peace and security.
As an active member of the Core Group for
Timor-Leste and a close bilateral partner, the
Philippines fully supports Timor-Leste at this crucial
moment in its young history as an independent nation.
As Timor-Leste marks its tenth anniversary, it is still
experiencing hardship and difficulties, like many States
emerging from conflict. But the Philippines is
confident that Timor-Leste is in a good position to face
the many challenges ahead.
At this point, Mr. President, let me once again
assure you and all of our partners in the United
Nations, especially the Core Group for Timor-Leste,
that the Philippines will do its part to contribute to the
success of UNMIT and to continue assisting the people
and the Government of Timor-Leste.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS) represented at the United
Nations: Fiji, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New Guinea.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today’s meeting on this important issue.
I also acknowledge the welcome presence in the
Council today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Albano da Costa, and to thank him
for his briefing. The Minister’s words underline his
strong commitment to consolidating a peaceful
transition in his country. In the same vein I would like
to acknowledge the presence with us today of the ViceMinister for Political Affairs of the Ministry of
External Relations of Brazil.
Let me also commend the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Ameerah Haq, in leading the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). We take special note
of the report of the Secretary General on the United

28

Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste for the
period from 8 January 2011 to 20 September 2011
(S/2011/641).
We, the Pacific SIDS, are pleased to note from
the Secretary-General’s report that since 7 January
2011 “The overall situation in Timor-Leste remained
generally calm, with continued progress towards the
consolidation of peace, stability and development.”
(ibid., para. 2) We further note that both individual
actors, such as the party leaders of the Congresso
Nacional da Reconstrução de Timor-Leste and the
Frente Revolucionária do Timor-Leste Independente,
and institutional bodies such as the Parliament, in
preparation for the 2012 presidential and parliamentary
elections, have all underscored the need to sustain
national unity and to concentrate on longer-term
socio-economic and development strategies.
We note in particular the various initiatives and
events led by His Excellency President José RamosHorta to support his call for “solidarity to build a
society living in peace, stability, and harmony, in
which women and men may have a confident outlook
and hopeful future.” (see S/2011/641, para. 6) Those
initiatives reveal the President’s strong political will
towards national unity and stability.
We are also pleased to note that one of the most
important issues under discussion at this time is the
participation of women in the political process. We
therefore note the important meeting convened on
14 July 2011 under the aegis of the Secretariat of State
for the Promotion of Equality.
The role of UNMIT continues to be crucial in the
transition, ensuring dialogue and reconciliation among
the diverse political actors and civil society. Continued
institutional capacity-building remains essential for
Timor-Leste, especially in the context of the coming
presidential and parliamentary elections in March and
June 2012. The elections will represent a cornerstone
for the people of Timor-Leste and will constitute a
unique opportunity for the nation to secure democracy
and confirm its will to develop a respectful and
peaceful society.
In order for the elections to be a success, with a
sustainable outcome, domestic public security remains
crucial. The resumption of the Polícia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) in March 2011 proved to be an
important step relating to public safety. The Pacific
small island developing States appreciate the work of

11-60396

S/PV.6664

the UNMIT police in providing operational support to
the PNTL in issues such as close protection, joint
patrols and border policing. We further embrace the
reported progress in the implementation of the joint
development plan, which sets out the priority areas for
UNMIT police capacity-building support.
Several Pacific SIDS members have contributed
actively to the progress of UNMIT by past and current
deployment of police personnel. In the past, a
considerable Pacific contingent served in the country,
coming from Palau, Fiji, Samoa and Vanuatu. At
present, Samoa contributes with five policemen and
policewomen and Fiji with one expert on mission. The
Pacific small island developing States express their
continued dedication and commitment to their active
involvement in Timor-Leste.
We note with appreciation the progress of the
Government of Timor-Leste in developing legislation
to reinforce the security sector, for example in civil
protection and border management. The Government
has made notable progress towards meeting the
objectives and benchmarks of the medium-term
strategy in the area of the rule of law, justice and
human rights. We are therefore glad to observe that
Timor-Leste is showing solid progress on security and
judiciary reforms.
Currently, Timor-Leste is experiencing a steady
rate of economic development. We welcome the
Strategic Development Plan for 2011-2030, which
reveals the Government’s commitment to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. UNMIT is making
invaluable efforts in supporting that main national
development policy by assisting the Government in
planning, monitoring and coordinating donor
assistance.
The Pacific small island developing States stand
with Timor-Leste, which is also, we are very proud to
say, a valued observer member of both the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Melanesian Spearhead Group.
Not only do we all share the same vulnerabilities and
challenges, but we also share common values and
opportunities. The Government of Timor-Leste is
putting remarkable efforts into ensuring a stable,
peaceful and democratic transition. Still, the quest for
prosperity is a long-term journey with significant
challenges ahead. The Pacific SIDS are committed to
working closely with the Government of Timor-Leste
in achieving its mission and reiterate their full support.

11-60396

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the presence today of Foreign Ministers
Portas and Da Costa and Vice-Minister Machado, and
also Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ameerah Haq, not only for her sterling work in TimorLeste itself but also for her report here today.
That report highlights the fact that the past nine
months in Timor-Leste have seen a continuation of the
positive trends of recent years. The country remains
largely calm and stable. Continued strong growth has
enabled progress in addressing extreme poverty and
extending social services. And we have seen further
signs of broad commitment to a political culture based
on dialogue and respect for constitutional norms.
There has also been real progress in preparing for
a Timor-Leste without United Nations peacekeepers.
Resumption of full policing responsibilities by the
Timor police, the formal launch of the Government’s
Strategic Development Plan and agreement on a jointly
owned transition plan have all laid foundations for a
smooth transition.
New Zealand supports a conditions-based
approach to UNMIT’s withdrawal. Current trends
suggest that we are on track for a smooth drawdown
following next year’s presidential and parliamentary
elections and for a transition to a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence by the end of 2012. Events over that
year will of course determine whether that can be
achieved. The coming elections will unquestionably be
the sternest test since 2006 of progress in building the
capacity of core State institutions.
Recent developments, however, do give us cause
for optimism. Growing electoral management
capability means that much less international support
will be required for next year’s elections. New Zealand
welcomes the positive response from the United
Nations to Timor-Leste’s requests for targeted electoral
assistance. We are also committed to providing support
bilaterally. Impressive habits of restraint and respect
for electoral rules and institutions have emerged, and
we will soon learn whether they can withstand the
intensity of high-stakes electoral competition.
Timorese-led political dialogue processes, such as the
retreat convened in July by the Bishop of Bacau, are
playing an important role in consolidating those gains.

29

S/PV.6664

Assuming continuation of those positive trends,
we must now focus on preparing for a smooth
transition, by intensifying work to strengthen core
Timorese institutions and by concluding Mission
activities or transferring them to other actors. The joint
transition plan provides a comprehensive framework in
that regard. We must work through that plan with key
stakeholders, particularly the Timorese Government,
the United Nations country team and donors, to ensure
its effective and sustainable implementation. That is
why we agree that the plan should remain a living
document, to be adjusted as required.
Developing an integrated, “one United Nations”
country strategy must also be a priority. Further
strengthening the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste,
particularly its logistical and operational capabilities,
will also be important ahead of the expected United
Nations police (UNPOL) drawdown after the 2012
elections.
The
PNTL-UNMIT
Police
Joint
Development Plan is a useful blueprint in that context.
We have been pleased at UNPOL efforts to recruit and
retain suitable personnel for the highly specialized
tasks of training and capacity-building.
Donors are also playing an increasingly important
role. For example, at the Government’s request, New
Zealand is already scaling up assistance to the PNTL.
Our police recently completed a pre-posting evaluation
and preparatory visit for a bilateral programme focused
on strengthening community policing, which will
commence in January 2012, initially in four districts.
We will continue our long-standing security
partnership with Timor-Leste through a bilateral
assistance programme with the Falintil-Forças de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL).
Over the coming year, we must also intensify
efforts to strengthen the capacities of other core State
institutions, including public sector oversight and
accountability bodies and the justice sector. That may
also be Timor-Leste’s final chance to draw on UNMIT
support in addressing other long-standing challenges,
such as strengthening civilian oversight of security
institutions, investigating allegations of serious crimes
and agreeing on support for their victims.
It is particularly important for the long-term
health and legitimacy of Timor-Leste’s security
institutions that allegations of serious crimes against
PNTL and F-FDTL officers be credibly addressed. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a joint

30

UNPOL-PNTL investigative team to process the
remaining allegations against PNTL personnel.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/641)
usefully outlines possible options for a post-UNMIT
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste, and provides
a good basis for further consideration of their
respective implications and merits. Any decision in that
regard must, of course, be based on careful assessments
of Timor-Leste’s post-UNMIT needs, and be
determined in accordance with the priorities of the
Timorese Government itself. Realistically, that means
that the decision is still some way off and will be
made, at the earliest, only after a Government emerges
from next year’s election processes.
The year 2012 should also mark a real shift in the
focus of international assistance, with stronger
emphasis being placed on Timor-Leste’s long-term
development challenges, including improving health
and education and generating employment for its
swelling youth population. That requires sustained
growth in the non-oil private sector and particularly in
agriculture.
The
Government’s
twenty-year
Strategic
Development Plan, launched in July, sets out a
comprehensive framework for providing international
assistance in accordance with national priorities. New
Zealand is seeking Timorese endorsement of a strategic
framework to guide our bilateral aid programme over
the next five years, and Timorese agreement on a
shared vision for long-term development outcomes.
The draft outcome framework contemplates assistance
in three priority areas: strengthening the security and
justice sectors, facilitating private-sector investment
and providing education and training.
The year 2012 will be a watershed year for
Timor-Leste, and a critical test of its emergence from
post-conflict fragility. Should events proceed as we
hope, by this time next year we may be marking
UNMIT’s valedictory. Credit is due to the Mission and
its leadership for the progress made since the 2006
crisis. Above all, however, the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste deserve praise for their
courage and determination in charting their own future,
and for their willingness and ability to define, for
themselves, the assistance that they need. That is
peacebuilding as it should be: national ownership in
action.

11-60396

S/PV.6664

Timor-Leste will still require the ongoing support
of its friends in the region and beyond in addressing
the many political and economic challenges that it will
continue to face even after UNMIT’s withdrawal. For
its part, New Zealand remains a proud friend and
committed partner of Timor-Leste as it writes for itself
the next chapter in its history.

11-60396

The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

31
