UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1915’”

MEETING:

22 APRIL

1976

UN

lJ!LRARY

OCT'1 @198L:

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l915)

... . ... .. ... ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ,. ... .. .

1

agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council reseolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionofthe

S/PV.1915

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is’give’n;
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,
,/.

1915th MEETING

Presidenr:

Held in New York on Thursday,

22 April

Mr. HUANG

3. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania): The
Security Council is meeting again to consider the
question of East Timor. When the Council met last
December on this same question, my delegation stated
my Government’s
position in no uncertain terms
[1867th meeting].
At that time we emphasized that
the principle of self-determination,
which is very dear
to the Organization,
must not be jeopardized. That is
why my delegation went along with the idea of consultations by the Secretary-General,
in the hope that
after an assessment had been made a solution would
be found.

Hua (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l915)

of the agenda

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1)
The meeting

The age&u

4. With that background in mind, my delegation has
studied very carefully the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S/120/1], which reflects the commendable
efforts the Secretary-General
has undertaken
in
accordance with Council resolution 384 (1975). At this
point my delegation wishes to pay a special tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi,
for his valuable report
[ihid., unnex].

wus culled to order ut 4.05 p.m.
Adoption

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

wus adopted.

5. But, as the report of the Secretary-General
clearly
points out, a state of tension continues in East Timor.
The report also indicates that no one particular group
exercises full control over the whole Territory.
As
matters stand now, the Special Representative
points
out, the situation in East Timor remains elusive and
continues to evolve.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1)
1. The PRESIDENT
(trunslution from Chinese): In
accordance with the decisions taken ealier [190&h
and 1910th to 1912th meetings], I shall now invite the
representatives of Australia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia,
Malaysia,
Mozambique,
the Philippines,
Portugal and Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

6. It is the firm belief of my delegation that had it
not been for foreign intervention,
we would be dealing
with a completely
different situation. We would be
considering ways and means of bringing peace and
reconciling the different groups in East Timor in order
to create favourable conditions for the implementation
of the principle of self-determination.
Instead, the
Council is faced with a fait accompli created by the
presence of the armed forces of Indonesia, the result
of which, among other things, has been the creation
of a so-called Provisional Government. This situation
not only hinders a free and genuine exercise of the
right to self-determination
but also hardens the positions of the various groups, as has already been
indicated in the statements made by representatives
of both sides.

At the invitution of the President. Mr. Anwur Suni
(Indonesiu) und Mr. da Costu Loho (Portugal) took
pluces ut the Council table and Mr. Hurry (Austfuliu), Mr. Cumuru (Guineu), Mr. Fernundes (GuineuBissuu), Mr. Singh (Mukuysiu), Mr. Loho (Mozurnhiyue), Mr. Yungo (Philippines) und Mr. Buroody (Suudi
Aruhiu) took the pkuces reserved for them ut the side
of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(trunskution from Chinese):
This morning the Security Council took a vote on the
draft resolution [S//20.56] and amendment
[S//2057]
before it and adopted the draft as resolution 389 (1976)!
At the close of the meeting, a number of representatives expressed the wish to speak. I shall now call on
them.

7. In its resolution 384 (1975) the Security Council
has, among other things, categorically called upon the
Government of Indonesia to “withdraw without delay
1

all its forces from the Territory”.
It is regrettable that
that resolution
has not been fully implemented.
Although
we have now been informed
that the
Indonesian troops are in the process of withdrawing,
the situation in East Timor remains one of grave
concern, threatening peace and security in that region
and hence calling for urgent action by the Council.

13. As one of the sponsors of the draft resolution
just adopted by this Council, I feel I should express
my delegation’s gratitude to all those Council members
who supported that text. My delegation is fully aware
of the difficulties involved in drafting a text which
could satisfy all members of the Council. We are,
however, pleased to note that a spirit of co-operation
has prevailed, thus enabling the Council to adopt
the text by such an important majority.

8. My delegation is convinced that the Council has
the responsibility
of maintaining
peace and order in
East Timor so, as to create favourable conditions for
the implementation
of the principle of self-determination. .We maintain that the people as a whole must be
allowed the opportunity
to express their views on
this matter and to decide on their own destiny freely.
The Council should not hesitate to deplore any acts,
including military intervention,
which may have the
effect of frustrating the free expression of the people
of East Timor. In this context, my delegation attaches
great importance
to the implementation
of resolution 384 (1975), which, among other things, calls upon
the Government
of Indonesia to withdraw without
delay all its forces.

14. At this juncture, I wish to express my delegation’s
gratitude for the statement made by the representative of Panama, who expressed the wish to join the
list of sponsors [19/&h meeting].
Members of the
Council have taken note of this and it has been
recorded. We believe that the wish expressed by our
friend from Panama strengthens the spirit of co?
operation which has prevailed throughout our deliberations on this matter, and I believe this will be reflected
in the records.
15. Mr. TRAVERT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): As was the case last December, the delegation of France is very happy that the Security Council
has adopted a text on the subject of the situation in
Timor which, after intense negotiations,
has made
possible a substantial meeting of minds which had
originally held very divergent positions. In this respect
we wish to pay tribute both to the praiseworthy
efforts of the delegation of Japan and to the understanding shown by the authors of the initial text.
However, my delegation keenly regrets the rejection
of an amendment which, by implicitly
taking note of
the initiatives already taken by Indonesia and of its
goodwill, could only have encouraged it to pursue
this course, in accordance with commitments
reaffirmed in this chamber by its representative. Despite
this serious reservation,
the delegation of France
pronounced itself in favour of the draft resolution
because even though a word to which we had attached
much importance was cut out of it, it still has definite
merit.

9. My delegation
continues
to believe that the
question of East Timor should be considered in the
light of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) concerning the exercise of the inalienable right to selfdetermination
and independence. This, as the Council
is aware, is the responsibility
of the General
Assembly.
10. We believe that the administering
Power, Portugal, continues to be responsible for the administration
of East Timor and that it is incumbent upon all States,
including Indonesia, to respect the “sacred trust” of
the administering
Power. To that effect, all acts of
frrit cmompli,
as well as the results thereof, must be
deplored. We reject any justifications
of intervention
alleging that Indonesia was asked to intervene by one of
the parties purporting to represent the population of
East Timor, because to act differently is to legitimize
an otherwise illegitimate action and to clothe intervention with legality.

16. Like resolution 384 (1975), adopted on 22 December, the one adopted by the Council today
seems to us a substantial improvement
over resolution 3485 (XXX), which the General Assembly had
adopted 10 days earlier. Indeed, rather than unilaterally
placing responsibility
for the situation on one of the
parties to the conflict, it takes into account the various
points of view and the facts of life. After duly recalling
the inalienable right of the people of East Timor to selfdetermination
and independence-principles
to which
France attaches particular importance-the
resolution takes note of the statements of the representative
of Indonesia and thus contributes to strengthening the
will of that great country to co-operate with the United
Nations.

11. Those are the considerations which have guided
my delegation in the decision just taken by the Council. We realize that the situation obtaining in Timor
still leaves many questions unanswered. The Secretary-General’s
report points this out. It is for that
reason that we believe that the Secretary-General’s
recommendation
for further consultations
should be
given the Council’s full support. My delegation is
pleased to note that this view has received the support
of the majority of the members of the Council.
12. We wish the people of East Timor to be one. If
a representative of the Secretary-General
goes there,
it will be to help those people to be one and to
determine their own destiny. As a great wise man once
said, we want the people of East Timor to be one,
Ut unlm sint--” that they may be one”.

17. My delegation fully approves of continuing the
assignment
entrusted
to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative.
Rather than dwelling on the
2

22. During the statements
of certain witnesses,
expressions were used which are hardly worthy of the
Security Council. They spoke about some sort of
“vacuum”
which is apparently forming; they spoke
about the “chaos” prevailing there; they spoke about
God knows what else. But that is the terminology
of the past, the colonialist terminology of the nineteenth
century or early twentieth century. After all, the people
of Timor have survived without the Portuguese, and
they live without any vacuum at all. If anybody left
East Timor, it was not a vacuum they left behind
but a living population,
with all its vital needs and
requirements, with all its desires and aspirations to live
better and to live freely. One of the witnesses used the
expression, “Let them live as they want.” That is
precisely the point: as they want. But do those participating in Council discussions really not care that
there are no schools or hospitals in East Timor? The
people there need a great deal more than they have.
What is the meaning of “living as they want”? Indeed,
let them live as they wish, but what they want is
a better life; so let them make their lives better. But
let them do it alone, without outside interference.

past and apportioning blame here or there, it is to the
future that we must now look. The future of East
Timor must be characterized by national reconciliation,
subject to a total cessation of hostilities
and to a
coming together
of the various parties,
whose
divergencies seem to us less fundamental
than their
common aspiration,
namely, the accession of the
people of Timor to well-being and independence. Even
though some encouraging signs in this respect have
already been reported, it is not to be expected that
this reconciliation
will be without its vicisssitudes or
without long and laborious negotiations. Therefore it
would be desirable for such negotiations to be held,
or at least to be started, under United Nations
auspices and, initially, through the good offtces of the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative.
We
sincerely
hope, therefore,
that Mr.
Winspeare
Guicciardi, in pursuing his excellent efforts, will be
able to pay a second visit to East Timor and this
time be in a position to meet all the parties and to
gather all points of view.
18. It is with this hope that I shall conclude these
brief remarks, but not without paying tribute to the
skill and impartiality
with which you, Mr. President,
have guided this thorny debate.

23. It was also suggested that certain ideologists had
tried to infiltrate East Timor, but I must say that
I do not believe this. I do not believe that any alien
ideology could appear in Timor and that it could have
any influence on the population of East Timor.

19. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intcrpretutiun
from Russian): The discussion in the Security Council of the question of East
Timor for the second time in a rather brief period has
made it clear that the situation in that Territory remains
complex, tense and unsettled. This cannot fail to
preoccupy
progressive
mankind
and the United
Nations. The political situation in Timor continues to
be complicated
by the presence of foreign troops,
which are there in violation of General Assembly and
Council resolutions.

24. I am not quite sure that we were right in inviting
all the witnesses here. One of them, a rather curious
one, was a participant in the Spanish Civil War-not
on the Republican side, either-and
also participated
in repressing the liberation movement in Kenya. And
what is his present status in East Timor? He began
there as nothing but a small plantation owner. But in
a short time his plantation grew from 10 hectares to
200 hectares, and we took him as a witness whose
words should be considered as truth. I think we wasted
our time listening to such a “witness” and in faithfully
recording everything he said here in the records.

20. The Council has tackled this discussion, armed
with many more facts and much more material than
before. We have the report of Special Representative,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, and representatives of the
various parties concerned have spoken before the
Council. We have additional material on which to base
an assessment of the actual situation, a situation
which is difficult and complex but not unpromising.

25. The position of the delegation of the Soviet Union
on this point is clear; it was clearly and unambiguously
expounded in detail in its statements in the Council’s
discussion last December of the situation in East
Timor. The fundamental premise of our Government
and country in this matter is that it is necessary to
support the right of every people to decide its own
fate without any foreign intervention. The delegation of
the Soviet Union is against any outside interference in
the affairs of East Timor; we are in favour of creating
conditions which would permit the people of that
Territory to exercise their inalienable
right to selfdetermination.
In the final analysis, how that right is
exercised is up to the people themselves.

.2 1. As far as the mission of Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
is concerned, we consider that the Secretary-General
performed an extremely useful task in sending such a
missjon to East Timor, but it us our considered opinion
that the work of that mission has not been completed.
It must be completed. In other words, we must receive
a full report which clearly and accurately describes
the situation and which shows the opinions of the
various parties concerned. What is necessary is not to
enflame the situation but rather to give an opportunity
to the population of East Timor to live in peace and
freedom in the sort of conditions in which they wish
to live.
,

26. Of course the Soviet delegation would have
preferred a stronger and more definite resolution.
However, in view of the fact that the resolution
contains provisions
that are in accordance with
3

.

previous decisions adopted by the United Nations,
as we!! as with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
which we regard as remaining in force, we supported
the resolution. We did not support the amendment
because we felt that it somewhat obscured the issue
instead of shedding light on it.

graph 4 of the resolution, will bring us good news on
the restoration of peace and order and on withdrawals
by external forces-two
of the three prerequisites
which I mentioned earlier for self-determination
in
East Timor.
32. .We also support the holding, under the auspices
of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative,
of
further consultations between the parties concerned.
Ways should be explored to build on the common
assumption of those parties that the Timorese should be
consulted about their own future. A major difftculty
will .be the absence of any prior preparation in the
Territory for the use of democratic processes. In our
view, procedures suited to the local circumstances
should be used. We were interested in the proposals
made in that regard by certain speakers in the debate.
We would hope that as many possible of the members
of a representative assembly will be chosen by popular
vote and that ‘the different options for the political
future of the Territory will be canvassed widely during
the selection of representatives.

27. This is our position. A!! we want is that the
.popu!ation of East Timor should itself, without any
interference, freely determine its fate, its’ future. If
the United Nations gives assistance to the people of
East Timor in solving this problem, it will have fulfilled
its noble mission.
28. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
The United
Kingdom voted for the draft resolution just adopted
because of the great importance we attach to the principle of self-determination.
We regret, however, that
the amendment submitted by Japan was not adopted.
Our vote in favour of the draft resolution should in no
way be taken as casting doubt on the statement of the
representative
of. Indonesia when he informed the
.Counci! that the process of withdrawing Indonesian
forces from East Timor had begun. We have noted this
statement and we fully support the call addressed to
Indonesia in paragraph 2 to withdraw its forces now
from East Timor without delay.

,33. Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): In its resolution 384
(1975); ,adopted with the affirmative vote of all its
members, the Security Council called upon al! States
to respect the territorial integrity of East Timor as we!!
as’ the ina!ienable,‘right
of Timor’s people to self.determination
in accordance with Genera! Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV). The Council also called upon
the Government
of Indonesia to withdraw without
delay al! its forces from the Territory.,Among
the other
provisions
of resolution
384 (1975), the Council
requested the Secretary-Genera!
to send urgently a
special representative
to East Timor to make an
on-the-spot assessment of the existing situation and to
establish contact with al! the parties in the Territory
and a!! States concerned in order to ensure the implementation of the resolution.

29. We do not accept the view put forward by some
speakers in the debate that self-determination
has
already taken place in East Timor. For a valid act
of self-determination
to take place-and
here I should
like to borrow a phrase from the representative of
Japan-“according
to due procedures widely accepted
by the international
community’*
[191&h meeting,
pcm. 261, there are, as we understand the confused
situation in the Territory
itself, three requirements
which will have to be satisfied. First, conditions of
peace and order must prevail; secondly, there should be
no pressure on the Timorese from external forces; and
thirdly, procedures should be used which are suited
to the local circumstances.

34. The Council is now called upon to review how
this resolution has been implemented.
In regard to
two of its most central elements we are obliged to
note, first of a!!, that foreign troops are still in East
Timor and that the people of East Timor has not yet
been able to exercise its right to self-determination.
The Indonesian military presence there is not based
on the agreement of the administering
Power of the
Territory, Portugal: It must therefore be considered a
.vio!ation of the territorial
integrity of East Timor.
The Council’s demand in December for a withdrawal
without delay of a!! foreign troops remains unfulfilled.
The illegal presence of foreign forces also has a
negative impact on the possibilities of conducting an act
of self-determination.
No such act can truly be carried
.out under such conditions. Sweden has consistently
supported the principle of self-determination
as it has
been spelt out in Genera! Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and that important rule has its full applicability
also for the people of East Timor. Whether the people
of the -Territory then choose merger with Indonesia
or the status of an independent State is a choice for

30. We were pleased to hear from the representative
of Indonesia and from some representatives
of .the
people of the Territory that the situation in East Timor
is returning to normal. We have noted assurances by
Indonesia that it has no claims over East Timor, that
it will abide by the decision of the people of the
Territory upon their future and that withdrawal of its
forces has begun and will continue until it has been
completed. In order that the process of self-determination in Timor may take.p!ace fairly, substantial withdrawals should-be made as a matter of urgency. We
hope that Indonesia will heed the successive appeals
made to it by the Council.
31. The United Kingdom endorses the idea .of a
further fact-finding mission by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative.
We hope that the report which
the Secretary-Genera!
is asked to submit,. in para4

the people of East Timor itself, to be made freely,
without-any foreign interference. This is the second
important element in resolution 384 (1975) that remains
to be fulfilled.

tremendous suffering in recent years. The restoration
of peace and the possibility of resuming international
humanitarian
aid are matters of prime importance.
Sweden appeals to all States and to all parties now
to heed the Council’s call and to co-operate fully in
the implementation
of today’s resolution, in order to
enable the people of East Timor to build its future in
peace and progress.

35. A third central element in resolution 384 (1975)
was the decision to dispatch a special representative
of the Secretary-General
to the area. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on this mission is now before the
Council in document S/12011. My delegation would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Win.speare Guicciardi on the task which he has skilfully
performed under the terms of this resolution and to
thank him and the Secretary-General
,for their report.

41. Mr. SHERER (United States of America): The
United States voted in favour of the amendment
submitted
by Japan because it would have made
explicit that the Council recognizes the important
statement of the representative of Indonesia that some
forces have been withdrawn and that withdrawal is
continuing.

36. We also note from the report that the Special
Representative
was not able to establish contact
in. East Timor with all the parties concerned. The lack
of such contacts has been a severe handicap. Such
contacts remain a necessary prerequisite to the fulfilment of this mission.

42.. In the view of the United States, there were only
two useful purposes that a resolution on this subject
could accomplish
at this time. One would be to
encourage and enhance the co-operation of all concerned, and the other would be to extend the mandate
of the Secretary-General.
In the light of the Council’s
decision not to accept the constructive
Japanese
proposal, which decision is a refusal explicitly to note
steps to comply with existing resolutions, we do not
believe that a spirit of co-operation has been encouraged. As far as the mandate of the Secretary-General
is concerned, we do not believe a new resolution
was needed in order to keep that mandate in being.
His laudatory efforts and those of his Special Representative could and should be continued in any event.
Their work demonstrates
once again the indispensable role of the United Nations in the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

37. The Secretary-General
states in his report that
the parties concerned have expressed their readiness
to continue consultations with the Special Representative and that he therefore suggests that such consultations should be continued. The Swedish delegation
shares this opinion and supports the idea of a renewed
effort by the Special Representative.
In this context
we appeal to Indonesia
to give its complete
cooperation in any further effort by the Special Representative to meet the parties concerned.
38. Sweden voted in favour of the draft resolution
adopted earlier today. We for our part have sought to
contribute
to a broad solution, as far as possible
without compromising
with the basic positions of
principle that we have always defended. The resolution does on some points represent compromise
between the various positions. The fact that some
formulations
are compromise
solutions
should,
however, in no way be interpreted as a weakening of
the stand the Council has previously taken on important
points of principle in this matter.
.
39. The Swedish delegation still maintains what we
said in December [1869rh meeting],
that we want to
put special emphasis on the necessity of a rapid withdrawal of all Indonesian troops from East Timor. In
this regard we have duly noted the statement here by
the representative
of Indonesia,
which encourages
hope for the withdrawal of the bulk of the Indonesian
military presence from East Timor.

43. In abstaining in the vote on this draft resolution
because we do not see that it serves any essential
purpose in its present form, we are not wavering in
our support of the right of the people of East Timor or
of any people anywhere in the world for equal rights
and self-determination.
44. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from
Chinese):
Now I will make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of CHINA.
45. General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX) and
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) explicitly point
out that all -States must respect the territorial integrity
of East Timor as well as the inalienable right of its
people to self-determination,
deeply deploring the
armed invasion of East Timor by the Indonesian
authorities and calling upon the Indonesian Govemmerit to withdraw without delay all its forces from
the Territory. Since the adoption of these resolutions,
people have expected the Indonesian Government to
mend its ways immediately
by honouring the just
demands of the great majority of Member States and
the world’s people and by strictly implementing
the
relevant
resolutions.
Nevertheless,
contrary
to
people’s expectations,
it has hastily rigged up a

40. We also hope that the further consultations now
to be undertaken by Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi will
help the Council form a clearer view of how the
principal objectives could be achieved through an
effective self-determination
for the people of East
Timor,
and we wish him every success in this
important
mission. It stands out clearly from all
reports that the people of East Timor have gone through
5

so-called Provisional Government in disregard of the
above resolutions, trying to use this puppet organization as a pretext for legalizing its invasion of East
Timor, for suppression of the struggle of the indigenous
people to safeguard independence
.and territorial
integrity and then for annexation of East Timor.
Furthermore,
in defiance of the resolutions of the
Assembly and the Council which called upon the
Government
of Indonesia to withdraw all its forces
from the Territory without delay, that Government has
continued to send large numbers of reinforcing troops
with air and naval support for expanded aggression and
occupation of East Timor, carrying out bombing raids
of the territories under the control of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor, and has continued all-round
naval and air blockade of East Timor. The intensified
military operations of the Indonesian armed forces
have inflicted heavy casualties on the East Timorese
people and caused serious damage to their life and
property. These continued and aggravated operations
of military aggression and annexation in open contravention of Assembly and Council resolutions have
aroused widespread discontent, shock and condemnation within and outside the United Nations.

48.

Under

[Frente
the people
of East Timor have heroically and tenaciously fought
in defence of their sacred rights and territorial integrity.
Inspired by the firm will for “independence
or
death”, they have taken up all usable arms and
fought a bloody battle, dealing heavy blows at the
invaders. Although they are fighting at great odds and
under extremely difftcult conditions, the heroic East
Timorese people have persevered in their just struggle
of resisting the invaders. These facts demonstrate that
the people of East Timor are heroic and indomitable
people’ who have made tremendous
sacrifices in
defence of the independence and territorial integrity of
their motherland, whose ardent will for independence
and freedom cannot be destroyed by any brute force
and whose struggle has won broad sympathy and firm
support from many third-world countries and peoples.
Revoluciondria

the leadership

of FRETILIN

Timor Lade Independente],

49. In the view of the Chinese delegation, the Indonesian Government’s
refusal to withdraw its troops, in
defiance and violation of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, and its
intensified efforts to annex East Timor cannot be
tacitly accepted or tolerated by any justice-upholding
countries and people. The Chinese delegation holds
that the Council must adopt a resolution condemning
the Indonesian Government’s refusal to implement the
relevant
Assembly
and Council
resolutions
and
requiring the Indonesian Government to fully respect
the independence and territorial integrity of the East
Timorese people, to cease its air and naval blockade
and other military operations against East Timor and
to withdraw all its invading forces from East Timor
immediately and completely, so that the people of East
Timor may solve their internal problems by themselves.

46. When the Security Council adopted resolution 384
(1975), the Chinese representative pointed out [f869rh
meeting]
that the responsibility
of the SecretaryGeneral was none other than to supervise the Indonesian Government’s
immediate
withdrawal of its
forces from East Timor. At the time the Chinese
delegation expressed doubt about the necessity and
usefulness of sending a representative of the SecretaryGeneral and stated its reservations concerning the
relevant paragraphs of the resolution. The development of events has fully testified to the correctness
of the judgement of the Chinese delegation at that time.
Even the vaguely-worded report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
shows that the
obstructions on the part of the Indonesian authorities
prevented Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi from carrying
out his mission.

50. The Chinese delegation voted this morning in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by Guyana and
the United Republic of Tanzania. But at the same time
we cannot but point out that the text is not satisfactory
in that it has failed to condemn the Indonesian Govemment’s armed invasion of East Timor and its refusal to
implement. resolution 384 (1975) over four months.
The Chinese delegation stil1 has reservations on paragraphs 3 and 4 of the text. We wish to reiterate that
the responsibility
of the Secretary-General
must be,
and can only be, to supervise the Indonesian Govemment’s immediate withdrawal of all its military forces
from East Timor in speedy implementation
of the
present resolution. As for the internal problems of
East Timor, they should be solved by the people of
East Timor themselves. No party should use them as
a pretext to delay the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of all the Indonesian forces from East
Timor.

47. It can be seen from the report that the Special
Representative even failed to see the Indonesian troops
in East Timor. In his report it was admitted that he
could go only to certain places designated by the
Indonesian authorities and the so-called “provisional
government”,
and even in those places he was unable
to travel widely. The report shows that it was impossible to make arrangements for him to meet in East
Timor leaders of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor.
In these circumstances,
it was obviously
impossible for the report to reflect the situation in
East Timor in a comprehensive
and truthful way.
Anyone with elementary common sense can see that
the report is at best a mere depiction of the meticulous
arrangements
made by the Indonesian
authorities.
However, nothing of this sort can change the stark
reality that East Timor is being subjected to aggression
and annexation.

5 1. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I wish to remind
the Council that at its 1908th meeting it extended an
invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Guilherme
Maria Goncalves to
6

prefer to follow, but it is the one which
imposed upon us.

participate in our discussion. Mr. Gon$alves has asked
to speak at this time, and if no member raises any
objection, I shall invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make an additional statement.

has been

57. I am confident that our revolutionary
forces,
together with the people of East Timor, will be able to
overcome all the difftculties
and problems ahead.
I can assure Council members that my Government will
do its utmost to ensure the maintenance of security,
law and order in this tribal society and to guarantee
the life and property of all foreign residents in the
Territory.

52. Mr. GONCALVES:
Mr. President, on behalf of
my delegation and the Government
of East Timor,
I should like to take this opportunity
to thank you
and the other members of the Council for your
indulgence in according my delegation a final opportunity to address the Council on the question of East
Timor, as well as for previous opportunities
to participate in the consideration of this question.

58. Whatever happens, the people of East Timor and
its Provisional
Government
will survive. We shall
never capitulate to those who want to turn our part
of the world into a hell of killings and repression.
With the spontaneous and unreserved support of the
people of East Timor we shall overcome all the difficulties ahead and, God willing, with the understanding
and help of our neighbours in the Asia region, one
day-and
this will be very soon, I hope-the
sun will
truly shine again in East Timor.

53. We have listened with close attention to the many
speakers before the Council, both members and nonmembers, as they presented their views, and we have
studied the resolution just adopted by the Council.
54. Having done so, we have; not without regret,
been forced to conclude’that the resolution as adopted
cannot be said to reflect accurately the prevailing conditions in East Timor and its people’s needs. My delegation acknowledges that this decision has been taken by
the Council after long hours of consultations.
We
appreciate that it is indeed a difficult task to judge
accurately conditions in so distant a Territory as East
Timor and that this is particularly
so when little is
known of conditions and the way of life of the people
whose destiny your decisions will affect.

59. My delegation is grateful to the representatives
of Indonesia,
the Philippines,
Malaysia and Saudi
Arabia and those members of the Council who have
shown goodwill towards the people of East Timor and
an understanding of their problems. We highly respect
their wisdom and their concern to avert more suffering
in the Territory.

55. Though we recognize the difficulties which have
faced the Council in this respect, we feel constrained
to say, however, that we are not happy with the
resolution, for, while concentrating its attention on one
aspect of the problem, it fails to consider many others.
My delegation
has already
acquainted
Council
members with the progress which has been made in the
Territory in recent months”he
withdrawal of the
Indonesian volunteer force from East Timor, which
began in February and is expected to be completed
shortly, and the advanced stage of the preparations
for an act of self-determination
by the Timorese
people. We regret that the Council, in addition to
‘failing to recognize these points. in the resolution, did
not consider it necessary to look into the FRETILIN
assassinations,
particularly
since many facts and
figures concerning those crimes have been gathered by
the Indonesian Red Cross and placed at the disposal
of the members of the Council. The Council also
seems to have forgotten the plight of the suffering
refugees who fled to safety when FRETILIN
was in
power.

61. Of course, the political future of the people of
East Timor will be determined by the people of East
Timor
itself. The Provisional
Government
will
therefore continue its efforts to prepare the people of
East Timor to exercise its inalienable
right of selfdetermination
and to ensure that it will be able to
exercise that sacred right in an orderly and peaceful
manner.

56. The Council’s faihrre to pay due attention to the
salient aspects of the situation prevailing in Timor is
bound to affect the views of the Provisional Government regarding the resolution just adopted by the
Council, as well as the course of action it is going
to follow, but my Government will not hesitate to go
forward, whatever the consequences. 1 wish to make
clear that this is not a course of action we would

62. The PRESIDENT
(trmshtbn
jirwn Chinese):
In conformity of the provisions of rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, the Council decided at its
1908th meeting to invite Mr. Jose Ramos Hot-ta to
participate in our debate. He has also asked to speak
again. Therefore, if I hear no objections, I shall invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a further statement.

60. My Government,
with its limited capability,
resources and experience, will co-operate as far as
possible in the implementation
of the resolution,just
adopted. It has sincerely co-operated to the best of
its ability and resources in all the efforts undertaken
by the Special Representative
of the SecretaryGeneral. I should like to take this opportunity to state
once again that my Government *would welcome
another visit by the Special Representative,
a visit
which we hope can take place in the near future, and
that we shall again co-operate as far as possible with
him in the discharge of his duties.

7

63. Mr. HORTA: Mr. President, in the course of the
various meetings of the Council, we have had the
opportunity
to observe your efforts and those of the
other Council members in the search for a solution
to the war in East Timor and to put an end to the
Indonesian armed intervention
in the Territory.
As
we said in our statement on 12 April [190&h meeting],
whatever the outcome of the current Council meetings,
we shall remember that’the members of the Council
could not have done better. The duty to bring peace
where there is war and aggression is not an easy one.
We should like to make a special reference to the nonaligned group, particularly
our brothers from the
United Republic of Tanzania and Guyana, which tried
in a very skilful manner to achieve a just solution to
the conflict in East Timor so that the East Timorese
people could exercise their right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).

from East Timor except, obviously, those that have
been wounded. More than 30,000 Indonesian paratroopers and marines are continuing military operations
in the Territory.
66. I wish to read a message sent by the President of
the Democratic Republic of East Timor, Francisco
Xavier do Amaral, to the Secretary-General:
[The speaker

read

the annex

to document

S/12055.]

67. The latest message received from our Prime
Minister, Nicolau Lobato, at 10 p.m. New York time
yesterday, says that fighting has intensified in several
areas in the last few days in places such as Dili,
Suai, Same, Manatuto,
Los Pales, Baucau and
Viqueque. Warships are bombarding the south coast
and, on the north coast, the villages of Liquica and
Maubara.
68. In accordance with instructions from our Govemment, my delegation wishes to emphasize that we
remain ready for bilateral or multilateral dialogue with
the Government
of Indonesia and other States and
parties concerned in order to find a just solution to the
war in East Timor. In our previous statements we
have clearly stated our position. There will be a real
possibility for peace in East Timor only when Indonesian armed forces have been withdrawn completely.
We regard with scepticism suggestions concerning
talks between the Government
of the Democratic
Republic
of East Timor
and the so-called Provisional Government,
which does not exist. As we
mentioned earlier, we should like to make some very
brief comments based on facts about the real nature of
this so-called Provisional Government;

64. In the course of these meetings we have heard
with great interest statements by various representatives of several countries. Although different views
were expressed, there were certain basic common
points. Generally all the speakers referred to the
existence, to a certain degree, of a situation of war
in East Timor and ‘to the presence of Indonesian
troops in the Territory, although some, in a spirit of
goodwill and encouraged by the vague statements of
the Indonesian Government,
accepted at face value
the statement that units of Indonesian forces have withdrawn from the Territory. ‘Nevertheless,
all have
expressed their desire to see those forces withdraw
completely without delay; There might be conflicting
definitions of the expression “without delay”. For
instance, my delegation would take it as something to
be done in a matter of hours or a few days. We
cannot speak for other representatives, but obviously
the Indonesians
would interpret
the expression
“without delay” as something in the order of three
months, one year, three years or indefinitely.
Therefore, the Council must make things very clear, without
ambiguities,
Indonesia, by invading the Territory of
East Timor, committed an act of aggression as defined
in article 3, paragraph (cr) of the Definition of Aggression adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 3314 (XXIX).

69. It is an irony that it was Mario Carrascallo who
for the first, time, in September 197”at
that time he
was President of the UDT [Unirio Democrcitico
de
Tintor]-in
an official statement accused Arnaldo
Araujo of being a war criminal, a collaborator
with
the Japanese during the Second World -War against
the Allies. Here, Mario Carrascal’io tried to deny this.
But we know, and Mario Carrascalao knows even
better, that he and his wife and children are prisoners
of the Indonesian junta. As he himself said, he does
not write his speeches; he is just the reader.
70. On 16 December 1975 [1865rh meeting],
in this
very place where I am sitting at this moment, a man
called Jose Martins spoke in support of the Indonesian
cause as leader of the so-called KOTA [Klibm Oan
Timor Aswain].
I should like to ask the representative of Indonesia if he can inform the Council of the
whereabouts of Jest Martins. It is rather strange
that he has not been brought here this time, while,
according to the Far Eastetw Economic
Review
of
17 October 1975, “he is regarded favourably by the
Indonesians, has access to their intelligence-types
in
Kupang and Atambua”. The fact is that Jose Martins,
President of the so-called ‘KOTA,
has deserted the

65. There should be’no doubt in a Security Council
resolution when it deals with matters concerning
armed aggression. If there is an act of armed aggression against a-territory, it is the duty of the Council,
regardless of the arguments used by the aggressor,
to put an end to such action by all possible means.
Therefore, as we said in our statement of 15 April
[1910rh meeting],
the Council must as a matter of
urgency discuss continued Indonesian armed intervention in East Timor. We repeat and underline that
not a single Indonesian solider has been withdrawn
8

Indonesians because of his disgust at their atrocities
in East Timor. But we are not bringing Mr. Martins
to sit here again to play the clown, as other deserters
have been doing in support of Indonesia. He arrived in
New York yesterday and seems to be anxious to
present to Council members a very lengthy report
about the nature of Indonesian military operations in
East Timor. He will be able to supply the Council
with very reliable information,
as he is the President of
KOTA and one of the main collaborators in the Indonesian intervention
in East Timor. Unfortunately
he
has arrived at the end of the current meetings, and it
seems he will not be able to address the Council
formally, but he will meet various individual delegates.

at all to this question. In private, we have told several
Council members the whole story in detail. We have
prepared evidence which we shall provide to members
for their own use.
75. I should like to read excernts from a letter dated
8 April 1976, addressed to the Secretary-General
by a
prominent leader of the UDT, Mr. Moises da Costa
Amaral. He writes:
“Bearing in mind that our leaders in Timor are
now in the situation of technical prisoners, we are
for the time being the only free voice of our Party
abroad able to interpret without any kind of pressure
the spirit of the programme of our Party which, in
essence, defends the right of our people to selfdetermination
without any foreign intervention.”

71. It seems the truth is coming out in spite of
Indonesia’s attempts to distort events in East Timor
and to escape world condemnation.
Therefore we
should like to see the Council receive Indonesian
statements with severe reservations so as not to
endorse Indonesian criminal
aggression against the
people of East Timor. Mr. Martins, who fought with
the Indonesians against the nationalist forces of East
Timor; can supply the Council with authoritative
evidence concerning
Indonesian
atrocities
in the
Territory.

76. I wish to take this opportunity to make a clarification for the representative of Malaysia in regard to one
point of his statement on Tuesday, when he said that
“most of the FRETILIN
leadership has left the Territory” [1911th meeting,
para. 221. As a matter of
fact, only three members out of a whole Cabinet in
the Central Committee
of 50 members are outside
the country to carry on the diplomatic
struggle, but
we shall return. I should like just to add that if
FRETILIN
had eliminated the prominent APODETI
_
[Associa~do
Popular
Democrtitica
Timorense]
leaders
listed in the pamphlet that the Indonesian Mission has
been handing out, the so-called APODETI
would now
consist of .only -two men: the Chairman,
Amaldo
Araujo, and the Vice-Chairman,
Guilherme Goncalves.

72. The Indonesians have also brought to the Council
two men-Jo50
Pedro Soares and Jose Goncalves.
Soares claimed to be a FRETILIN
military commander. We were just surprised that the Indonesians
did not claim the presidency of FRETILIN
for him.
In fact, JoZo Pedro Soares was not a military commander of FRETILIN;
he held a very junior position
in the Finance Department.
Jose Goncalves was in
fact a Minister
for Economic
Co-ordination
and
Statistics in the first Government
of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. He was not a member of
FRETILIN,
a fact which shows the flexibility of the
Central Committee of FRETILIN
in forming the first
Government.
Jose Goncalves was captured in Dili
on 7 December along with his wife Olimpia, her sister
Isabel Barreto and his nephew Jose. His house was
completely destroyed by mortar barrage and all his
belongings were sacked. His sister-in-law was executed
by a firing squad, and his wife was forced to witness
the macabre ceremony. I should like to ask the representative of Indonesia about the present status of Jose
Goncalves. Is he a free man, or is he in fact a captive
whose wife and other relatives are in Djakarta as
hostages?

77. We have heard in the Council fantastic stories
about fantastic developments
carried out in East
Timor in the last few weeks by the Indonesian
military junta. Only a fertile imagination
could tell
here lies of this sort. It is laughable to hear that in
a few weeks the Indonesian junta has built roads,
bridges and schools and sent to East Timor a great
number of doctors. Surely the Indonesian people in
West Timor and in the numerous islands must now feel
very frustrated and bitter, as they never had such
attention from their own Government. The Indonesian
Government has not been able to take adequate care
of the health and welfare of its own people in its own
regions. Malnutrition
and diseases related to poor
nutrition are endemic throughout the Indonesian territories. Economists
have established
that the discrepancy between the real food intake of the richest
and poorest fifths of the Indonesian population has
increased, not decreased, in the 10 years of the
Suharto regime. The advantages of the Green Revolution have been lost in Indonesia because of the
corruption
of the middlemen,
who are dealing in
fertilizer and rice and who are hastening the process
of the pauperization
of the Indonesian people even
further by engaging in usurious lending practices. In
1963 it was estimated. that the poorest fifth of the
Indonesian population ate an average of 780 grams of
rice per person per week; in 1970 that figure had

73. Today Mr. Robert Hawke, President of the
Australian Labour Party and President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, left for Djakarta
leasing a trade-union delegation to protest to President Suharto
Indonesia’s
continued
intervention
in East Timor. My delegation telephoned Mr. Hawke,
asking him to inquire about the fate of the families of
Mr. Goncalves and Mr. Carrascalao.
74. I do .not wish to make further comments on this
subject. It was not our intention to make any reference
9

fallen to 750 grams per person per week. In 1965
Indonesia imported 140,000 tons of rice a year. Now
this has risen to 1,500,000, an increase of 800 per cent.
According to Tuesday’s New York Times, the United
States Secretary of Agriculture has stated that Indonesia has received over .the past few years approximately one billion dollars’ worth of food aid.

world tourist industry had plans to build a major
tourist complex in East Timor, rivalling Bali, Fiji,
Miami and so on. The Australian Financiul Review
has reported that the Indonesian
Government
has
exerted great pressures on oil companies with holdings
in East Timor to suppress information about the commercial viability of the East Timorese oil and natural
gas deposits. In fact, several companies have found
big deposits of oil and natural gas in East Timor,
inland and offshore. The first commercial production
for local consumption
was due to start in 1976. It is
beyond any doubt that with so great an economic
potential and such a low population density, in stark
contrast to desperately
overcrowded
Java, East
Timor could well be a very wealthy country in a
period of 10 or 15 years under a popular government,
under a non-corrupt management.

78. It is very easy to understand that the people of
Indonesia, ,especially the people of the poorer regions,
are amazed when they hear the representative
of
Indonesia claiming that the Indonesian Government
has been able to build roads, bridges and schools in
the neighbouring Territory of East Timor-a
Territory
that does not even belong to Indonesia-when
it
cannot provide these things to its own people in its
own territories.
79. It has been reliably reported by financial commentators that the Government of President Suharto
-the Government
of the military technocrats who
came to power over the dead bodies of hundreds of
thousands of political dissidents in 1965 and 1966,
claiming that they would set Indonesia on the path of
economic and social development-has
now incurred
a national debt several times greater than that of the
late President Sukamo.
Pertamina alone has been
responsible for a debt of over $10 billion, which is
much higher than the whole debt left by Sukamo.
There is no doubt that the economic collapse of an
oil company in the era of petrodollars could happen
only in today’s Indonesia. It will be interesting to see
what the Inter-Governmental
Group on Indonesia, the
international
cartel that includes the United Nations
Development Programme, will make of this collapse of
the major source of foreign exchange for the Indonesian
military junta.

83. It is true that the Indonesian Government
has
spent tens of thousands of dollars in East Timor, but
that expenditure
has been for military operations.
It has been calculated by independent sources that
since September 1975 over $10 million has been spent
on the war in East Timor. That sum includes the
cost of naval and aerial operations and the transport
of troops. It does not include the loss of over 1,000
rifles, machine-guns
and other types of weapons,
ammunition
and vehicles that have been captured by
the nationalist forces. Neither does it include the loss
of a modem warship that sank in the Bay of Dili
on 7 December because of bad manceuvring.
84. Although the representative
of Indonesia has
been very skilfully trying to hide the truth about what
is considered by Pentagon sources to be the “fiasco
of the Indonesian invasion of Dili”, it is undeniable
that the Indonesian
military junta has incurred far
greater expenses than had ever been imagined. The
Fur Eastern Economic Review of 17 October 1975,
quoting top military leaders, stated that “a battalion
or two of regular troops could solve the problem
[of East Timor] in a matter of days if not hours”.
As members of the Council will realize, the war has
been going on for several months and the Indonesian
forces have failed to achieve their purpose and instead
are bogged down in a costly guerilla war.

80. Where does the money for this co-called development in East Timor come from? Where is the money
to provide for the administration
of the Territory of
East Timor to come from in the future, or the money
for the reconstruction
of the infrastructure
of East
Timor after the devastation of the war of aggression
launched by the Indonesian military junta?
81. Why, in the midst of this financial catastrophe,
is Indonesia interested in taking on the burden of yet
more territory, which even its representative declares
to be very poor? Why does Indonesia claim to be
willing to spend more of its precious and failing
resources to “develop”
this “poor” country? Perhaps
it is because East Timor is in fact not so poor as the
Indonesian propagandists make out.

85. Seldom in modern history has the survival of a
nation been so very dependent not only on its will to
be free and independent but also on actions by the
world at large. The members of the Council must be
reminded that whatever the outcome of the war in
East Timor, they will share the responsibility
for
bringing peace and justice to the people or for digging
the graves of my countrymen. This Council, the representatives who at this moment have the mandate of the
international community to prevent aggression across
territorial borders, might one day be remembered by
the people of East Timor with great respect and
gratitude. Therefore you, the members of the Security
Council, have the principal responsibility
to respond
actively to the appeal of the people of East Timor

82. East Timor is potentially a very wealthy country.
Although it was neglected by the Portuguese colonial
Government,
the country is very fertile for all sorts
of agricultural products, such as rice, corn, potatoes
and sugar cane. The sea is very rich for fishing,
especially lobsters, crabs and prawns, which have
attracted the interest of Japanese corporations.
The
10

regrets that the Japanese amendment
the required majority.

contained in the message to the Secretary-General
from the President of FRETILIN
and President of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor, Francisco Xavier
do Amaral.

did not obtain

89. Like all other Member States, Indonesia is a
sovereign State and, like all other Member States, it
has its own perception of its responsibilities and obligations towards its own people, towards the people of
East Timor, towards the region in which Indonesia is
situated, towards the world of which it is a part, and
towards the United Nations of which it is a Member.

86. The PRESIDENT
(trunskution
from
Chinese):
The last speaker is the representative of Indonesia,
on whom I now call.
87. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Having adopted
the draft resolution in document S/12056, the Council
has arrived at the end of its deliberations on the report
of the Secretary-General on the question of East Timor.
Though they were not entirely successful, my delegation would like to express’its appreciation for the role
that the non-aligned and other members played in
arriving at an acceptable text. I wish to thank all
delegations which have shown understanding of the
Indonesian views and have taken them into account in
their statements and in formulating
the draft resolution, especially the delegation of Japan for proposing
the amendment in document S/12057.

90. My delegation
cannot support the resolution
which the Council has just adopted. We have strong
reservations, because in our view it does not reflect
the situation and the developments
in East Timor.
Indonesia’s continued co-operation with the United
Nations in this matter will be based on that perception of our responsibilities
and obligations, especially
towards the United Nations. We will make a thorough
study of the Council’s proceedings. The co-operation
Indonesia will extend to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
will continue to be guided
by the wishes of the people of East Timor while
taking into account the realities prevailing
in the
Territory.

88. My delegation has explained its views with regard
to the call for “withdrawal”
and the right of the
people of East Timor to self-determination.
With
regard to “withdrawal”,
we have stated that the Indonesian volunteers were in East Timor in answer to the
specific request of the people and the Provisional
Government of East Timor and that they would leave
the Territory
upon the decision of the Provisional
Government.
In the meanwhile,
the Provisional
Government has decided to allow the armed volunteers
to return to their places of origin. As stated by the
delegation of the Provisional Government,
they are
now in the process of leaving East Timor. Therefore,
my delegation cannot support paragraph 2 of the
resolution
which the Council has just adopted,
especially because the word “remaining”
before
“foreign”
in the original working paper which was
shown to me has been deleted. My delegation deeply

91. I should like to stress once again my delegation’s
conviction that, with regard to the remaining stage of
the process of decolonization
in East Timor, only the
wishes of the people of East Timor are decisive.
92. In conclusion,
my delegation
would like to
express its sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, and to
the other members of the Council for allowing us to
participate in the Council’s deliberations.
93. The PRESIDENT
(trunslution
from
Chinese):
Since there are no other speakers, I take it that we
have concluded today’s business with regard to the
consideration of the situation in Timor.
The meeting

11

rose crt 5.35 pm.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE, PROCURER LBS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unia sont en vente’dans les libtairies et les agences deposit&s du
monde entier. lnformez-vous auprk de votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentn.
KAK
H3~annn

HOJIYSHTh

IilAAHZil

OpranmaAw

JriHax H areriTevBax
%aweM
HawiR.

KH~XHOM
Ce~wm

OPI’AHH3AIlHW

OE%EAHHEHHhlX

HAUMH

OCineAsinensxbrX

HaqsiR
YO*AO
xynmb
* wimxxib~X
Mar-arapa.
HaBoAHre
enpaBKII
06 n3AaHHIIX
B
mm nHrnHTe
no anpecy:
OpraHmaLwR
06'beAIiHeIiHblX
nsAassft.
Hbm-nopK
mu HCeHesa.

no ncex panonax

Haraxuie
no npoAame

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-Aligust1984-2,200
