UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3276
14 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 14 September 1993, at 5.15 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86529 (E)

S/PV.3276
2-5

The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN THE REPUBLIC OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I have

received a letter from the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the

consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its consideration

of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Following consultations among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its profound concern over recent
reports that Bosnian Croats have been holding Bosnian Muslims in detention
camps under deplorable conditions.

The Council recalls the international

revulsion and condemnation that accompanied revelations last year of the
conditions under which Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats were being held
in Bosnian Serb detention camps.

S/PV.3276
6
(The President)
"The Council reiterates the principle that the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) must be given access to all detainees in Bosnia
wherever they may be held.

It notes that the ICRC has recently been given

access to some detainees, but recalls with condemnation the obstacles which
the Bosnian Croats have previously placed in the way of the ICRCs attempts
to gain access to the camps in order to ascertain the conditions of the
detained.

It also notes the recent appeal addressed by the President of

Croatia to the Bosnia Croats (S/26419).
"The Council emphasizes the fact that inhumane treatment and abuses in
detention centres violates international humanitarian law.

Moreover, as

the Council has previously recalled, persons who commit or order the
commission of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions are individually
responsible in respect of such breaches.
"The Council calls upon the Bosnian Croats to supply immediately to
the ICRC complete information on all camps where Bosnian Muslim and any
other prisoners are being held, and to assure the ICRC and all other
legitimately concerned international bodies free and unhindered access to
the detained, wherever they may be held.
"The Council believes that the Government of Croatia has a
responsibility to use its influence with the Bosnian Croats to secure
compliance with this statement and calls on the Government of Croatia to
take immediate steps to that end.
"The Council further reaffirms that all parties to the conflict are
bound to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law
and in particular the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and reminds
them of its willingness to consider appropriate actions if any of them
should fail to abide scrupulously by their obligations.
"The Council decides to remain seized of the matter."

S/PV.3276
7
(The President)
This statement will be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/26437.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.
