204

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

4. Once more urgently requests the Chilean authorities
to respect and promote human rights in conformity with the
obligations undertaken under various international instruments and, in particular, to adopt the concrete measures
contemplated in resolution 1982/25 of the Commission on
Human Rights, especially the lifting of the state of emergency and the state of exception and the re-establishment
of democratic institutions, by ensuring the full enjoyment
and exercise of the civil and political rights as well as the
economic, social and cultural rights and fundamental freedoms of the Chilean people, as provided in those international instruments;
5. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of all persons who have disappeared
in Chile for political reasons, to inform their families of the
results of such investigation and to punish those responsible
for the disappearance;
6. Further urges again the Chilean authorities to restore
the full enjoyment of trade union rights, in particular the
right to organize trade unions, the right to collective bargaining and the right to strike;
7. Urges the Chilean authorities to respect, in conformity with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 119 the right of Chilean nationals to live in and freely
enter and leave Chilean territory, without restrictions or
conditions of any kind, and to cease the practice of "relegation" (assignment of forced residence) and forced exile,
in particular of those who participate in trade union activities, academic life or the defence of human rights;
8. Also urges the Chilean authorities to put an end to
arbitrary detentions and imprisonment in secret places and
the practice of torture and other forms of inhuman or degrading treatment which have resulted on occasion in unexplained deaths;
9. Requests the Chilean authorities to respect fully the
economic, social and cultural rights of the Chilean population in general and of the indigenous population in
particular;
10. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under consideration
the situation of human rights in Chile;
11. Calls again on the Chilean authorities to co-operate
with the Commission on Human Rights and its Special Rapporteur and to submit commentaries on his report to the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-ninth session;
12. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth the report of the Special Rapporteur at its thirtyninth session, with a view to taking the most appropriate
steps, in particular the extension of the mandate of the
Special Rapporteur, and report on its consideration, through
the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session.
I 10th plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/184.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly.
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1982/
31 of 11 March 1982, 124 in which the Commission expressed
its profound concern at the continuing deterioration in the
situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Gua-

temala under the previous regime and in which it requested
its Chairman to appoint a Special Rapporteur,
Taking into account General Assembly decision 36/435
of 16 December 1981 ,
Expressing its satisfaction at the declared willingness of
the present Government of Guatemala to co-operate with
the Special Rapporteur to be appointed pursuant to Commission on Human Rights resolution 1982/31 with a mandate to make a thorough study of the human rights situation
in Guatemala,
Taking note of resolution 1982/ l 7 of 7 September 1982
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 126 in which the Sub-Commission
expressed alarm at reports of massive repression against and
displacement of indigenous populations,
Disturbed about the large number of missing persons,
who, despite appeals from various international organizations to the Government of Guatemala, remain unaccounted
for,
Noting with concern the state of siege in force in Guatemala since l July 1982, under which basic human rights
are abrogated and serious violations of human rights are
reported to occur,
l. Expresses its deep concern at the serious violations
of human rights reported to be taking place in Guatemala,
particularly those reports of widespread repression, killing and massive displacement of rural and indigenous
populations;
2. Urges the Government of Guatemala to ensure that
human rights and fundamental freedoms are fully respected
by all its authorities and agencies, including its security
forces;
3. Appeals to the Government of Guatemala to allow
international humanitarian organizations to give their assistance to those displaced;
4. Appeals also to all parties concerned in Guatemala
to seek an end to all acts of violence;
5. Calls upon Governments to refrain from supplying
arms and other military assistance as long as serious human
rights violations in Guatemala continue to be reported;
6. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other parties concerned to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights;
7. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to study
carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur and to consider,
in the light of that report, further steps for securing human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all in Guatemala.
I 10th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/185.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador

The General Assembly.
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 118
Conscious of its responsibility in all circumstances to
promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken under various international human
rights instruments,

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations
of human rights wherever they occur and to take measures
to restore respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 35/192 of 15 December
1980 and 36/155 of 16 December 1981, it expressed deep
concern at the situation of human rights in El Salvador,
especially in view of the death of thousands of people, the
climate of violence and insecurity prevailing in that country
and the impunity of paramilitary forces and other armed
groups,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution
32 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 128 in which the Commission decided to appoint a Special Representative on the
situation of human rights in El Salvador, and resolution
1982/28 of 11 March 1982, 129 whereby the Commission
extended the mandate of the Special Representative for another year and requested him to report, inter alia, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session,
Taking note of resolutions 10 (XXXIV) of 9 September
1981 130 and 1982/26 of 8 September 1982 126 of the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities,
Taking note with grave concern of the interim report of
the Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights, 131 in which the unabated continuation of a cli.mate
of violence and insecurity in El Salvador with armed clashes,
acts of terrorism and unbridled, large-scale and grave violations of human rights, as well as the failure of the judiciary
to fulfil its duties to uphold the rule of law, are confirmed,
Observing that the elections which were held in El Salvador in March 1982 have not led to the cessation of violence
or to any improvement in the situation of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in that country,
1. Expresses its deepest concern at the continued and
unbridled violations of human rights and at the resulting
suffering of the Salvadorian people, and regrets that the
appeals for the cessation of violence made by the General
Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the international community in general have not been heeded;
2. Again draws the attention of all Salvadorian parties
concerned to the fact that the rules of international law, as
contained in article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949 132 on the laws of war, are applicable to
armed conflicts not of an international character and requests
all parties to the conflict to apply a minimum standard of
protection of human rights and of human treatment to the
civilian population;
3. Notes that the situation in El Salvador, as is clearly
shown in the report of the Special Representative of the
Commission on Human Rights, has its root causes in internal
political, economic and social factors, and that conditions
in El Salvador for the effective exercise of civil and political
rights do not exist at present;
4. Reaffirms the right of the Salvadorian people freely
to determine their political, economic and social future without interference from outside and in an atmosphere free from
intimidation and terror from all parties;
5. Regrets that the Government of El Salvador has not
responded to suggestions to initiate, through available channels, contacts to negotiate a peaceful settlement with all
representative political forces in that country;
128 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1981,
SupplemenJ No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I), chap. XXVIII, sect. A.
129 Ibid., 1982, Supplement No. 2 (E/1982/12 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI,
sect. A.
130
See E/CN.4/1512-E/CN.4/Sub.2/495. chap. XX, sect. A.
m A/37/611, annex.
132 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

205

6. Calls again upon the parties in El Salvador to seek
an end to all acts of violence in order to end the loss of life
and the suffering of the people of El Salvador;
7. Reiterates its appeal to the Government and other
political forces in El Salvador to work together towards a
comprehensive negotiated political solution in order to bring
about a peaceful settlement and appropriate conditions for
the establishment of a Government through free and unhampered elections, in an atmosphere free from intimidation
and terror;
8. Reiterates its appeal to all States to abstain from
intervening in the internal situation in El Salvador and to
suspend all supplies of arms and any type of military assistance, so as to allow the political forces in that country
to restore peace and security and to permit the establishment
of a democratic system;
9. Strongly urges the Government of El Salvador to
fulfil its obligations towards its citizens and to assume its
international responsibilities in this regard by taking the
necessary steps to ensure that human rights and fundamental
freedoms are fully respected by all its agencies, including
its security forces and other armed organizations operating
under its authority or with its permission;
10. Urges the judiciary in El Salvador to assume its
obligation to uphold the rule of law and to prosecute and
to punish those found responsible for assassinations, acts
of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment;
11. Reiterates its appeal to all Salvadorian parties concerned to co-operate fully and not to interfere with the activities of humanitarian organizations dedicated to alleviating
the suffering of the civilian population, wherever these organizations operate in El Salvador;
12. Calls again upon the Government of El Salvador,
as well as all other parties concerned, to continue to cooperate with the Special Representative of the Commission
on Human Rights;
13. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-ninth session to continue to examine, as a matter of
high priority, the situation in El Salvador on the basis of
the report of its Special Representative;
14. Decides to keep under consideration, during its thirtyeighth session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine this
situation anew in the light of additional elements provided
by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic
and Social Council.
I /Oth plenary meeting
17 December /982

37/186.

Human rights and mass exoduses

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its general humanitarian mandate under the
Charter of the United Nations and its mandate to promote
and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all,
Deeply disturbed by the increasing scale and magnitude
of exoduses and displacements of populations in many regions of the world and by the human suffering of millions
of refugees and displaced persons in all regions of the world,
Conscious that human rights violations are among the
principal factors in the complex and multiple root causes of
mass exoduses and displacements of population,
Deeply preoccupied by the increasingly heavy burden
being imposed upon the international community as a whole,
