Resolutions adopted without referenee to a Main Committee

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that a special issue of United Nations
stamps has been decided upon by the Preparatory
Committee for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations with the words "Peace and progress"
as the theme on the occasion of the anniversary,
Taking into account resolution 2499 A (XXIV) of
31 October 1969 by which the General Assembly
decided that the theme of the anniversary should be
"Peace, justice and progress",
Bearing in mind that steps have already been taken
for the issue of stamps with the theme "Peace and
progress",
l. Decides that the medals to be struck to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations will bear the ernblem "Peace, justice and
progress";
2. Decides that stamps with the theme "Peace and
progress" may be issued;
3. Further decides that another set of stamps will
be issued with the theme "Peace, justice and progress" and directs the Secretariat to take the necessary steps towards that end.
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.

*

*

*

At the 1797th plenary meeting, on 31 October 1969, the
President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of paragraph 5 of resolution A above, designated the members of
the Committee for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations.
The Committee is composed of the following Member States: AUSTRIA, BULGARIA, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET
SoCIALIST
REPUBLIC,
CANADA,
CHINA,
FRANCE,
GHANA,
GUATEMALA, GUINEA, GUYANA, INDIA, IRAN, ITALY, LEBANON,
MAURITANIA, PERU, PHILIPPINES, SOMALIA, SWEDEN, TOGO,
TRINIDAD ANO TOBAGO, UGANDA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN ANO NoRTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AME.RICA.

2500 (XXIV).

Representation of China in the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in its resolution 396 (V) of 14 December 1950 that, whenever
more than one authority claims to be the Govemment
entitled to r.;:present a Member State in the United
N ations and this question becornes the subject of
controversy in the United Nations, the question should
be considered in the light of the purposes and principies
of the Charter of the United Nations and the circurnstances of each case,
Recalling further its decision in resolution 1668
(XVI) of 15 Decernber 1961, in accordance with
Article 18 of the Charter, that any proposal to change
the representation of China is an important question,
which, in General Assembly resolutions 2025 (XX)
of 17 November 1965, 2159 (XXI) of 29 November
1966, 2271 (XXII) of 28 November 1967 and 2389

s

(XXIII) of 19 November 1968, was affirmed as remaining valid,
Affirms again that this decision remains valid.
1808th plenary meeting,
11 November 1969.
2504 (XXIV). Agreement between the Republle
of Indonesia and the Kingdom of the Netherlands concerning W est New Guinea (Weet
frian)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1752 (XVII) of 21 September 1962, in which it took note of the Agreement
of 15 August 1962 between the Republic of Indonesia
and the Kingdom of the Netherlands conceming West
New Guinea (West Irian),• acknowledged the role
conferred upon the Secretary-General in the Agrecment and authorized him to carry out the tasks entrusted to him therein,
Recalling also its decision of 6 November 19631
to take note of the report of the Secretary-General•
on the completion of the United Nations Temporary
Executive Authority in West lrian,
Recalling f urther that the arrangements for the act
of free choice were the responsibility of Indonesia with
the advice, assistance and participation of a special
representative of the Secretary-General, as stipulated
in the Agreement,
Having received the report on the conduct and results of the act of free choice7 submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with article XXI, paragraph 1, of the Agreement,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with article XXI,
paragraph 2, both parties to the Agreement have
recognized these results and abide by them,
Noting that the Govemment of Indonesia, in im.plementing its national development plan,· is giving
special attention to the progress of West Irian, bearing
in mind the specific conditions of its population, and
that the Government of the Netherlands, in close cooperation with the Government of Indonesia, will
continue to render financia! assistance for this purpose,
in particular through the Asian Development Bank and
the institutions of the United Nations,
1. T akes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral and acknowledges with appreciation the
fulfilment by the Secretary-General and bis representative of the tasks entrusted to them under the Agreement of 15 August 1962 between the Republic of
Indonesia and the Kingdom of the Netherlands conceming West New Guinea (West Irian);
2. Appreciates any assistance provided through the
Asian Development Bank, through institutions of the
United Nations or through other meaos to the Govemment of Indonesia in its efforts to promote the economic and social development of West Irian.
1813th plenary meeting,
19 November 1969.
• Jbid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89
document A/5170, annex.
'
• 11 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Plenary Meetings, 12SSth meetmg, para. 71.
6 lbid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 20 document A/S578.
'
7
lbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 98,
document A/7723.
