VI.

Resolutions adopted on the repor111 of the Third Committee

Pretoria regime and continue to supply related material
to that regime;
12. Strongly condemns all Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples
of Africa and the Palestinian people;
13. Strongly condemns the ever-increasing massacres of innocent and defenceless people, including women and children, by the racist minority regimes in
southern Africa in their desperate attempt to thwart the
legitimate demands of the people;
14. Further condemns the expansionist activities of
Israel in the Middle East, as well as the continuous
bombing of civilian Arab and, in particular, Palestinian
populations and the destruction of their villages and encampments, which constitutes a serious obstacle to the
realization of the self-determination and independence
of the Palestinian people;
15. Urges all States, competent United Nations organs, specialized agencies and other international organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian
people through its representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, in its struggle to restore its right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
16. Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence,
full respect for their fundamental individual rights and
the observance of article 5 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 32 under which no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment;
17. Reiterates its appreciation for the material and
other forms of assistance that peoples under colonial
and foreign rule continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a maximization of that assistance;
18. Further calls for a maximization of all forms of
assistance given by all States, appropriate United Nations organs, specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to the victims of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid through their national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity;
19. Takes note of Economic and Social Council
decision 1979 /39 of 10 May 1979, by which the Council decided that the studies on the historical and current
development of the right to self-determination on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations and other instruments adopted by United Nations organs, with particular reference to the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, 33 and on the
implementation of United Nations resolutions relating
to the right of peoples under colonial and alien domination to self-determination 31 should be printed and given
the widest possible distribution, including distribution in
Arabic;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle being

waged by oppressed peoples for the realization of their
self-determination and national independence;
21. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyfifth session on the basis of the reports which Govemments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under foreign
domination and control.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34/45.

Resolution 217 A (III).
E/CN.4/Sub.2/404 (vols. I-III).
34
E/CN.4/Sub.2/405/Rev.l; the study was published under
the title The Right to Self-Determination (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.5).

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /86 of 13 December 1976,
32/66 of 8 December 1977 and 33/51 of 14 December
1978,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 3 "
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal,
more Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights, 36
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol thereto,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Human Rights Committee on its sixth and seventh sessions3' and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing
to undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights which have extended their co-operation to the
Human Rights Committee when submitting their reports
under article 40 of the Covenant and urges States parties which have not yet done so to submit their reports
to the Committee as speedily as possible;
3. Urges States parties which have been requested
by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional
information to comply with that request;
4. Welcomes the information that the Economic
and Social Council has now finalized arrangements for
the consideration of reports submitted under the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 38 and expresses the hope that
the Council will take steps to consider those reports as
soon as possible;
5. Again invites all States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to
35

32

33

169

A/34/440.
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
31
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/34/40).
3
8 See Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/43 of
11 May 1979.
36

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

170

consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
6. Welcomes the entry into force on 28 March 1979
of article 41 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and invites the States parties to the
Covenant to consider making the declaration provided
for in article 41 ;
1. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and of the Optional
Protocol thereto and emphasizes the importance of the
strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the Covenant;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of the Commission on Human Rights, the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to transmit the
annual reports of the Human Rights Committee to those
bodies;
9. Notes with due attention the recommendation of
the Human Rights Committee regarding the holding of
future meetings of the Committee in developing countries39 and requests the Secretary-General to explore this
possibility, taking into account the recommendation of
the Committee, and to submit a report in this regard to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the report requested in Commission on Human
Rights resolution 23 (XXXV) of 14 March 1979 40 concerning the development of public information activities
in the field of human rights, to bear in mind the question
of improving the publicity for the work of the Human
Rights Committee;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to take all possible
steps to ensure that the Division of Human Rights of the
Secretariat is able to assist effectively the Human Rights
Committee and the Economic and Social Council in the
implementation of their respective functions under the
International Covenants on Human Rights, taking into
account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December 1976.
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979
34 / 46.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations to achieve international co-opera-

tion in solving international problems of an economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 41 and of the International Convenants
on Human Rights 42 in further promoting international
co-operation for respect for and observance of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that the acceptance by Member States of
the obligations contained in those Covenants is an important element for the universal realization of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human
beings enjoying freedom from fear and want can be
achieved only if conditions are created whereby everyone may enjoy economic, social, and cultural rights, as
well as civil and political rights,
Recalling its resolution 32/130 of 16 December 1977,
in which it decided that the approach to the future work
within the United Nations system with respect to human
rights questions should take into account the concepts
set forth in that resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 33/104 of 16 December
1978, in which it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to continue with high priority the over-all analysis of the alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, which will contribute to the implementation of
resolution 32/ 130,
Recalling further its resolution 32/ 197 of 20 December 1977, in particular paragraphs 5 (b) and 41 of the
annex thereto, regarding the responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council to monitor and evaluate the
implementation of over-all strategies, policies and priorities established by the General Assembly,
Noting with interest Economic and Social Council
decisions 1979/29 and 1979/30 of 10 May 1979, and
Commission on Human Rights resolutions 4 (XXXV)
and 5 (XXXV) of 2 March 1979, 4 :i in which the Commission reiterated that the right to development is a
human right and that equality of opportunity for development is as much a prerogative of nations as of
individuals within nations,
Recognizing the need to create satisfactory conditions
at the national and international levels for the full promotion and protection of the human rights of individuals
and peoples,
Noting with interest that in the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, the non-aligned countries
called on the United Nations to continue working towards ensuring human rights in a comprehensive manner
to ensure the dignity of human beings and, in this regard, reaffirmed their own willingness to work actively
for the implementation of the steps outlined in General
Assembly resolution 32/ 130 in the form which it prescribes, through the existing structures of the United
Nations system, 44
Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
43 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
44 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 262.
41

89

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Third Committee, 31st meeting, para. 40.
40 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.

42
