76 (I). Prlvlleges and Immunities of
the Staff of the Secretariat
of the United Nations

76 (I). Privileges et iMmunltls du
personnel du Secretariat des
Nations Unies

The Ge11eral Assembly,
Having considered the proposal of the SecreJary-GeneraJl that, in accordance with Section 17
of Article V of the Convention on the Privileges
and Immunities of the United Nations, the categories of officials to which the provisions of Articles V and VII shall apply should include all
members of the staff of the United Nations, with
the exception of those who are tecruited locally
and are assigned to hourly rates;
Approves the granting of the privileges and
immunities referred to in Articles V and VII of
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations, adopted by the General
Assembly on 13 February 1946, to all members of
the staff of the United Nations, with the exception
of those who are-recruited locally and are assigned
to hourly rates.
Fiftieth plenary meeting,
7 December r946.

L'Assemblee generate,
Ayant examine Ja proposition du Secretaire
general1 suivant laquclle, conformement a la section 17 de l'artide V de la Convention sur Jes
privileges et immunitcs des Nations Unies, Jes
categories de fonctionnaires auxquelles devront
s'appliquer Jes dispositions des articles V et VII
devraient comprendre tous Jes membres du personnel des Nations Unies, a !'exception de ceux
qui sont recrutes sur place et payes a J'heure;
Approuve l'octroi de privileges et immunites
mentionnes aux articles Vet VII de la Convention
sur Jes privileges et immunitcs des Nations Unies,
adoptce par l'Assemblee generale le 13 fevrier
1946, a tous Jes membres du personnel des Nations
Unies, a !'exception de ceux qui sont recrutes sur
place et payes a l'heure.

77 (I). Date of the Regular Session of
the General Assembly

77 (IJ. Date de la session ordinalre
de l'Assemb"e g,nerale

The General Assembly resolves that rule 1 of
the provisional rules of procedure shall be
amended to read:
"The General Assembly shall meet every
year in regular session commencing on the third
Tuesday in September."
Fiftieth plenary meeting,
7 December r946.

L'Assemblee generale decide de modifier
comme suit !'article 1 de son reglement interieur
provisoire:
"L'Assemblee generale se reunit en session
ordinaire, chaque annee, le troisieme mardi de
septembre."
Cinquantieme seance pleniere,
le 7 decembre r946.

Cinquantieme seance plenihe,
le 7 decembre r94n.

78. HJ. Tax Equalization

78 ( IJ. Plrequation d'imp&ts

The General Assembly resolves that:
1. In order to achieve full application of the
principle of equity among Mero.hers and equality
among personnel of the United Nations, Members
which have not yet completely exempted from
taxation, salaries and allowances paid out of the
budget of the Organization are requested to take
early action in the matter.

L' Assemblee genera le decide:
1. En vue d'assurer !'application pleine et
entiere du principe d'egalite parmi Jes Etats
Membres et du principe d'equite a J'egard du
personnel des Nations Unies, d'inviter Jes Etats
Membres qui n'ont pas encore completement
exonere de toute imposition Jes salaires et indemnitcs payes au titre du budget de !'Organisation,
de prendre a bref delai toutes mesures utiles en
Ja matiere.
2. De renvoyer la question d'un bareme des
contributions du personnel destine a remplacer
Jes impositions nationales a la Commission con·
sultative pour Jes questions administratives et
budgetaires, qui pourra demander au Secretaire
general de presenter de nouvelles propositions a
la prochaine session ordinaire de J'Assemblee
generale.
Cinquantieme seance pleniere,
le 7 decembre r946.

2. The question of a staff contributions plan
in lieu of national taxation is referred to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questi_ons, which may request the Secretary-G_eneral to submit new proposals to the next
regular session of the General Assembly.

Fiftieth plenary meeting,
7 December r946.

79 (I). Transfer of the Assets of the
League of Nations

79 (I). Transfer+ des avolrs
de la Societe des Nations

The General Assembly resolves that,
1. The Agreement concerning the execution of
the transfer to the United Nations of certain

L'Assemblee generate decide que:
1. L'Accord concernant J'e>.ecution du transfert aux Nations Unies de certains avoirs de la
nocumcnts A/116 et A/116/Add. 1.

• Documenta A/116 and A/116/Add. 1.

189
