10

31/1.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Admission of the Republic of Seychelles
to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 16 August 1976 that the Republic of Seychelles should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations, 2
Having considered the application for membership
of the Republic of Seychelles, 3
Decides to admit the Republic of Seychelles to membership in the United Nations.
1 st plenary meeting
21 September 1976
31/3.

Observer status for the Commonwealth
Secretariat at the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the States members of the Commonwealth for co-operation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth Secretariat,
1. Decides to invite the Commonwealth Secretariat
to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary organs in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.
33rd plenary meeting
18 October 1976

(a) Any other form of referendum or consultation
which may hereafter be organized on Comorian territory
in Mayotte by France;
( b) Any foreign legislation purporting to legalize
any French colonial presence on Comorian territory in
Mayotte;
2. Strongly condemns the presence of France in
Mayotte, which constitutes a violation of the national
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of the independent Republic of the Comoros;
3. Calls upon the Government of France to withdraw immediately from the Comorian island of Mayotte,
an integral part of the independent Republic of the
Comoros, and to respect its sovereignty;
4. Invites all Member States to render effective
assistance, individually and collectively, to the Comorian
State and to co-operate with it in all fields with a view
to enabling it to defend and safeguard its independence,
the integrity of its territory and its national sovereignty;
5. Appeals to all Member States to intervene, individually and collectively, with the Government of
France to persuade it to abandon once and for all its
plan to detach the Comorian island of Mayotte from
the Republic of the Comoros;
6. Calls upon the Government of France to enter
into negotiations immediately with the Government of
the Comoros concerning the implementation of the
present resolution.
39th plenary meeting
21 October 1976

31/6.
31/ 4. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the people of the Republic of the
Comoros as a whole, in the referendum of 22 December 1974, expressed by an overwhelming majority its
will to accede to independence in conditions of political
unity and territorial integrity,
Considering that the referendums imposed on the inhabitants of the Comorian island of Mayotte constitute
a violation of the sovereignty of the Comorian State
and of its territorial integrity,
Considering that the occupation by France of the
Comorian island of Mayotte constitutes a flagrant encroachment on the national unity of the Comorian
State, a Member of the United Nations,
Considering that such an attitude on the part of
France constitutes a violation of the principles of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, in particular
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 concerning the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples, which guarantees the
national unity and territorial integrity of such countries,
1. Condemns and considers null and void the referendums of 8 February and 11 April 1976 organized
in the Comorian island of Mayotte by the Government
of France, and rejects:
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 26, document A/31/176.
3 A/31/173-S/12164. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-first Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1976.

Policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa4
A

THE SO-CALLED INDEPENDENT TRANSKEI AND OTHER
BANTUSTANS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3411 D (XXX) of 28 November 197 5 condemning the establishment of bantustans by the racist regime of South Africa,
Taking note that the racist regime of South Africa
declared the sham "independence" of the Transkei on
26 October 1976,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid5 and its special reports, 6
1. Strongly condemns the establishment of bantustans as designed to consolidate the inhuman policies
of apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the
country, to perpetuate white minority domination and
to dispossess the African people of South Africa of
their inalienable rights;
2. Rejects the declaration of "independence" of the
Transkei and declares it invalid;
3. Calls upon all Governments to deny any form of
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and
to refrain from having any dealings with the so-called
independent Transkei or other bantustans;
4 Sec

also sect. I above, foot-note 9.
"Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/3 l /22).
ii Ibid., Supplement No. 22A (A/31/22/ Add.1-3).
