S/PV.9415

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9415th meeting

Tuesday, 12 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26549 (E)
*2326549*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

2022 in violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
earthquake in Morocco and the flooding in Libya
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express our profound sadness over the
devastating earthquake that hit Morocco last Friday and
the deadly flooding that has affected Libya over the past
days. Those events have led to the loss of thousands of
lives. Our thoughts are with all those affected by these
heartbreaking disasters.
The Security Council expresses its heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people and the Governments of Libya
and Morocco.
I now invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
the victims of these tragic events.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. George Szamuely, journalist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: Since my most recent briefing
to the Security Council on this topic only weeks ago
(see S/PV.9399), the provision of defensive military
assistance to the armed forces of Ukraine has continued
in the context of the full-scale invasion of Ukraine
launched by the Russian Federation on 24 February
2/21

12/09/2023

Much of the information on transfers of weapons
systems and ammunition flows from Governments is
available through open sources. These transfers have
reportedly included heavy conventional weapons such
as battle tanks, armoured combat vehicles, combat
aircraft, helicopters, large-calibre artillery systems,
missile systems and uncrewed combat aerial vehicles,
as well as remotely operated munitions, small arms
and light weapons and their ammunition. Over the last
months, reported transfers of arms and ammunition to
the Ukrainian defence forces have expanded.
There have also been reports of States transferring
or planning to transfer weapons, such as uncrewed
aerial vehicles and ammunition, to the Russian armed
forces, including for possible use in Ukraine.
Needless to say, any transfer of weapons must
take place within the applicable international legal
and policy frameworks, including relevant Security
Council resolutions. Any potential or suspected
violations of relevant Security Council resolutions
imposing sanctions or restrictive measures, if verified,
are very concerning.
Reports related to the transfer and use of cluster
munitions throughout the war are also very concerning.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly called for an
immediate end to the use of cluster munitions. In line
with his long-standing position, these weapons must be
consigned to history. Most recently, in his policy brief
on the New Agenda for Peace, the Secretary-General
has encouraged Member States to commit to reducing
the human cost of weapons, including by achieving
universal participation in treaties banning inhumane
and indiscriminate weapons, such as the Convention on
Cluster Munitions. We also take note of reports related
to the transfer of depleted uranium tank ammunition to
the Ukrainian forces.
The supply of weapons and ammunition into any
armed conflict situation raises significant concerns
about the potential escalation of violence and presents
significant risks of diversion and proliferation, even
after the conflict has ended. Measures to address
the risk of diversion of weapons and ammunition to
unauthorized end users and for unauthorized uses
are essential for preventing further instability and
insecurity in Ukraine, the region and beyond. Such
measures include the enforcement of marking practices,
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

comprehensive pre-transfer diversion risk assessments,
end-user certificates, including non-transfer clauses,
effective legal and enforcement measures and postshipment verifications. Requirements for preventing
the diversion of weapons include supply-chain
transparency and cooperation and information
exchange among importing, transit and exporting
States, as well as concrete measures such as marking,
tracing, effective accounting and comprehensive
record-keeping practices, the physical safeguarding
of arms and ammunition, customs and border-control
measures and diversion monitoring and analysis.
As I have said many times, transparency in arms
transfers is a crucial confidence-building measure that
can serve to reduce tensions and avoid ambiguities
among Member States. The United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms (UNROCA) remains a key
instrument in that regard. In its 30 years of operation,
178 Member States have submitted a report to UNROCA
at least once, and I call on all States to continue to
participate in the mechanism. UNROCA captures
around 90 per cent of global arms flows and can help
track influxes of weapons into conflict zones. Moreover,
the Arms Trade Treaty, the Firearms Protocol, the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, and its International Tracing Instrument,
are some of the arms-control instruments established
by States to prevent the diversion of conventional arms
and regulate the international arms trade.
I welcome the conclusion of the work of the Openended Working Group on Conventional Ammunition
and applaud the successful adoption of its final report
(see A/78/111), which contains the text of the new Global
Framework for Through-life Conventional Ammunition
Management. The Framework is a much-needed
instrument to more effectively counter the diversion
of conventional ammunition of all types that continue
to fuel instability, insecurity and conflict across
the world. I reiterate my call on all States to join the
relevant treaties and agreements and to fully implement
their legal obligations under the conventional armscontrol instruments to which they are party, as well as
their political commitments, to minimize the risk of the
diversion of arms and ammunition.
Beyond addressing arms transfers, all parties to
armed conflicts have a duty to protect civilians in armed
conflict and to ensure compliance with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian

S/PV.9415

law. From 24 February 2022 to 27 August of this year,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights recorded 26,717 civilian casualties
in Ukraine, with 9,511 killed and 17,206 injured. The
actual figures are likely to be considerably higher.
The vast majority of civilian casualties have been the
result of the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects, including by shelling from artillery, tanks,
multiple-launch rocket systems, cruise and ballistic
missiles and by air strikes. The continued use of
large numbers of armed uncrewed aerial vehicles
against civilians and civilian infrastructure is
concerning. Armed uncrewed aerial vehicles must not
be used in a manner inconsistent with international
humanitarian law.
The Secretary-General has unequivocally urged
all sides to avoid the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas, as their use is highly likely to result
in indiscriminate harm, including in Ukraine. I would
like to take this opportunity to call on all Member
States to implement in a broad and meaningful manner
the Political Declaration adopted in November 2022
on strengthening the protection of civilians from the
humanitarian consequences arising from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. The continued
and intensified attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure and services in Ukraine, including
energy infrastructure, health and educational facilities,
ports, roads, bridges and grain facilities, remain
very alarming.
Under international humanitarian law, parties to an
armed conflict are prohibited from targeting civilians
and civilian objects, including civilian infrastructure,
and have the responsibility to take all feasible
precautions in the conduct of military operations in
order to avoid, or at least minimize, the incidental
loss of civilian life, injury to civilians and damage to
civilian objects. The United Nations strongly condemns
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure
and urges for their immediate cessation. Mines and
explosive remnants of war have resulted in widespread
land contamination, which renders land unusable
for agriculture while impeding people’s movement.
I reiterate my call to all the relevant parties to abide
by their obligations under the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and not to transfer or use any
mines prohibited by its Amended Protocol II.
The past 18 months have seen death, loss, unbearable
suffering and devastation in Ukraine. The world cannot

23-265493/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

afford for this senseless war to continue. I appeal to
all Member States to make every effort for peace. As
the Secretary-General has repeatedly emphasized,
the United Nations is committed to supporting all
meaningful efforts to bring a just and sustainable peace
to Ukraine guided by the Charter, international law and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Szamuely.
Mr. Szamuely: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me the opportunity to address the
Security Council.
This is a war that could easily have been avoided.
On 17 December 2021, Russia published two draft
proposals outlining a new security architecture for
Europe — one for the United States and one for NATO.
The proposed framework recalled the Helsinki Final
Act of 1975, in which the mutually antagonistic parties
of the Cold War agreed to recognize one another’s
security concerns and pledged not to enhance their own
security at the expense of their purported adversaries.
At the heart of Russia’s proposals was a commitment
by NATO to no further expansion, and in particular to
no NATO membership for Ukraine. There was nothing
unreasonable about the demands that could not have
been addressed with a little deft diplomacy. There are
many countries in the world, even in Europe, that do
not join military alliances. Russia was not demanding
a military alliance with Ukraine but merely requesting
that its neighbour, with which it shared a centurieslong history, not join a hostile military alliance. Neither
the United States nor NATO deigned to respond to
Russia’s proposals.
Let us recall that in its 1990 Declaration of
State Sovereignty, Ukraine avowed its intention of
becoming “a permanently neutral State that does not
participate in military blocs”. We should also recall
that although at its 2008 Bucharest summit NATO had
promised membership for Ukraine and Georgia, there
was no desire on the part of the people of Ukraine
to join NATO. A May 2009 Gallup poll showed that
Ukrainians were more than twice as likely to see NATO
as a threat than as a source of protection. A September
2009 Pew Research Center survey found that 51 per
cent of Ukrainians opposed NATO membership, with
only 28 per cent in favour. In February 2010, Viktor
Yanukovych ran for the presidency of Ukraine on a
4/21

12/09/2023

platform pledging not to join NATO or any military
alliance. Following his election victory, Yanukovych
submitted a bill to Ukraine’s Parliament barring
Ukraine’s membership in any military bloc. In other
words, through the democratic process, Ukraine had
declared itself a militarily non-aligned State.
That all changed following the illegal and violent
overthrow of the elected Government of Yanukovych
on 22 February 2014. The coup d’état was actively
supported by the United States and the European Union
(EU). That is no conspiracy theory. We need just to
recall the leaked phone call between Assistant Secretary
of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria
Nuland and United States Ambassador to Ukraine
Geoffrey Pyatt. During the call, which took place weeks
before the coup, the two United States officials happily
discussed who would and who would not be part of the
post-Yanukovych regime. How did the NATO Powers
react to the coup? The very same countries that today
vent their fury at those who ousted the legally elected
Government of the Niger exulted in the toppling of the
legally elected Government of Ukraine.
Within two days, EU Foreign Policy Chief
Catherine Ashton was in Kyiv to discuss EU support for
a “lasting solution to the political crisis and measures
to stabilize the economic situation”. A couple of days
later, it was the turn of Deputy United States Secretary
of State William Burns, who, according to the State
Department, went to consult on United States support
for Ukraine’s efforts to secure a stable, democratic,
inclusive, prosperous future.
United States Treasury Secretary Jack Lew
encouraged the new leaders to begin discussions with the
International Monetary Fund on an assistance package.
The United Kingdom’s Chancellor of the Exchequer,
George Osborne, immediately offered cash, stating
“We are ready to help. Just as soon as there is
someone at the end of the telephone, we will be
there with a cheque-book to help the people of
Ukraine rebuild their country”.
The European Commission announced that it was ready
to conclude a trade deal with Ukraine and offer aid once
a new Government was formed.
In reality, no one was waiting for any elections.
On 21 March, one month after the coup and before
any elections had been held, the illegally constituted
regime in Kyiv and the European Union signed the
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

EU Association Agreement, the very Agreement that
Yanukovych, in accordance with his legally defined
powers, had decided to delay signing. One should add
that the Association Agreement had a strong security
and defence component. Ukraine and the EU agreed to
“promote gradual convergence in the area of
foreign and security policy, including the Common
Security and Defence Policy”.
The Common Security and Defence Policy, of course, is
a backdoor into NATO.
President of the European Council Herman Van
Rompuy issued a statement congratulating the people
of Ukraine for taking to the streets and using violence
to ensure that the Association Agreement was signed.
“The refusal to sign the Association Agreement with
the European Union created a popular uprising, a
political and cultural shift. We pay tribute to those
who gave their life for freedom”.
And he went on to say, without a trace of irony, that the
Agreement
“recognizes the aspirations of the people of
Ukraine to live in a country governed by values, by
democracy and the rule of law”.
The most important consequence of the coup was
the disenfranchisement of the people of the east and the
south-east of Ukraine — Yanukovych’s base of support.
Much like sovereign people anywhere else in the world,
they did not appreciate the violent overthrow of the
leader for whom they had voted, and they refused to
accept the legitimacy of the coup regime.
Today the United States is sending people to prison
for decades for calling into question the integrity of
the 2020 election. And yet the people of Donbas were
supposed to sit quietly and accept an illegal seizure of
power, one that was, at least in part, orchestrated from
abroad. Let us also not forget that, as its first order of
business, the coup regime, in order to demonstrate its
respect for diversity and European values, scrapped
a minority language law, passed by Ukraine’s
Parliament in 2012, that had granted regional language
status — meaning that it could be used in courts,
schools and Government institutions — to Russian
and other minority languages in any region where a
minority exceeded 10 per cent of the population. That
was obviously a matter of some concern to the Russianspeaking residents of Donbas.

S/PV.9415

Not surprisingly, the disenfranchised rebelled
against Ukraine’s new rulers, who responded to that act
of defiance with overwhelming force. NATO responded
by going all-in to support the rulers in Kyiv as they
waged a war against their own people. Just listen to the
words of NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg:
“NATO allies have supported Ukraine since
2014. We did not wake up in February 2022. The
Ukrainian armed forces are much better equipped,
much better trained, much larger and much better
commanded in 2022 than in 2014, not least because
of the support, the training and the equipment
they have received for many years from the NATO
allied countries”.
Note his words. NATO was pouring in weaponry
and providing training to the Armed Forces of Ukraine
from 2014 onwards.
What was supposed to be happening during those
years? Of course, it was the implementation of the Minsk
accords. The Minsk accords constituted a step-by-step
reconciliation process, signed by the Kyiv Government
and the representatives of the breakaway regions, which
would have led to their reintegration into Ukraine. The
key condition was to be a constitutional amendment
granting the breakaway regions special status. France,
Germany and Russia served as guarantors. The
Security Council endorsed the Minsk accords in 2015,
in resolution 2202 (2015).
We now know that neither Kyiv nor France nor
Germany took their pledges seriously. Former Ukraine
President Petro Poroshenko, who signed the Minsk
Agreements on behalf of Ukraine, has admitted that
he never had the slightest intention of fulfilling their
terms. What is the result of the Minsk agreement? As
he boasted a few months ago,
“We win eight years to create an army. We win
eight years to restore the economy”.
Former German Chancellor Angela Merkel has also
admitted that Minsk was never anything more than a
mechanism to buy time for Ukraine. As Merkel told the
weekly Die Zeit last December,
“The 2014 Minsk Agreement was an attempt to give
Ukraine time ... It also used this time to become
stronger, as you can see today”.
And she went on,

23-265495/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

“It was clear to all of us that this was a frozen
conflict, that the problem had not been solved, but
that is precisely what gave Ukraine valuable time”.
In other words, she pretended to go along with Minsk
even though she had not believed in it for a second.
Former French President François Hollande echoed
Merkel. As he told The Kyiv Independent last December,
“Since 2014, Ukraine has strengthened its
military posture. Indeed, the Ukrainian army was
completely different from that of 2014. It was better
trained and equipped. It is the merit of the Minsk
Agreements to have given the Ukrainian army
this opportunity”.
From 2014 onwards, the NATO Powers continued
to pour arms into Ukraine, pretending to be interested
in implementing Minsk, while in reality encouraging
Ukraine to resolve the problem of Donbas by force. The
result was some 14,000 deaths in Donbas.
Since February 2022, NATO countries have
continued pouring weaponry into Ukraine. The list
is mind-blowing — shoulder-fired man-portable air
defence systems, anti-ship missiles, anti-aircraft
missiles, Stinger missiles, tanks, armoured personnel
carriers, fighting vehicles, attack helicopters, howitzers,
multiple-launch rocket systems, High Mobility
Artillery Rocket Systems, drones, anti-tank missiles,
patriot missile systems, long-range cruise missiles,
depleted uranium shells and cluster munitions. Ukraine
is now promised F-16 fighter aircraft and long-range
Army Tactical Missile Systems. In addition, NATO
countries, particularly the United States, have provided
tactical intelligence to Ukraine, enabling it to target
and kill Russians.
What the NATO Powers have notably failed to do
is offer a convincing explanation as to what they are
trying to achieve. President Biden once suggested that
the goal was regime change. Defence Secretary Lloyd
Austin said the objective is to degrade Russia’s military
capability. United States National Security Adviser
Jake Sullivan says that it is all about not “letting Russia
run roughshod over Ukraine”, something that would
allegedly place the continent of Europe at military risk.
United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken
claims that investing in Ukraine’s strength paves the
way for diplomacy. Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom James Cleverly claims that
6/21

12/09/2023

“giving the Ukrainians the tools they need to finish
the job is the swiftest path to peace.”
NATO’s Stoltenberg says,
“the more gains Ukraine makes, the stronger their
hand will be at the negotiating table”.
None of that makes the slightest sense. Does
anyone seriously believe that, as soon as Ukraine
makes serious gains, the NATO Powers will decide to
call it a day and demand that Ukraine head towards
the negotiating table? Of course not. Any Ukrainian
success would immediately be touted as a reason for
stepping up military deliveries.
That is why today there is no diplomacy and
no negotiating table. Former Israeli Prime Minister
Naftali Bennett has disclosed that he came close to
reaching a peace agreement within a few days of the
start of the war. As Bennett described the agreement,
Ukraine would pledge not to join NATO, and Russia
would abandon its goal of the so-called demilitarization
and de-Nazification of Ukraine. However, according
to Bennett, Western leaders — Boris Johnson in
particular — blocked the deal. The pattern was to
be repeated in Istanbul at the end of March. A peace
agreement was in the offing, but then Boris Johnson
flew to Kyiv and urged Zelenskyy to drop the idea.
Putin was a war criminal, Johnson said. He should be
crushed, not negotiated with. Even if Ukraine were
ready to sign a deal, Johnson told Zelenskyy, the NATO
powers were not. Following the collapse of the talks,
Türkiye’s Foreign Minister declared: “There are those
within the NATO member States that want the war to
continue and Russia to get weaker.” The truth is that
key NATO Powers want to keep the war going because
Russians are dying, and military contractors and their
lobbyists are getting rich. United States politicians
are at least honest about admitting this. Just listen to
Senator Richard Blumenthal, who said,
“We are getting our money’s worth on our
Ukraine investment. For less than 3 per cent of our
nation’s military budget, we have enabled Ukraine
to degrade Russia’s military strength by half. All
without a single American servicewoman or man
injured or lost.”
Senator Mitt Romney said that the money spent
on Ukraine was the best national defence spending
the United States had ever done, losing no lives while
diminishing and devastating the Russian military.
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

And of course, it was Senator Lindsey Graham who
famously chirped, “Russians are dying.… Best money
[we have] ever spent.”
To sum up, the NATO Powers embarked on a
deliberately provocative policy back in 2008 when they
offered NATO membership to a country that was not
interested in it. They doubled down on the policy when
they supported the overthrow of an elected Government
in 2014, then compounded their errors by pouring in
weaponry for eight years, refusing to implement the
Minsk agreements and ignoring Russian warnings
about red lines. Now they are keeping a war going, even
as casualties continue to mount and the dangers of world
war — and therefore of nuclear conflict — continue
to escalate.
The President: I thank Mr. Szamuely for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We convened today’s meeting primarily to
discuss once again the significance for the prospects for
resolving the Ukrainian crisis of the country’s Western
sponsors’ unfettered supply of various types of weapons
to their underlings in Kyiv. Our briefer, Mr. George
Szamuely, has just reminded us very professionally
of its true genesis. We have been urging the Council
to consider the subject almost every month, and every
time we find new issues that support our discussion.
For example, we heard directly from Ukrainian and
United States officials recently that Kyiv has already
received more than $100 billion in military and other
assistance from the United States and its allies, while as
a result of last week’s visit to Ukraine by Secretary of
State Blinken there was another handout of more than
$1 billion.
The Kyiv regime is begging for new weapons
with redoubled pressure and unconcealed insolence,
attempting to blame the obvious failure of the so-called
counter-offensive that has been under way since the
beginning of June on Western countries. All kinds of
trickery and shenanigans are at work here. For example,
just before Secretary Blinken’s visit last week, the
Zelenskyy regime used an old trick to commit a
bloody provocation, launching a missile attack on a
market in Kostiantynivka that it immediately tried to
pin on Russia. Except that the facts were caught on
surveillance cameras and showed up online, foiling the

S/PV.9415

Kyiv provocateurs’ plot. The video clearly shows that
the missile came from areas under the control of the
Armed Forces of Ukraine. As a result, we are now seeing
that the Kyiv regime and its sponsors are trying to shut
the story down rather than draw extra attention to it,
just as they did after they botched a similar provocation
when they shelled the railway station in Kramatorsk
in April 2022, when the evidence of witnesses to the
crime published on social networks clearly pointed to
the Ukrainian forces’ guilt.
In the light of the obvious failures at the front,
which can no longer be concealed, it seems that the
chiefs of the Kyiv regime have begun to lose their nerve.
In a recent interview with The Economist magazine,
Zelenskyy, the leader of the Kyiv junta, lamenting
the fact that Ukraine’s support among Western voters
is plummeting, resorted to direct threats, saying
that it was impossible to predict how the millions of
Ukrainian refugees in European countries would react
to their country being abandoned. The Ukrainian
Foreign Minister, Kuleba, also gave way to rudeness
in his response to Germany’s Foreign Minister,
Ms. Baerbock, when she said that her country had not
yet made a decision on the delivery of long-range Taurus
missiles. He said that Germany would supply them with
the missiles anyway and that it was just a matter of
time, but that he did not understand why time was being
wasted. We are all generally accustomed to Ukraine’s
continued contemptuous treatment of Germany, ever
since Chancellor Scholz was described as “an offended
liver sausage”, but such rudeness in intergovernmental
contacts is still quite rare.
And yesterday Mykhailo Podolyak, Ukraine’s
presidential adviser, referred to the United Nations as
a money-making office that is not fulfilling its original
functions. To quote him,
“We will not get them to renounce their own
pointlessness. The fact is that United Nations is
absent as an organization. I would say that it is a
public relations or lobbying office to make money
to support the comfortable retirement of the
people who occupy various leadership positions.
The emotions that the United Nations evokes will
always be negative, just like any other international
institution — the International Atomic Energy
Agency, some international red cross or other,
Amnesty International — they are all fictitious
organizations that clog our consciousness with
absolutely rubbish assessments. If they did not

23-265497/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

exist, we would probably have resolved many issues
better and quicker.”
In the Ukrainians’ understanding, therefore,
Mrs. Nakamitsu and her Secretary-General did
not report to the Security Council today, but rather
“clogged our consciousness with absolutely rubbish
assessments”. That is how, in the face of imminent
military and political bankruptcy, the Kyiv regime is
beginning to completely lose its self-control.
The nervousness on the part of the Kyiv clique is
understandable. Despite the fact that support for Ukraine
by its Western sponsors has reached an unprecedented
level, the country has been unable to back it up with
action. We have already spoken about the so-called
counter-offensive, which is a blatant fiasco. The
equipment supplied to the Kyiv regime, including the
lauded American Bradley armoured personnel carriers
and German Leopard and British Challenger tanks,
are going up in smoke. Incidentally, we would like to
suggest to our British colleagues that they should update
the information on their Ministry of Defence website,
which still states that not a single Challenger has been
destroyed on the battlefield, whereas in fact at least two
have already been destroyed in Ukraine, while the other
12 may still be trundling around somewhere but will
receive the same fate, just like the American Abrams
tanks and F-16 fighter jets. Many leading experts are
already warning loudly that pumping the Kyiv regime
full of new weapons makes no sense at all, given the
insoluble logistical and maintenance problems. And the
Western militaries must surely realize that too.
The Western countries’ main priority is therefore
not to achieve a military defeat of Russia, which is by
definition impossible, but to do as much damage to it as
possible along with inflicting the maximum amount of
pollution and damage on the territories that have joined
our country. Just as the Western colonizers once used
scorched-earth tactics in Africa and Asia and sowed
vast areas of Indochina, Syria and Afghanistan with
mines and unexploded ordnance, so now are they acting
in southern and eastern Ukraine.
It is enough here to remind the Council that this
year the United Kingdom has supplied the Armed
Forces of Ukraine with depleted uranium shells. The
United States, which appears to be preparing a base for
sending its Abrams tanks to the Ukrainians, may also
be supplying Kyiv with similarly dangerous weapons in
the near future. We are now seeing active hypocrisy at
8/21

12/09/2023

work in a campaign in the West claiming that depleted
uranium shells are not in the least harmful. They will
soon be proving that they are actually good for our
health. In that regard, I would like to recall the trial that
took place in Italy after more than 7,000 soldiers — 400
of whom died — were poisoned by NATO forces in
Yugoslavia due to the use of such munitions. Of course,
no one in the West remembers that Serbs, obviously,
suffered too.
Another issue deserving special attention is that of
the cluster munitions that the United States is supplying
to Ukraine in large quantities, partly because there is
very little conventional ammunition left in NATO’s
stores. It is being presented to the public in such a way
as to say that cluster munitions produced in the United
States pose no threat to civilians and are high-tech,
while the rest are all no good and dangerous because
of their high percentages of unexploded submunitions.
That of course is contrary to elementary facts. For
example, in its World Report 2023, Human Rights
Watch representatives say that civilians accounted for
95 per cent of the victims of cluster munitions last year,
primarily in Iraq, Laos, Lebanon, Myanmar, Syria and
Ukraine, with 71 per cent of all victims being children.
Among them are the residents of Izyum who died in
2022 as a result of shelling by Ukrainian forces, which
we have spoken about in detail at previous meetings.
The organization called the United States’ decision to
supply cluster bombs to Ukraine as unconscionable. In
response, according to reports, the Biden Administration
is preparing a decision to supply the Kyiv regime with
long-range missiles with cluster munitions. In this case,
according to the United States Congressional Research
Service, up to one third of the new munitions may fail to
explode and remain in the ground as a threat to civilians
for decades. And that is depite the fact that, according
to the unanimous opinion of military experts, cluster
munitions will not give Ukraine an advantage on the
battlefield, as they have far less penetration power than
conventional weapons.
What are the principles guiding Washington and
London in authorizing such obvious crimes? Do our
colleagues have any shred of decency left? They clearly
did not have a shred of decency when they razed to
the ground peaceful cities in Yugoslavia, Libya, Iraq,
Syria, Afghanistan and, in the past, Indochina and
other regions, so why would they now, when they are
waging a proxy war in Ukraine against Russia, to the
last Ukrainian?
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The fact that the United States is the real puppeteer
behind the Kyiv regime was clearly demonstrated
yesterday by Mark A. Milley, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff of the United States Army, who
invited CBS reporters to the situation room, where the
situation on the battlefield is monitored in real time
by satellites. In doing so, the general did not hide the
fact that the Americans are passing to Kyiv all that
intelligence, including locations of objects deep behind
Russian lines. Washington therefore has no desire to
end this war — a war that is, above all, enriching the
United States significantly. We have already spoken
at previous meetings about the fantastic profits that
Western corporations are making and the fact that a
significant portion of the funds allocated to Ukraine
do not leave the territory of the United States or that of
other Western sponsors of the Kyiv regime.
There has recently been much evidence of
unprecedented corruption in that context. For example,
with regard to the United States’ active use of grey
schemes to supply arms to Ukraine, there is one more
story worth mentioning. Recently, the American
media published information about the role played in
that process by American arms dealer Marc Morales,
who was indicted on money laundering charges in the
United States back in 2009. Thanks to his contracts with
the Pentagon and his personal ties with the Ukrainian
military command, Mr. Morales’ company has become
a crucial link in the supply of arms and ammunition to
Ukraine for the latter’s Soviet-era systems. As a result,
Mr. Morales has enriched himself by several hundreds
of millions of dollars. That means that a businessman is
receiving contracts and backing from the United States
Government to supply arms to another State. One can
only imagine the level of corruption that exists not only
in full view of the United States authorities, but also
with their direct support. According to information
from journalists, the United States began to engage
in such shadow cooperation with Ukraine at least a
year before the beginning of Russia’s special military
operation in Ukraine.
Can we really expect our greedy American
colleagues to give up that extremely profitable business
project in the name of peace? There are big doubts
about that, as the thirst for profit runs through the veins
of all segments of the American political and business
elite. According to an article by The New York Times,
a new factory is being built in the town of Mesquite,
Texas, United States, to produce artillery shells for the

S/PV.9415

Ukrainian army. It is worth noting that when voices of
common sense in the area began to speak up to call for
an end to the insane pumping of weapons to the Kyiv
regime, they immediately came under harsh criticism
from a number of local lawmakers. Do Council
members know why? One of the opinions cited in the
article was that:
“This will create manufacturing jobs in the
United States. [The lawmakers who oppose it are]
saying no to the people they are representing”.
Even the newspaper itself shares that view and
believes that the effort to arm Ukraine, combined
with Kyiv’s seemingly insatiable need for weapons
and ammunition, has prompted a defence-production
bonanza in the United States. This situation represents
the ugly truth of the American position in support of
Ukraine: in addition to enabling the pursuit of dubious
geopolitical goals, it is also an opportunity to make
money — good money — off the pain and suffering
of others.
Against that backdrop, Ukraine itself continues
to slip into the abyss of totalitarian dictatorship, in
which any alternative or inconvenience to the ruling
regime’s point of view is denied. At the same time,
the current authorities in Kyiv are basing their policies
on the glorification of Nazi ideology and elevating
Hitler’s henchmen to the rank of heroes. In addition to
that, there is rampant corruption throughout Ukraine’s
echelons of power, which is only gaining momentum
in view of the impressive amounts of financial and
other material aid coming from the West. Even Kyiv’s
most ardent allies recognize the alarming scale of such
corruption. One of the ugliest ways it manifests is in the
Kyiv regime’s attitude towards its own citizens, both in
the form of accepting bribes for excuses from military
service — from which the children of Ukraine’s elite
are of course already safe — and in the way it uses
Ukrainian refugees as pawns.
In fact, only in Russia do those refugees feel
protected by the law. According to information from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, since February of last year, 2,852,000
people have left the territory of Ukraine for Russia.
If we add to them the 3 million residents of Donbas
who left for Russia after the civil war unleashed by
the Kyiv regime in 2014, our country can rightfully be
considered one of the main host States for Ukrainians in
distress. We see a completely different attitude towards

23-265499/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

Ukrainian refugees in Europe. Despite the European
Union’s thundering statements about the provision of
assistance, the rights of Ukrainian refugees are not
guaranteed or protected. The most vulnerable categories
of citizens — women and children — are particularly
at risk, namely, of separation from their families,
involvement in criminal activities and exploitation.
Such unpleasant facts are becoming increasingly
difficult to conceal.
Ukrainians are also becoming victims of organ
trafficking. There is growing evidence of a flourishing
black market for organs for transplant in the country. To
that end, the country passed the necessary legislation.
For example, a law was recently created to regulate the
transplanting of human anatomical materials, according
to which it is no longer required to notarize the written
consent of a living donor or his or her relatives for
transplantation — the authentication of signatures
is not required. Essentially, it has been authorized to
extract organs from children as well. The procedure
for the removal of organs from deceased persons who,
while still alive, did not give their consent to donate
their organs after death has been simplified. Permission
to extract bio- or anatomical materials from the body of
a deceased person can be obtained from the person in
charge who is obliged to bury the deceased person — for
example, from the head doctor of a hospital or the head
of a military unit. The right to perform transplants has
been granted to not only public but also private clinics.
Thanks to another law, organ transplant operations
are exempt from value added tax. That policy, in a
most favourable environment, is actively being used by
criminals. Organs are being traded on the dark web — and
not only there. For example, in June, a man — an
employee of a certain charitable organization — was
detained on the Ukraine-Slovakia border for engaging
in in the trafficking of Ukrainian children abroad,
including for organ transplants. Tellingly, the bail set
by the court for the criminal amounted to only 1 million
hryvnia. After the bail was paid, that man accused of
committing a serious crime was released, and now
he is gone without a trace. Apparently, the Ukrainian
Government is covering up this gruesome business.
Are our former Western partners going to ring the
alarm bells? I highly doubt it.
In that context, it is worth recalling the crimes
that were committed by the Kosovo militants, with
the complicity of their Albanian accomplices and with
the connivance of the occupying NATO contingents,
10/21

12/09/2023

during the aggression against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. In particular, there is documented
evidence that from 1998 to 2000, the fighters of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) kidnapped some 300
Serbs, Roma and disloyal Albanians in the province.
Those people were transported to makeshift prisons in
Albania, after which the prisoners were filtered out for
health reasons and their kidneys and other organs were
taken at transit points for further transport to Europe
and sale on the black market. The so-called donors
were detained near the Albanian town of Fushe-Kruje.
Upon receipt of the order, they were shot in the back
of the head, and the organs were taken abroad through
Tirana International Airport. Those inhumane crimes
were described in a book by Carla Del Ponte, former
Prosecutor for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), entitled The Hunt: Me and the War
Criminals, published in 2008, and in a report on KLA
atrocities dated 7 January 2011 by the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, authored by Swiss
lawyer Dick Marty. A confidential contribution on
that topic was also prepared on 30 October 2003 by
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
In April 2004, a delegation from the ICTY and
UNMIK travelled to the vicinity of Burrel in Albania,
where, according to eyewitnesses, organ removal
operations had taken place. The delegation visited
a so-called “lunatic asylum” in the village of Ripa,
where traces of illegal organ removal operations
were found in one of the rooms. But in 2005, the
ICTY Prosecutor’s Office destroyed all the evidence
collected. Characteristically, Albania in 2008 refused
Serbia’s proposal for a joint investigation and for many
years has been avoiding the admission of Serbian and
international experts into its territory. That makes it
impossible to locate and identify the alleged burials of
the KLA’s victims. So, indeed, without a body, there is
no crime. At the same time, it is known that, even after
2000, those in Kosovo conducting organ transplants
continued their criminal business in cooperation with
organized criminal groups, in the Medicus clinic in
Pristina. The victims of those crimes were people from
Eastern Europe and Central Asia.
Since the NATO countries that served as cover for
that inhuman business are the same countries that have
now taken Ukraine under their wing, it is obvious that
not only Ukrainian citizens on the territory controlled
by the Kyiv regime but also Ukrainian refugees in the
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

European Union face a serious danger. It is first and
foremost Ukrainian women and their children who
ended up in Europe who are at great risk. We call on
international non-governmental organizations and
others to pay particular attention to their protection
from those unscrupulous characters.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her latest briefing
on this issue today. Her leadership and the continuing
efforts of the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs in the global effort to counter weapons diversion
remain essential.
This is the fifth meeting Russia has requested on
this subject in six months. This latest request is yet
a further signal — as though we needed it — of the
depth of Russia’s cynicism and willingness to waste
the Security Council’s time, attention and resources.
Russian officials seem to continue to think that they
can distract us from the Kremlin’s actions undermining
international peace and security, including through
Russia’s irresponsible nuclear rhetoric; through its
ongoing efforts to unlawfully procure arms from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in violation
of the Council’s own resolutions; through procuring
armed drones from Iran, used to attack Ukrainian
civilian infrastructure; and through endangering cargo
vessels in the Black Sea.
However, Russia should disabuse itself of the
illusion that we will be distracted from the darker
reality we face; we will not be. We last met on this topic
not even four weeks ago (see S/PV.9399). Since then,
Russia’s daily rocket and drone attacks have continued
to hit Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure and kill innocent
people. Just recently, on 6 September, a Russian missile
tore through the Ukrainian city of Kostiantynivka,
killing 17 people. Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine
is the true and undeniable cause aggravating the crisis
and undermining efforts to find a peaceful solution.
After the United States exposed the November
2022 transfer of infantry rockets and missiles from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to Russia’s
Wagner Group, we have warned that Russia is actively
seeking to acquire additional munitions, including
through leader-level discussions, from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Security Council
resolutions prohibit all Member States from procuring
arms or related materiel from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. By continuing that relationship,

S/PV.9415

Russia would receive significant quantities and
multiple types of munitions for the Russian military
to use against Ukraine. Those potential deals could
also include the provision of raw materials that would
assist Russia’s defence industrial base. In tandem, any
revenue that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
receives from such transfers could be channelled by
Pyongyang to further develop its unlawful weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic missile programmes.
We will continue to identify, expose and counter
Russia’s attempts to acquire military equipment from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or any other
State that is prepared to support Russia’s war against
Ukraine. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to cease its efforts to transfer arms to Russia.
We also urge all Member States to remind Russia of
its Security Council obligations and to remind Russia
that any transfer of arms between the two countries
would violate the United Nations arms embargo on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which Russia
itself voted to adopt.
Unfortunately, as we know, this is not the only
time Russia has violated a Security Council resolution
to procure arms. There is extensive documentation of
Russia receiving hundreds of uncrewed aerial vehicles
from Iran for use against Ukraine. The documentation
includes recently downgraded information provided
by the United States Defense Intelligence Agency and
shared with the Council. Such transfers are violations
of resolution 2231 (2015), and we know those weapons
have been used in attacks on Ukrainian civilian
infrastructure. The United states, along with other
Member States, have called on the Secretary-General
to authorize an investigation into the serious violations
of resolution 2231 (2015). We are still waiting for a
substantive response to that request. Moreover, Russia
has refused to allow the examination of evidence of
Iranian transfers of those uncrewed aerial vehicles and
has instead worked actively to prevent an investigation
by the Secretariat. Those acts only further demonstrate
Russia’s continued attempts to undermine the credibility
of the Council.
The United States will continue to demonstrate its
enduring commitment to supporting Ukraine’s selfdefence, including through the provision of arms and
equipment that enable Ukraine to defend its territory
and protect its people from Russia’s unprovoked and
unjustified war of aggression. Let me be clear — this
support for Ukraine is being carried out responsibly. By

23-2654911/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

helping Ukraine and neighbouring States account for
and safeguard arms and ammunition during transfer,
in storage and when deployed, by strengthening border
management and security in Ukraine and neighbouring
States and by building the capacity of relevant
government agencies to deter, detect and interdict illicit
trafficking of certain weapons, we are taking concrete
steps to address threats posed by the potential diversion
of weapons.
In fact, as we work closely with Ukraine and other
partners to ensure our military assistance is properly
safeguarded and used appropriately by Ukraine in
its self-defence, Russia remains at this stage the only
known vector of diversion of advanced conventional
weapons. If Russia were concerned about reducing
conflict and mitigating the potential diversion of illicit
weapons, it would choose to end the war it started and
withdraw its forces, rather than escalate with nuclear
rhetoric, barrages of missiles, human rights abuses and
war crimes, crimes against humanity and violation of
various Security Council resolutions and the Charter of
the United Nations. We once again renew our calls for
Russia to end its war and to do so immediately.
I would like to make a few points on cluster
munitions. Let me be clear — when used appropriately
against military targets, cluster munitions are an
effective battleground tool for the defeat of dismounted
infantry, including entrenched positions, and against
lightly armoured mobile forces, which reflects the
situation on the ground in Ukraine. The cluster
munitions that the United States is providing Ukraine
are tested and designed to maximize effect and limit
rates of failure. In contrast, since the start of the
full-scale war in Ukraine, Russia has employed highfailure-rate cluster munitions across the country.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Once again, by calling for a meeting on Western
arms deliveries to Ukraine, Russia would like to shift
onto others the responsibility for an illegal war that
it itself started. No one is fooled by this attempt at
disinformation. Let us not forget: it was Russia that
started a war of aggression contrary to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. It was Russia
that decided to undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. This aggression and Russia’s illegal
attempt to annex Ukrainian territories were condemned
by the General Assembly by a very large majority.
12/21

12/09/2023

Let us also recall that it is up to Russia to put an end
to this war, without prejudice to its own security. All it
would have to do is cease its aggression and withdraw
its troops from Ukrainian territory, as requested by
the International Court of Justice as early as 16 March
2022. Russia denounces the military support given by
Western countries to Ukraine, a State it is attacking.
However, to support its war of aggression, Russia is
obtaining combat drones from Iran and missiles and
ammunition from North Korea. In doing so, Russia
is violating resolutions and sanctions unanimously
adopted by the Council.
Ever since Russia started the war, France, along with
its partners, has chosen to support the Ukrainian people
in the exercise of its right to self-defence, in accordance
with Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are legally supplying Ukraine with equipment to bolster
its defence system. In particular, we have transferred
air-defence capabilities to Ukraine, helping it to defend
itself from indiscriminate Russian strikes against its
civilian infrastructure. The sole aim of that military aid
is to enable the Ukrainians to defend themselves, so
that credible negotiations can take place when Ukraine
decides to do so. Our aim in doing that is to create the
conditions for a fair and lasting diplomatic settlement
in line with international law. France will maintain its
support for as long as necessary, as it has committed
to do with its partners, to help the Ukrainian people
preserve their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
For more than a year and a half, the war has
caused immense suffering for the Ukrainian people
and catastrophic repercussions for the whole world,
in particular for populations in vulnerable countries,
especially in terms of food security.
We reiterate our commitment to a just and
lasting peace. That can be based only on respect for
international law and Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me start by thanking High Representative Nakamitsu
for her clear and expert briefing.
This weekend, a Russian missile struck a car
carrying humanitarian aid workers on the road
to Bahkmut, killing two and leaving others badly
injured — one of many attacks on those trying to
deliver essential humanitarian assistance.
Newly declassified United Kingdom intelligence
reveals that Russia fired multiple missiles at a Liberian23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

flagged cargo ship in the Black Sea on 24 August. It
is thanks only to Ukraine’s air defences, which shot
down the missiles, that Russia’s attacks on that civilian
ship failed.
Russia’s bombardment of Ukrainian ports and grain
infrastructure has destroyed 280,000 tons of grain. That
is enough to feed 1 million people for a whole year.
In short, Russia is employing the tactics of a bankrupt
aggressor that knows its military cannot win on the
battlefield and instead seeks desperate ways to inflict
pain on civilians and put pressure on the international
community. Therefore, let us call this meeting out for
the farce that it is. Russia is once again misusing the
Council in an attempt to obfuscate its responsibility for
atrocities in Ukraine.
Russia has convened the Council at the same
time as North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Un, crosses
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea/Russia
border for a meeting with President Putin. There is
incontrovertible evidence that Russia is negotiating
potential deals for significant quantities and multiple
types of munitions from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to be used against Ukraine. That
epitomizes the bare-faced hypocrisy that has come to
characterize Russia’s conduct on the international stage.
And in its pursuit of those weapons, Russia will violate
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions that
Russia itself voted for.
Ukraine and the whole international community
want a just and sustainable peace in line with the
Charter of the United Nations, as Group of 20 leaders
reiterated over the weekend. But the only peace that
is just, lasting and compatible with the Charter of the
United Nations is one that sees the full withdrawal of
all Russian forces.

S/PV.9415

violence in a war that has already claimed thousands of
innocent civilian victims and untold destruction to vital
civilian infrastructure.
We are deeply concerned by the intensification of
hostilities, at a time when many voices around the world
are calling for de-escalation, a cessation of combat and
a focus on constructive dialogue to find a peaceful
and lasting solution to the conflict. It goes without
saying that more weapons for belligerents means more
death and destruction and undoubtedly greater risks of
proliferation and insecurity in the medium term for the
entire region and beyond.
Massive rearmament of belligerents in Ukraine
undermines the considerable efforts made by the
international community in favour of disarmament
and the non-proliferation of weapons of all
kinds. The increase in the flow of weapons to the
region — whether for offensive or counter-offensive
reasons — clearly carries the risk of aggravating the
situation. The uncontrolled flow of arms and munitions
will undoubtedly fuel belligerence and frustrate
mediation efforts, making it even more difficult to find
a negotiated solution. Of course, the first victims will
continue to be innocent civilians.
It is an illusion on both sides to envisage peace
on the basis of a military victory. The acquisition of
new stockpiles of weapons risks further shattering the
peace and prolonging the conflict, with more serious
humanitarian consequences.

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu
for her edifying briefing. I listened carefully to the
statement of Mr. Szamuely.

I take this opportunity to underscore and recall
our common commitment, which is the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, that is, to protect the
peoples of the world from the scourge of war. In saying
that, I reiterate my country’s opposition to war. We
remain convinced that the most effective way to limit
the circulation of arms is to put an end to war. To
prolong this conflict is to condemn the region to longterm insecurity. The belligerents must step up their
efforts to prevent the risk of diversion of conventional
weapons by using existing regional and international
instruments and mechanisms, in particular the Arms
Trade Treaty and the International Tracing Instrument.

The issue that brings us together today is a recurrent
one on the Security Council’s agenda. Arms deliveries
continue to increase, and new military alliances
are announced, amplifying the risks of escalating

We call on all parties to prioritize dialogue and to
engage in negotiations in good faith, in order to silence
the weapons and lay the foundations for lasting peace
and peaceful coexistence.

Until then, we will continue to ensure that Ukraine
has the support it needs to exercise its right to selfdefence, in line with international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. We are proud to support Ukraine.

23-2654913/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirate): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her informative
briefing, and I welcome Ukraine’s participation in
today’s meeting.
All Members States of the United Nations have
the right to self-defence and to manage their national
security and defence systems, in line with the Charter of
the United Nations. It is also vital that risks associated
with the transfer, storage and deployment of weapons
are carefully managed. As we have seen in other
contexts, the threat of weapons ending up in the hands
of terrorist groups and other malign actors, which may
target civilians and negatively impact security and
stability, is significant. Preventing the diversion of
weapons to such groups is of particular consequence.
Given the interconnected nature of such challenges,
it is critical that competent national authorities
protect against the risk of weapons diversion and that
international actors cooperate, as appropriate, to bolster
those efforts.
The Council has recognized the need to address such
risks in different situations around the world, including
in December with the adoption of presidential statement
2022/7 condemning the flow of weapons, military
equipment, unmanned aerial systems and improvised
explosive device components to terrorist groups.
Last year, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Centre
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
released the technical guidelines to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 2370 (2017) and related
international standards and good practices on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons. The technical
guidelines provide practical tools that can support the
development and implementation of national policies
and facilitate international coordination. We encourage
all Member States to consult it, as appropriate.
The most effective way to mitigate the risks
associated with weapons transfers during wartime
is to end the war. We therefore repeat our call for
de-escalation and dialogue. The diplomatic path
towards peace remains fraught, but it is the only path
that offers hope in bringing about a just and sustainable
end to this devastating conflict, in line with the United
Nations Charter. The United Arab Emirates stands
ready to support all genuine efforts to that end.
14/21

12/09/2023

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the briefing by the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu.
I reiterate once again Ecuador’s position of rejection
of armed violence, militarization and weapons build-up.
I regret once again that the protracted invasion
against Ukraine continues to exacerbate global military
spending, which in 2022 already exceeded $2 trillion.
With regard to our concern about the threat to
peace, security and stability posed by the large-scale
flow of arms and munitions into any conflict situation,
we reiterate our call for the observance of current
standards and the setting of stricter standards for
marking, record-keeping and traceability of weapons
and ammunition. All weapons transfers must be
accompanied by measures aimed at preventing the
diversion, spread and escalation of the conflict. Such
efforts are also key to post-conflict recovery.
Furthermore, any supply of arms or ammunition
must be accompanied by assurances of respect for the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution
at the time of use. For that reason, we cannot support
the transfer or the use of cluster munitions.
An occupying Power — in this case, the Russian
Federation — cannot expect the invaded country to
not to defend its population and territory, which would
constitute a negation on various levels of the Charter of
the United Nations.
First, it would contravene Article 2, paragraph 4,
which stipulates:
“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
Secondly,
which states:

it

would

contravene

Article

51,

“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair
the inherent right of individual or collective selfdefence if an armed attack occurs against a Member
of the United Nations”.
Thirdly, as inscribed in the Preamble of the Charter,
in San Francisco,
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

the scourge of war” and for that end “to practice
tolerance and to live together in peace with one
another as good neighbours”.
Today this scourge continues to be inflicted on
the present generations of Ukrainians and Russians,
with incalculable global consequences. That is why we
insist that the Russian Federation definitively stop its
neocolonial military aggression, to silence the guns and
to give way to a peaceful solution framed in respect for
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her informative briefing and take note of
Mr. Szamuely’s statement.
It is regrettable that the Russian Federation has
once again called for a meeting to discuss the transfer
of weapons from the West to Ukraine. This meeting,
which is turning into a recurring item, is solely intended
to push Russia’s narrative to depict the aggressor as the
victim, and the victim as the aggressor. It is nothing
more than another blatant attempt by the Russian
Federation to justify the unjustifiable.
It goes without saying that this alternative version
of events conveniently leaves out the fact that on
24 February 2022, the Russian Federation chose to
violate the fundamental principles of international law
that bind us all and proceeded to launch an unprovoked
war of aggression against its sovereign neighbour. Those
actions are even more serious and worrisome when we
consider Russia’s role and responsibility as a permanent
member of the Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Our response also remains unchanged. We once again
strongly condemn Russia’s senseless and illegitimate
war against Ukraine. We reiterate our full support for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders. Equally, we
underline Ukraine’s right to self-defence, as enshrined
in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Russia’s continued escalation through the use of
missile and drone attacks all over Ukraine has killed
and wounded more than 410 civilians over the past
two weeks alone and damaged civilian infrastructure.
The recent missile attack perpetrated by Russia on a
market area in Kostiantynivka, in the Donetsk region,
is the latest shocking development in a long string of
atrocities since the unprovoked war of aggression. That
is unacceptable.

S/PV.9415

According to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, since February 2022 there have been at least
6,717 civilian casualties in Ukraine. Those are mostly
a result of the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects, including shelling from artillery, tanks,
multiple-launch rocket systems, cruise and ballistic
missiles and air strikes.
Malta echoes the Secretary-General’s call to avoid
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. They
cause indiscriminate harm and immense suffering.
We stress once again that civilians and civilian
infrastructure are not a target and urge Russia to cease
such attacks. Attacks against civilians constitute war
crimes. All efforts will be made for the perpetrators
to be held accountable. Those reprehensible actions
are the real obstacle to peace. Malta calls once again
for constructive dialogue and diplomacy to establish
lasting peace, stability and security.
In conclusion, we urge the Russian Federation
to end its hostilities and withdraw its military forces
and proxies from the entire internationally recognized
territory of Ukraine.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu and the other briefer for their presentation.
It is noteworthy that Russia has called for this
meeting on the same topic, yet again, in such a short
timespan. Throughout this period, member States
that are committed to upholding the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations have continued to support
Ukraine in exercising its right of self-defence to ensure
its sovereignty and territorial integrity in accordance
with the Charter and international law.
At the same time, we are observing flagrant
violations of the Charter by Russia, which is relentlessly
perpetuating its aggression. Nor can we overlook some
Member States’ intensified cooperation with Russia,
which is enabling such behaviour. We must not lose sight
of the overall picture. It is also troubling that Russia’s
attempts to repeatedly convene the Security Council
on the issue of Ukraine merely in order to retaliate are
squandering the Council’s valuable resources. Russia
should use its rich diplomatic experience and influence
to foster peace and stability rather than undermine
them. The path forward is unequivocal. Russia should
withdraw all its troops and military equipment from
Ukraine and focus its diplomatic skill on genuine
constructive efforts that uphold international law and
the principles enshrined in the Charter.

23-2654915/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

12/09/2023

Mrs. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her informative briefing. I also thank the civil-society
briefer, Mr. George Szamuely, for sharing his views.

withdraw its troops from the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine, in compliance with the rules of
international law and the core values of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Ghana continues to be deeply concerned about
the Russian Federation’s sustained aggression
against Ukraine and its implications for international
peace and security. We reiterate Ghana’s continuing
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders, and reaffirm
Ukraine’s inherent right to self-defence afforded by the
rules of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. As the Security Council once again addresses
the subject of the supply of weapons to Ukraine, our
view is that there is no alternative to winning the peace
in Ukraine. We continue to be mindful of the growing
numbers of civilian casualties and the threats posed to
international peace and security by the proliferation
of arms. Nothing is normal about the current security
and humanitarian situation in Ukraine, as ordinary and
innocent citizens continue to pay the price of the war
with their lives and livelihoods.

Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo Junior (Brazil): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Mr. Szamuely
for their briefings, and I welcome the representative of
Ukraine to this meeting.

We reiterate our calls to all sides to endeavour
to uphold the obligations imposed by international
humanitarian law for protecting civilian lives during war
and preserving life-supporting infrastructure. We also
re-emphasize the necessity for strict compliance by all
concerned States with their obligations under the Arms
Trade Treaty and other international arrangements in
order to safeguard against the diversion or illicit transfer
of conventional weapons to unintended recipients.

Our position has not changed since our previous
meeting on this issue last month (see S/PV.9399).
Brazil fully recognizes and upholds the right of all
States to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations. Without prejudice to that right,
we believe that the growing flow of weapons to any
conflict will not help to resolve it and bring about
lasting peace. In particular, the addition of increasingly
destructive weapons accelerates the spiral of armaments
and makes peace even more elusive, with consequences
well beyond the battlefield. Another factor of
instability brought about by the transfer of weapons
and ammunition to conflict zones is the constant risk
of diversion to non-State actors, including criminals
and terrorist groups. Brazil urges all Member States to
adhere to the Arms Trade Treaty and other instruments
with a view to preventing diversion.

Ghana strongly believes in the importance of
seeking an immediate end to the intensifying military
conflict, which we believe should be the focus of the
Security Council and the international community’s
attention while efforts are also made to facilitate
constructive dialogue between the warring parties. As
we have said in previous statements in the Council, the
security interests and concerns of the parties can best
be addressed by peaceful means, not through the barrel
of a gun. We therefore encourage the drawing of lessons
from past United Nations-mediated conflicts to support
a peaceful, comprehensive and lasting resolution of
the conflict between the Russian Federation and its
neighbour Ukraine.

All States must abide by their responsibility under
international humanitarian law. We reiterate our call
on all the parties to honour and respect international
humanitarian law and the fundamental principles that
distinguish combatants from civilians. There should be
no acceptable collateral damage when the stakes are
the welfare of civilians. We strongly urge the parties to
prevent harm to residential areas, energy and transport
infrastructure and port facilities. Nuclear civilian
installations are of particular concern and should be
carefully protected against any damage. The only truly
effective way to protect civilians, vital infrastructure
and economic activity is by ending the war. Only a
political solution that takes into account the purposes
and principles of the Charter and the legitimate security
concerns of all parties will bring about lasting peace.
Brazil once again renews its call for a de-escalation of
hostilities and for the establishment of negotiations,
either directly or through the other peaceful means
outlined in Article 33 of the Charter, which have brought
just and lasting solutions to so many other conflicts.

In conclusion, we call once again on the Russian
Federation to immediately and unconditionally

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-

16/21

23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

General and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing. I have also taken note of
Mr. Szamuely’s remarks.
While more than 500 days have gone by since Russia
began its military aggression against Ukraine, the
suffering and damage that have been inflicted have only
worsened. Switzerland firmly condemns the attacks by
Russia that target civilians and civilian infrastructure
in Ukraine or that affect them disproportionately.
They are destroying lives and livelihoods, forcing
people to leave their homes and creating enormous
humanitarian needs. Access to essential services,
including education, has also been affected. Only one
third of children in Ukraine are able to access full-time,
in-person education.
Besides that, the attacks on ports and grain
infrastructure continue. In addition to Russia’s decision
to discontinue its participation in the Black Sea initiative,
those attacks are affecting global food security. The
contamination of agricultural land by mines and
other explosive devices serves only to exacerbate the
difficulties associated with exporting products from
Ukraine. Switzerland reiterates its concern about the
effects of the war on the civilian population in Ukraine
and beyond. They are a direct consequence of Russia’s
military aggression, in flagrant disregard of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations. We reject any
attempt to justify such action or to lay the blame on
others for its consequences. We reiterate our call on
Russia to immediately take steps to de-escalate the
situation, cease all combat operations and withdraw
its troops from Ukrainian territory without delay. We
would also like to remind everyone that Ukraine, like
all States, has the right to self-defence and to defend its
territorial integrity and ensure its security.
International humanitarian law must be strictly
respected. The parties to conflicts have an obligation to
ensure that military operations safeguard the civilian
population and infrastructure at all times. In view of the
sad news that two humanitarian volunteers were killed
and two others wounded in the Donetsk region this past
weekend, I want to point out that they too are protected
by international humanitarian law. That is one more
incident added to the more than 100 others that have
already hampered aid operations in 2023.Humanitarian
action is particularly difficult in the areas that are under
Russian military control. It is deeply worrisome that

S/PV.9415

eastern Ukraine has become increasingly dangerous for
humanitarian workers.
Switzerland reaffirms its solidarity with all
Ukrainians. By redoubling our humanitarian and
peacebuilding efforts, we are putting their needs and
demands at the centre. We support an inclusive and
participatory reconstruction process as well as justice
for all victims and the fight against impunity.
Lastly, Switzerland welcomes and supports
diplomatic efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Mr. Szamuely
for their briefings.
As the crisis in Ukraine drags on, the international
community hopes for a ceasefire as soon as possible. A
number of countries have put forward peace initiatives,
but weapons are still flowing onto the battlefield
in increasing quantities and with more variety and
lethality, leading to an escalation of fighting on the
ground and more civilian casualties and turning the
situation into a vicious cycle. China has repeatedly
expressed its apprehension and concern about this at
previous Council meetings. Military confrontation is
not the way out of the Ukrainian crisis. Dialogue and
negotiations are key to restoring peace. We hope that
the parties concerned will respond positively to the
expectations and calls of the international community to
maintain calm, show restraint, meet each other halfway,
seek consensus and avoid aggravating the tensions.
The recently concluded Group of 20 Leaders’
Summit issued a joint statement that sent a unanimous
message on Ukraine. It was a result of joint efforts and
compromise by all the parties concerned and a positive
sign that the international community welcomed.
We hope that the Security Council will draw on its
wisdom and experience, refrain from deepening
existing divisions, stimulate more positive interaction,
effectively leverage the core role of the international
collective security mechanism, make good use of the
tools of the Charter of the United Nations for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, promote the implementation of
various peace initiatives and enable the situation to
progress towards peace and stability.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that, with regard to
the issue of Ukraine, China has always maintained that

23-2654917/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be safeguarded, and the purposes and principles
of the Charter should be respected. The legitimate
security concerns of all parties should be taken seriously
and all efforts conducive to a peaceful resolution of the
crisis should be supported. We are ready to continue
to strengthen dialogue and communication with all the
parties and to play a constructive role in promoting a
political settlement of the Ukrainian crisis.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank the
presidency of Albania for convening today’s briefing.
I also thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing,
and Mr. George Szamuely for his perspective on the
ongoing conflict.
The persistent conflict between Russia and
Ukraine, exacerbated by the surge in transfers of
weapons, poses a grave and imminent threat to global
peace and security. Now, as the military hostilities
mark a 565th day without any visible prospects for a
settlement, we must brace ourselves for the grim reality
of a prolonged war characterized by devastation,
attrition, an increasing toll on innocent civilians and
a consequent dire humanitarian situation. Mozambique
has consistently voiced its concerns, and we again
urgently call for an immediate cessation of hostilities.
That, we maintain, remains the best hope for a peaceful
resolution of the armed conflict.
Regrettably, any eagerness to find common ground
or compromise seems conspicuously missing between
the warring parties. Instead, there seems to be an
inclination to await a favourable outcome determined
by sheer military might. With every passing day of
conflict and the swelling stockpiles of weaponry, the
fear of a misjudgment or an oversight that could lead
to a further and more wide-ranging confrontation only
grows. Mozambique is concerned about the possibility
that a relentless escalation in both military posturing
and arms accumulation may inevitably push us closer
to a precipice. Over the years, the Security Council has
adopted resolutions defending peace and international
security. It is in that vein that the Security Council
must persist as a pivotal advocate for respect for
those binding decisions, continually reminding every
faction embroiled in the conflict of their obligations
as members of the United Nations. That includes strict
adherence to the laws of war and the inviolable sanctity
of civilian lives.
18/21

12/09/2023

As we approach the zenith of our annual United
Nations multilateral calendar, Mozambique once
again calls emphatically for a renewed commitment to
diplomacy, an immediate cessation of hostilities and a
swift return to face-to-face negotiations between the
parties involved.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
No matter how hard anyone tries to shift the
attention of the Council and the United Nations by
convening meetings such as this, nothing will change
the fundamental issue at hand. An unjust and deadly
war is going on and a country is being deliberately
destroyed because in the minds of the perpetrators it
must be punished for bad behaviour.
We have brought the issue of crimes committed in
Ukraine to the Council many times and for good reason.
After the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry in Ukraine, the Moscow Mechanism and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, it is now the turn of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Alice Jill Edwards, who visited Ukraine from 4 to
10 September. Referring to the findings on the atrocities
by the Russian troops in Ukraine, her preliminary report
states among other things that their grievous acts appear
neither random nor incidental, but rather orchestrated
as part of a State policy to intimidate, instil fear, punish
or extract information and confessions. That should
have been our focus today rather than another attempt
to artificially overload the work of the Security Council
with topics of convenience.
The core issue is, and for as long as the war
goes on will continue to be, that Russia has initiated
an unprovoked and unjustified military aggression
against Ukraine, representing a threat to European
security, with an economic and humanitarian impact
that is felt worldwide. The General Assembly, the
International Court of Justice and other international
bodies have clearly condemned the aggression as a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. The international community
remains committed to supporting Ukraine politically,
diplomatically, economically and militarily to defend
its country, the Charter, peace and security in Europe
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and the international rules-based order. Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations provides a clear legal
basis for individual States to offer whatever assistance
to a country exercising its inherent right to self-defence
in defence of its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterate that the arms transfer to Ukraine has
been conducted in accordance with national legislation,
the Arms Trade Treaty, the obligations arising from that
act and the assessment of the risk of diversion. An ad hoc
commission established by the Ukrainian Parliament is
responsible for monitoring the entire process, so that
the weapons are used for defence purposes and do not
fall into the wrong hands.
While the Kremlin seems concerned that the
supply of arms to Ukraine is prolonging the conflict,
it is desperately looking for weapons in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and Iran. That is another
violation of the Security Council resolutions that place
clear restrictions on such activities with those States.
According to that logic, the so-called Western arms
supply to Ukraine is prolonging the war, whereas the
arms supply from the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and Iran to Russia, it seems, contributes to
peace. We are talking here about a permanent member
of the Security Council.
We have heard the same tale yet again today as
Russia attempts to establish similarities between its
military aggression in Ukraine and the situation in
the Republic of Kosovo. It is and remains a desperate
attempt, which we refute. What is even more ridiculous
is the recycling of the most absurd complot theories
ever: the so-called organ trafficking in Kosovo and
Albania. No one, including the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which investigated
for several years, has ever found any evidence of such
claims, and this for the simple reason that there is none.
Now Russia is trying to use the same tale and
the same arguments against Ukraine. No one is
surprised by that propaganda, but it is unfortunate
that the Security Council is used for such international
distorted narratives to hide Russia’s crimes, which in
turn have been verified and documented and will one
day be presented in a court of law. The problem is not
Kosovo. The issue here is the Russian aggression and
its consequences.
In conclusion, the arms supply to Ukraine is
a consequence of the Russian military aggression.
Therefore, only Russia can bring it to an end by

S/PV.9415

withdrawing its troops from the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and giving peace efforts
a real chance.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to say that today
we have not heard anything new in response to our
specific ideas regarding the supply of Western weapons
to Ukraine, which does not align at all international
obligations, as you just said, Madam President. We
have already spoken about the many and repeated
violations of a whole range of international treaties
on the arms trade that pertain to the supply of those
weapons to Ukraine. I will not list them now, as we
have already addressed this subject, but if necessary
we can certainly address the issue again at a later date.
The fact that our Western colleagues have nothing
substantive to say is evidenced by the fact that there is
no long line forming here from among European and
other delegations to sign up for today’s meeting’s list
of speakers on Ukraine — quite unlike those convened
by our Western colleagues, in which we hear an endless
litany of carbon-copy statements about the same things.
However, I would like to now respond to the last
remarks you made, Madam President, in your capacity
as the representative of Albania, when, despite the facts,
you tried to protect the Kosovo militants and murderers.
In that regard, I wish to cite a video testimony that came
to us yesterday from a former judge of the court of the
city of Peć, in the Metohija region, and of the Supreme
Court of Serbia. Mr. Goran Petronijević, a lawyer
and President of the non-governmental organization
Center for the Restoration of International Law, said
the following:
“The victims [of transplantology] were mainly
police officers and military personnel of the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Later on,
even Albanian citizens who collaborated with the
Kosovo Liberation Army and civilians fell victim
to such practices. Foreign investigators speak of
hundreds of victims. Data on missing persons in
Kosovo during the specified period confirms that
the number of victims exceeded 1,000 people. That

23-2654919/21

S/PV.9415

Threats to international peace and security

criminal activity reached a particularly intensive
scale from 1998 to 2000.
“During the NATO aggression against
Yugoslavia from March 1998 to June 1999, the
number of crimes was relatively low. After NATO
troops arrived in Kosovo, the number of abductions
increased noticeably. Events occurred in the
following way.
“First, victims were abducted on the territory of
Kosovo and sent to places for a medical assessment
of their condition. Victims were then transported
to Albania to specially created camps, where organ
harvesting operations awaited them. There were
more than 10 such camps in Albania.
“The main perpetrators of those crimes were
members of the Kosovo Liberation Army, who
received information from the Albanian special
services. On the territory of Kosovo, NATO
representatives assisted the Kosovo Liberation
Army militants. Without the help of NATO
representatives, the number of victims would not
have been so high.
“The main issue with the investigations in
Albania and Kosovo was that the NATO leadership
concealed all traces of such crimes. There were
witnesses, including drivers who transported
victims from Kosovo to Albanian territory and
camp guards, who saw the crimes with their own
eyes and were ready to testify to the investigators.
But as soon as information about them became
known, those witnesses disappeared. There is
also evidence that the hospitals in which organ
harvesting operations took place received relevant
information. One of those hospitals is located in
Tirana and one was even located on board a ship
off the coast of Albania.
“The location of the operation depended on
the organ being removed for transplantation and
the amount of time necessary to maintain the
viability of the harvested organ, taking into account
the distance from the site of harvest to the site of
transplantation. Depending on the financial status of
the client — and, naturally, the clients were mostly
wealthy people from Western Europe — the collected
organs reached a value of more than $1 million.”
I do not believe any further comments on the matter
are necessary. Given the course of our discussion today,
20/21

12/09/2023

we intend to post the cited material on our information
platform so that the international community may
access it.
The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my capacity as the representative of Albania.
I will not continue with the tale of organ trafficking,
but I want to stress that NATO’s operations in Kosovo
in 1999 followed more than a year of intense diplomatic
efforts by the United Nations and the Contact
Group — of which Russia was a member — to the end of
the conflict. The Security Council repeatedly branded
the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo and the mounting
number of refugees as a threat to international peace
and security. NATO’s mission helped to end large-scale
and sustained violations of human rights and the killing
of civilians. The Kosovo Force — NATO’s ongoing
peacekeeping mission in Kosovo — has a Security
Council mandate and is supported by both Kosovo and
Serbia. I will conclude there.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
comprehensive briefing, which has once again proved
the groundlessness of Russia’s allegations.
I recognize the representative of the Kremlin’s
regime in the permanent seat of the Soviet Union. What a
pathetic, tiresome performance that delegation arranges
regularly in the Chamber, to persuade the Security
Council that it is wrong to help a State under a Russian
terrorist attack to survive, and blaming whomever for
its own crimes. It would not have been such a mockery
of the Council’s mandate had his delegation attended
an event organized yesterday in the nearby Economic
and Social Council Chamber, the screening of the film
20 Days in Mariupol. The film was made by journalists
trapped in the besieged city of Mariupol at the very
beginning of the invasion and shows horrendous scenes
of the once-prosperous, peaceful city that was reduced,
in the blink of an eye, to complete ruins.
The tragedy of Mariupol is probably one of the most
powerful examples of the fate that Russian strategists
assigned to Ukraine — seizure, destruction and
extermination — everywhere, in residential buildings,
maternity hospitals, theatres and streets. The most
crucial prerequisites for that strategy to be implemented
were Russia’s overwhelming advantage in weapons and
23-26549

12/09/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9415

the absence of Ukrainians’ will to resist. While Russia
still benefits from the former — although to a lesser
extent than it did at the initial period of the full-fledged
war — the latter has not been the case from the very
beginning. Ukrainian courage and bravery in the face
of the existential threat to our statehood and our nation
have been underpinned by the utmost solidarity from
across the globe. It has contributed to our resilience in
defending what any United Nations Member State is
supposed to defend: people, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity — our future.

Kryvyi Rih and Nikopol in the Dnipro region; Ochakiv
in the Mykolayiv region; Kherson and nearby villages in
the Kherson region; Polohy district in the Zaporizhzhya
region; Pokrovsk, Bahkmut and Volnovakha districts
in the Donetsk region; and villages in the Kharkiv,
Chernihiv and Sumy regions.

This is not only about weapons, although weapons
remain a critical prerequisite for deterring the aggressor
State and making it withdraw from the territory of
another country. Ukraine reiterates its gratitude to our
friends and partners, who in practical terms support us
in exercising our inherent right to self-defence under
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. I would
like to reiterate that, as long as the Security Council
remains immobilized in its attempts to punish the evil,
let us and the responsible nations complete that task,
including by supplying the necessary weapons to, and
thereby strengthening the defensive capabilities of, the
State fighting the aggression.

Finally, it appears that Moscow is attempting to
seek foreign sources to replenish its military arsenals.
We closely follow the current contacts between Russia
and North Korea, which may focus, as reported, on
the supply of North Korean weapons and munitions to
Russia for the purpose of intensifying its war against
Ukraine. We underline that if that is the case, it will
constitute another grave violation by Russia of the
Security Council’s decisions, as has already happened
with the supply of military unmanned aerial vehicles
to Russia by Iran. Such a purchase from North Korea
would violate the relevant provisions of resolution
1718 (2006), which require Member States to prohibit
the procurement of arms and related materiel from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as
any items would enhance the operational capabilities
of armed forces of another Member State outside the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We encourage
the Security Council to closely monitor that issue and
take the necessary steps to protect its own decisions, if
the violations of the sanctions regimes are confirmed.

Along with weapons supplies, international
solidarity is also about moral support, clear statements,
humanitarian assistance and fair reporting from the
ground. Finally, it is about people coming from across
the globe as volunteers to help the affected civilians
to cope with the scourge of war. Unfortunately, those
noble people are also among the targets of the Russian
army. Just yesterday, near the city of Chasiv Yar, in the
Donetsk region, Russian terrorists attacked, with an
anti-tank missile system, a vehicle of a volunteer team
that delivered humanitarian aid to local residents. A
male volunteer from Canada and a female volunteer from
Spain were killed on the spot. Two others — citizens of
Germany and Sweden — were wounded. That attack by
Russia has again testified that the war against Ukraine
is too close to everyone in the world who truly values
human life and believes it is humankind’s common
moral duty to stop terror and defeat evil.
That was not the only deadly strike by Russia that
day. On Monday alone, Russia also shelled the cities of

Moscow tries to actively militarize its industry. It
continues to strike the port and grain infrastructure of
Ukraine. It does not conceal its plans to repeat its wanton
missile terror against Ukraine’s energy infrastructure.

Meanwhile, Ukraine will continue to de-occupy
its sovereign territory. We will do it at a pace that
enables us to save as many of the lives of our soldiers
as possible. Following the defeat of Russia and the end
of the war, the demilitarization and denuclearization of
Russia should, by definition, take place. It will prevent
the threat of the repetition of aggression, thereby laying
a solid foundation for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in line with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

23-2654921/21
