VIII.

45/248.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III

Questions relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 1990-1991

INTERNATIONAL COMPUTING CENTRE: 1991 BUDGET
ESTIMATES

A

The General Assembly
I
FIRST REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY QUESTIONS

Approves the 1991 budget estimates of the International Computing Centre, amounting to 10,515,500
United States dollars, as contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;61
IV

Takes note with appreciation of the first report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions; 58

II
WORK-LOAD STANDARDS FOR VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF CONFERENCE-SERVICING STAFF, INCLUDING CLERICAL AND TYPING STAFF, AND WORK-LOAD STATISTICS FOR THE VARIOUS
CONFERENCE SERVICES IN THE 1986-1987 AND 1988-1989
BIENNIUMS

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on work-load standards for conference-servicing
staff.'59 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 60
l. Takes note of the Secretary-General's revised
work-load standards, as modified by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
2. Notes that the revised work-load standards reflect a further step towards enhanced productivity of
conference-servicing staff, including improvements
achieved through the application of new technologies;
3. Urges the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee to keep these standards under review in
order further to enhance economy and efficiency in
conference-servicing activities;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue
through the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination the elaboration of unified work-load standards for
conference-servicing staff within the United Nations
common system and to report thereon, through the Advisory Committee, to the General Assembly at its fortyseventh session;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee to review with
the organizations of the United Nations system during
this time the efforts being undertaken to achieve the
harmonization of work-load standards in conferenceservicing of all organizations of the United Nations system;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-seventh session, through
the Advisory Committee, on progress relating to the
further development of work-load standards in conference-servicing for all United Nations conference facilities, including those of the regional commissions;

343

RECOMMENDATION OF THE ADVISORY BOARD
ON DISARMAMENT MATTERS

Concurs with the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budfetary Questions in paragraphs 6 and 7 of its report; 6
V
AFRICAN INSTITUTE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND PLANNING

Concu"ing with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions in paragraph 14 of its report, 63
1. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to urge the Administrator of the Programme to implement fully Economic
and Social Council resolution 1990/72 of 27 July 1990,
as follows:

(a) To give its full backing to the short-term training programme and the research and advisory activities
of the African Institute for Economic Development and
Planning;
(b) To continue its support for the activities of the
Institute;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-sixth session on the implementation of its request to the Governing Council;
VI
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE AFTER-SERVICE
HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAMME

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General64
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 65
VII
FUNCTIONING AND ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT OF THE DEPARTMENTS HAVING MANDATES RELATED TO GLOBAL SOCIAi. DEVELOPMENT ISSUES

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;66
61

NC.5/45/9.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 7 (N45r, and Add.1-14), document N45/7/Add.5.
63
lbid., document N45/7/Add.8.
64
NC.5/45/33.
65
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 7 (N4'5n and Add.1-14), document N45/7/Add.9.
66
NC.5!45/4.
62

58
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 7 (N45r, and Add.l-14), document N45(1.
59
NC.5/45/1.
60
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 7 (N45(1 and Add.1-14), document N45/7/Add.l.

General Assembly-Forty-fifth Session

344

VIII

XIII

CONFERENCE SERVICES AND DIVISION OF
ADMINISTRATIVE AND COMMON SERVICES AT VIENNA

STANDARDS OF ACCOMMODATION FOR AIR TRAVEL

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General67 and the related comments of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization; 68
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 11, 25, 27
and 28 of its report; 69
l.

IX
INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM PROJECT

l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the integrated management information system
project; 70
2. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General
report to the General Assembly on the cost benefits of
the project;

X
CONSTRUCTION OF ADDITIONAL CONFERENCE FACILITIES
AT ADDIS ABABA AND BANGKOK

l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the construction of additional conference facilities
at Addis Ababa and Bangkok; 71

2. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with
the projects in accordance with the revised timetables;

XI
FUNCTIONING OF THE MULTINATIONAL PROGRAMMING AND
OPERATIONAL CENTRES OF THE ECONOMIC COMMISSION
FOR AFRICA

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-Gen-

l.

eral; 72
2. Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 73

XII
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT
AND DEVELOPMENT

Approves the recommendation that, on an exceptional basis, payment be made for daily subsistence for
representatives of the least developed countries from
the Voluntary Fund for Supporting Developing Countries Participating in the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development and its Preparatory
Process;

67 NC.5/45/30 and NC.5/45/32.
68

See NC.5/45/62 and NC.5/45/63.
Official Records of lhe General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplemem No. 7 (N45/7 and Add.1-14), document N45/7/Add.6.
70 NC.5/45/20.
71 NC.5/45/53.
72 NC.5/45/57.
73
See Official Records of lhe General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session,
Fifth Committee, 44th meeting, and corrigendum.
69

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 74

2. Reaffirms its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December
1986 and 42/214 of 21 December 1987;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to review the existing arrangements in regard to payment of subsistence
allowance and standards of air travel by representatives
of Member States in their official capacity to attend
meetings of various intergovernmental bodies and for
other United Nations official work and to submit concrete proposals to the General Assembly at its fortysixth session, through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, with a view to
ensuring consistency of travel arrangements within the
United Nations;

4. Also requests the Secretary-General to examine
how the discounts and other incentives offered by various airlines could be utilized to provide savings to the
United Nations and upgraded travel arrangements to
representatives of Member States, experts attending
meetings of subsidiary bodies and the Secretariat staff
without incurring any additional expenditure and to include his recommendations in this regard in his report
to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;

5. Further requests the Secretary-General, in the interim, to continue to exercise his discretion in respect
of business class travel for United Nations official work,
taking into account the status of the traveller and in the
light of the views expressed by Member States at the
forty-fifth session of the General Assembly; 75
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session
information on the meetings attended by eminent persons for whom exceptions have been made for first class
travel;
7. Decides to review at its forty-sixth session the arrangements regarding the payment of subsistence allowance and accommodation for air travel on the basis
of the report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
XIV
OPTICAL DISK STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL SYSTEM

l. Decides to defer until its forty-sixth session consideration of the report of the Secretary-General on the
optical disk storage and retrieval system; 76

2. Requests the Secretariat to carry out consultations with the permanent missions in order to determine the appropriateness of making the system compatible with those of permanent missions and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
14

NC.5/45/2.8 and Corr. i.
Under this para~raph, the General Assembly requests the Secretary-General to proVJde business class tickets to permanent representauves of Member States accredited to the United Nations whenever
th~ are invited to travel on official United Nations work.
NC.5/45/58.
75

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Fifth Commltte~

3. Empowers the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to authorize the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for additional requirements necessary for 1991, on the
understanding that such appropriations as may be necessary for 1991 would have first call on the contingency
fund of the programme budget for the biennium 19901991 at the forty-sixth session;

xv
CONTINGENCY FUND
Notes that a balance of 3,218,700 dollars remains in
the contingency fund.

72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990

B

The General Assembly

I

REVISED ESTIMATES UNDER SECTIONS 3, 13, 27, 31
AND INCOME SECTION 1

345

ceased on 30 September 1990, as decided in paragraphs
7 and 8 of resolution 44/243 B;
6. Reiterates its decision reflected in paragraph 15
of resolution 44/243 B that Namibians currently benefiting from assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and through the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa shall continue to be eligible for such assistance
until they complete their programmes;
7. Decides that, in respect of the individual scholarship programme for Namibian students, should there
be a shortfall in funding, the Secretary-General would
be authorized to enter into commitments under the regular budget, subject to the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Trust Committee for the United Nations Fund
for Namibia to give priority to the execution of the individual scholarship programme, including through an
appeal early in 1991 for voluntary contributions;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session, through
the Advisory Committee, on the financing of the individual scholarship programme for Namibian students;

SECTION 3C. NAMIBIA

SECTION 3B. DEPARTMENT FOR SPECIAL POLffiCAL QUESTIONS, REGIONAL CO-OPERATION, DECOLONIZATION AND
TRUSTEESHIP

l. Reaffirms its resolutions 44/243 A and B, of 11
September 1990, by which, inter alia, it dissolved the
United Nations Council for Namibia and authorized
the orderly completion of the programmes and activities for Namibia during the period 1990-1994;

10. Accepts the proposal of the Secretary-General
to establish a Transitional Unit for Namibia in the Department for Special Political Questions, Regional Cooperation, Decolonization and Trusteeship;

2. Decides, having taken note of the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions in paragraph 4 of its report 77 and
of the request made by the Government of Namibia for
the holding of a seminar on programme planning for
the national reconstruction and development of Namibia, to appropriate an amount of 241,800 United States
dollars for this seminar in the programme budget for
the biennium 1990-1991;
3. Accepts the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee contained in paragraph 7 of its report regarding the urgency of the redeployment of the remaining staff of the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, on the understanding that the
Secretary-General will report, as necessary, to the Advisory Committee on this question in the course of
1991;
4. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
provide assistance to the Government of Namibia in the
preparation of a comprehensive national census, taking
into account the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report;
5. Accepts the proposals of the Secretary-General
related to the residual obligations of the United Nations Institute for Namibia whose operations have
77

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Sup-

plement No. 7 (N45{7 and Add.1-14), document N45f7/Add.2.

11. Decides that the Transitional Unit for Namibia
shall be composed in 1991 of four temporary posts, two
at the Professional level (1 P-5 and 1 P-3) and two at
the General Service level;
12. Accepts also the proposal of the Secretary-General to redeploy within the Department for Special Political Questions, Regional Co-operation, Decolonization and Trusteeship, one Professional post (P-4 level)
and one General Service post (other level) from Programme support services to the Unit for Special Emergency Programmes;
13. Decides that the functions of the Unit for Special Emergency Programmes shall be reviewed by the
Secretary-General, as recommended by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in the context of the preparation of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1992-1993;
SECTION 3D. CENTRE AGAINST APARTilt:ID
14. Takes note of the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral regarding the establishment and reclassification of posts in the Centre against Apartheid, and of the
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon;
15. Decides, given the priority attached to activities
against apartheid, to establish on a temporary basis one
Professional post (P-3 level) and one General Service
post (other level) in the Centre against Apartheid;

General Assembly-Forty-fifth Session

346

SECTION 13. ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA

16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General78 and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
17. Recognizes that urgent action needs to be taken
to establish adequate standards of technology and management to ensure the efficient functioning of the Economic Commission for Africa;
18. Approves the proposed office automation project of the Economic Commission for Africa set out in
the report of the Secretary-General;
19. Decides to appropriate an amount of 1,716,500
dollars for this purpose under section 13 of the programme budget for the biennium 1990-1991, as an exceptional measure, without prejudice to the new budgetary procedure set out in General Assembly
resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, particularly
paragraph 10 of annex I thereto;
SECTION 27.

PUBUC INFORMATION

20. Takes note of the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral and the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the financing of a new information centre, at
Windhoek, in 1991;

21. Recalls recommendation 2 (h) contained in section JI, paragraph 1, of its resolution 44/50 of 8 December 1989, and urges the Secretary-General to facilitate
and expedite the establishment of an information centre at Windhoek;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements, in consultation with the Government of Namibia, for organizing early in 1991 the
briefings referred to in paragraph 82 (b) of his report; 78
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session a report
on the implementation of section I of the present resolution;

II
REVIEW OF TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION SERVICES
FOR ALL OFFICIAL I.ANGUAGES IN THE ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA

Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
on the review of the translation and interpretation services for all official languages in the Economic Commission for Africa, 79
l. Expresses its concern over the difficulties experienced by the Economic .Commission for Africa, particularly in the area of conference services;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to take action for
the revival of a training programme for translators/precis-writers in all official languages of the Economic Commission for Africa and to report to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session, through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, on the measures taken;
78

79

See NC.5/45(2.

NC.5/45(26.

3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that this training programme is comparable in quality
with other similar United Nations training programmes
and to make every effort to utilize existing facilities and
expertise within the region;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures to ensure the immediate recruitment of those
candidates who, after completing their training, have
passed the competitive translators/precis-writers examination;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to make
proposals in the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 1992-1993 on the improvement of conference
services in the Economic Commission for Africa, including the provision of a permanent staff for interpretation;
6. Decides to consider again the question of conference services for the Economic Commission for Africa
at its forty-sixth session, in the context of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 1992-1993;

III
ELECTORAL ASSISTANCE TO HAITI

1. Decides to appropriate an amount of 5 million
dollars to be placed provisionally under the custody of
the Secretary-General under section 1 of the programme budget for the biennium 1990-1991, on the understanding that such a decision does not imply any
judgement on the nature of the activities of the United
Nations Observer Group for the Verification of Elections in Haiti;
2. Also decides that this amount is to be financed as
a revised estimate arising from extraordinary expenses;
3. Further decides that this should not prejudge the
way to treat revised estimates arising from extraordinary expenses as referred to in paragraph 11 of annex
I to its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986;
IV
INTERNATIONAL ACTION TO COMBAT DRUG ABUSE
AND ILLICIT TRAFFICKING

Taking into account all relevant resolutions on the
overall number of regular budget high-level posts in the
Organization,
Bearing in mind the need to maintain the overall integrity of the United Nations Office at Vienna,
Requests the Secretary-General to propose a comprehensive restructuring of United Nations entities at
Vienna with a view to a speedy implementation of the
expressed wish of the General Assembly both to
strengthen the United Nations Office at Vienna and to
consolidate the United Nations drug structures under
an Under-Secretary-General;
V
DEVELOPMENTS RELATING TO THE ACTIVITIES
OF THE CENTRE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS

1. Decides to accept the proposal for additional
posts made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 8 of

VIII.

347

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Fifth Committee

his report on developments relating to the activities of
the Centre for Human Rights; 80
2. Also decides that the Secretary-General shall
enter into commitments for further resources equivalent to 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 2 General Service posts subject
to review and concurrence by the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
basis of the results of his management and work-load
analysis which will be completed no later than January
1991;

VI
PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY
MATTERS

l. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters;

States dollars, with an additional special allowance of
8,000 dollars for the Chairman of the Commission and
the Chairman of the Advisory Committee;

2. Approves the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as contained in paragraphs 3 to 5 of its report with
regard to the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
Commission and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee, and decides that the other conditions of service
for these officials shall remain unchanged;
3. Decides that the compensation and other conditions of service of the full-time members of the Commission and of the Chairman of the Advisory Committee shall next be reviewed at the fiftieth session of the
General Assembly and that, pending such review, the
annual compensation shall be adjusted in accordance
with the procedure approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 35/221.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990

2. Reaffirms also the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
3. Expresses its concern at the tendency of its substantive Committees and other intergovernmental bodies to involve themselves in administrative and budgetary matters;

4. Invites the Secretary-General to provide all intergovernmental bodies with the required information regarding procedures for administrative and budgetary
matters.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
45/249.

Conditions of service and compensation for
officials, other than Secretariat officials,
serving the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/221 of 17 December 1980
and 40/256 of 18 December 1985 on the conditions of
service and compensation for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General81 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 82
Reaffirming the principle that the conditions of service for the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the International Civil Service Commission and for the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions shall be separate and distinct
from those of officials of the Secretariat,
l. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1991, the
annual compensation of the two full-time members of
the International Civil Service Commission and of the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions shall be 112,875 United
80

NC.5/45/66.
81 NC.5/45/21.

82 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Sup-

plement No. 7 (N4Sn and Add.1-14), document N45/7/Add.13.

45/250.

Conditions of service and compensation for
officials other than Secretariat officials members of the International Court of Justice
A
EMOLUMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/204 of 22 December 1976,
35/220 A of 17 December 1980 and 40/257 A of 18 December 1985 and section VI of its resolution 43/217 of
21 December 1988 on the emoluments of the members
of the International Court of Justice,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General83 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 84
l. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1991, the
annual salary of the members of the International
Court of Justice shall be 145,000 United States dollars;

2. Decides also that the ad hoe judges referred to in
Article 31 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice shall continue to receive for each day they exercise their functions one three-hundred-and-sixty-fifth
of the annual salary payable at the time to a member of
the Court;

3. Decides further, in between the regularly scheduled periodic reviews, to continue the system of
floor/ceiling measures introduced pursuant to section
VI of General Assembly resolution 43/217, in accordance with the recommendations contained in paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 85
83 NC.S/45/44.
84

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 7 (N45n and Add.1-14 ), document N45/7/Add. I 0.
85
Ibid., Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 7 (N43n and Add.1-13),
document N43n!Add.6.
