A /74/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

50th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 25, 26, 61, 65 to 70, 106 to 108, 121 and 136.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Mr. Firas Hassan Jabbar of Iraq, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Committee.
Mr. Jabbar (Iraq), Rapporteur of the Third
Committee (spoke in Arabic): It is an honour for me to
introduce to the General Assembly the reports of the
Third Committee on the agenda items allocated to it
by the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session,
namely, items 25, 26, 61, 65 to 70, 106 to 108, 121
and 136.
The reports, contained in documents A/74/391 to
A/74/404, include the texts of draft resolutions and
decisions recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption. For the convenience of delegations, the
Secretariat has issued document A/C.3/74/INF.1, in
English only, which contains a checklist of actions
taken on the draft proposals listed in the reports before
the Assembly.
During the main part of the seventy-fourth session
of the General Assembly, the Third Committee held
52 plenary meetings and adopted a total of 62 draft
resolutions, 19 of which were adopted by recorded vote,
and one draft decision.

Under agenda item 25, “Social development”,
including sub-items (a) and (b), the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 49 of document A/74/391,
the adoption of seven draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 26, “Advancement of women”,
including sub-items (a) and (b), the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 21 of document A/74/392,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 61, “Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions
relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
and humanitarian questions”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 19 of document A/74/393,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 65, “Report of the Human
Rights Council”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 12 of document A/74/394, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under the agenda item 66, “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, including sub-items
(a) and (b), the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 31 of document A/74/395, the adoption of
two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 67, “Rights of indigenous
peoples”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 10 of document A/74/396, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 68, “Elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,
including sub-items (a) and (b), the Third Committee

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-41930 (E)

*1941930*

A/74/PV.50

recommends, in paragraph 20 of document A/74/397,
the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda items 69, “Right of peoples to selfdetermination”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 23 of document A/74/398, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 70, “Promotion and protection
of human rights”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 69 of document A/74/399, the adoption of
two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 70 (a), “Implementation of
human rights instruments”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 13 of document A/74/399/
Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under the agenda item 70 (b), “Human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 90 of document A/74/399/
Add.2, the adoption of 21 draft resolutions.
Under the agenda item 70 (c), “Human rights
situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 47 of document A/74/399/Add.3, the
adoption of five draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 70 (d), “Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, the Third
Committee wishes to advise the Assembly that no
action was required under the sub-item.
Under agenda item 106, “Crime prevention and
criminal justice”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 29 of document A/74/400, the adoption of
eight draft resolutions.
In connection with draft resolution VII, “Improving
the coordination of efforts against trafficking in
persons”, I wish to make the following oral revision to
operative paragraph 21. The words “and persons with
disabilities” will be added after the words “concerning
children” in the fifth line. Operative paragraph 21 will
therefore read
“Calls upon Member States to continue their
efforts to criminalize trafficking in persons in
all its forms, including the exploitation of the
prostitution of others or other forms of sexual
exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery
2/36

18/12/2019

or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
removal of organs, especially concerning children
and persons with disabilities, and to condemn
these practices and to investigate, prosecute and
penalize traffickers and intermediaries while
providing victim-centred protection and assistance
to the victims of trafficking with full respect for
their human rights, and invites Member States to
continue to support those United Nations agencies
and international organizations that are actively
involved in victim protection.”
Under item 107, “Countering the use of information
and communications technologies for criminal
purposes”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 13 of document A/74/401, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 108, “International drug
control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 11 of document A/74/402, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 121, “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/74/404, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 136, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly that no action was required under the item.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the commendable leadership of our
Chair, His Excellency Christian Braun, Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg, and to thank the other
Bureau members, namely, the Vice-Chairs, Ms. Gail
Farngalo of Liberia, Mr. Ihor Yaremenko of Ukraine
and Ms. Maria Emilia Eyheralde Geymonat of Uruguay.
I would also like to thank, on behalf of the Bureau,
the Secretary of the Committee and his able team from
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management for the support and guidance provided
to the Bureau and to delegations as well as the other
offices in the Secretariat that supported the work of
the Committee.
Finally, I am grateful to all Third Committee
experts for their friendship and support for the Bureau.
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
19-41930

18/12/2019

the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Third Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. May I remind members that in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee, and
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That means
that where separate or recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed
to adopt without a vote those recommendations that
were adopted without a vote in the Third Committee.
The results of the votes will be uploaded and available
on the PaperSmart Portal.
I would like to draw the attention of members
to a note by the Secretariat, in English only, entitled
“List of proposals contained in the reports of the
Third Committee for consideration by the General
Assembly”, which has been circulated as document
A/C.3/74/INF/1. This note has been distributed desk
to desk in the General Assembly Hall as a reference
guide for action on the draft resolutions and decisions
recommended by the Third Committee in its reports.
Members will find in column 4 of the note the
symbols of the draft resolutions and decisions of the
Third Committee, with the corresponding symbols
of the reports for action in the plenary in column
2 of the same note. For reports containing multiple
recommendations, the draft resolution or decision
number is contained in column 3 of the note.
Members are reminded that additional sponsors
are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and
decisions have been adopted in the Committee. Any
clarification about co-sponsorship in the Committee

A/74/PV.50

reports should be addressed to the Secretary of
the Committee.
Furthermore, any corrections to the voting
intention of delegations after the voting has concluded
on a proposal should be made directly to the Secretariat
after the meeting. I would seek members’ cooperation
in avoiding any interruptions to our proceedings in
this regard.
Agenda item 25
Social development
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the
World Summit for Social Development and
of the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, persons with disabilities and
the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/391)
The President: The Assembly has before it seven
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 49 of its report.
I invite delegations wishing to explain their vote
before the voting on any or all of the seven draft
resolutions to do so now.
Mr. Salovaara (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The European Union and its member States
welcomed the outcome of the 2019 session of the Third
Committee of the General Assembly. Through the
adoption of several key draft resolutions, the Third
Committee reaffirmed that all human rights are to be
realized worldwide and that there is no hierarchy of
human rights. It recalled the centrality of human rights
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
its Sustainable Development Goals.
The EU and its member States have proudly
engaged on all the draft resolutions submitted, and
we ourselves have submitted 14 draft resolutions
covering a large number of human rights issues ranging
from social, economic and cultural rights to civil and
political rights and from thematic to country-specific

19-419303/36

A/74/PV.50

draft resolutions. We thank all members that supported
our priorities and initiatives.
We have worked with all regional groups and
organizations, including the Latin American and
Caribbean Group, on the rights of the child; the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar; the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in support of important draft
resolutions on social and economic rights; and the Group
of African States on a number of thematic resolutions.

18/12/2019

and to guarantee freedom of religion or belief for all,
including persons belonging to ethnic and religious
minorities. The EU recalls its support for the draft
resolutions on the situation of human rights in the
Syrian Arab Republic, on the situation of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran and on the situation of
human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine.

The EU remains committed to engaging with all
States in order to promote respect for and the protection
and progressive fulfilment of economic, social and
cultural rights, including the right to education, the
right to food and the rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation, as components of the right to an adequate
standard of living.

The Committee also adopted by consensus several
forward-looking draft resolutions on gender equality.
Those drafts send a strong signal of the international
community’s commitment for the human rights of all
women and girls, including sexual and reproductive
health, and provide a new, ambitious road map for
the years to come. We will work with all relevant
stakeholders, including member States, civil-society
actors and human rights defenders to turn these words
into concrete action.

The EU would like to express its deep appreciation
to the States Members of the United Nations that have
aligned with our statements, in particular the candidate
countries to the EU and the Eastern Partnership
countries. We welcome the consensual adoption of the
EU-led draft resolution on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well
as the widespread support for the draft resolution on the
situation of human rights of the Rohingya Muslims and
other minorities in Myanmar, submitted jointly by the
EU and the OIC.

As we mark the fortieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women today, we take this
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the full and
effective implementation of the Convention. The EU will
continue to strongly oppose all forms of discrimination,
including on the grounds of sex, race, ethnic or social
origin, religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
disability, age, sexual orientation and gender identity,
and will consistently and constructively continue to
support United Nations work in this regard.

We firmly believe that the international community
must continue to send the strong message that all
those responsible for crimes involving violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are to be held accountable in national,
regional or international courts or tribunals, including
the International Criminal Court.

We welcome the fact that, once again, the Third
Committee was able to reach consensus on the
promotion and protection of the human rights of
migrants, including women migrant workers. The EU
will remain steadfast in its commitment to upholding
international human rights law in relation to refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants.

We welcome the consensual adoption of the
draft resolution on the rights of the child, which the
EU submitted jointly with the Latin American and
Caribbean Group. In this important year marked by
the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, we collectively reiterated, through
the draft resolution, our resolve to promote and
protect the rights of all children, particularly those in
vulnerable situations.

The European Union, which, with its new European
Green Deal, has committed to becoming the first
carbon-neutral region by 2050, salutes the reaffirmation
in several resolutions adopted by the Third Committee
of the importance of fully implementing the Paris
Agreement in consideration of the undeniable impact
of climate change on the enjoyment of human rights.

We welcome the consensual adoption of the EUled draft resolution on freedom of religion or belief
and call on all States to fully implement its provisions
4/36

The EU calls upon all Member States to refrain from
using the Third Committee to pursue objectives other
than the promotion and protection of human rights. In
this regard, the EU reiterates its support for an open,
free, stable and secure cyberspace, where the rule of
19-41930

18/12/2019

law applies, including in the context of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, with a view to achieving
societal well-being, economic growth, prosperity and
the integrity of free and democratic societies. We
recall that, whereas consensus exists on the need to
step up our collective efforts to build capacity to fight
cybercrime, there is no consensus for the creation of a
new international instrument in that regard.
The EU also reiterates that is not for the Third
Committee to call into question the decisions of
the Human Rights Council, including the Council’s
authority to appoint mandate holders, and that we do
not see any merit in the Third Committee adopting a
resolution on the Council’s report.
Finally, the EU thanks the Chair of the Third
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Christian Braun, the
other members of the Bureau and the secretariat of the
Committee for their outstanding work.
The President: We shall now take decisions on
draft resolutions I to VII, one by one. After all the
decisions have been taken, representatives will have an
opportunity to explain their vote or position on any or
all of the draft resolutions.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Cooperatives in
social development”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/119).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Promoting social integration through social inclusion”.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/120).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Policies and programmes involving youth”. A
single, recorded vote has been requested on operative
paragraphs 10, 12 and 13.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo

A/74/PV.50

Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, Egypt, Guatemala,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Libya, Mauritania,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
United States of America, Yemen
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Comoros, Ethiopia, Haiti,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kuwait, Mauritius, Myanmar,
Pakistan, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, United
Arab Emirates
Operative paragraphs 10, 12 and 13 were retained
by 138 votes to 15, with 17 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nicaragua
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
against; Algeria had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

19-419305/36

A/74/PV.50

Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 74/121).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit
for Social Development and of the twenty-fourth special
session of the General Assembly”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
6/36

18/12/2019

Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 186 votes to 2,
with no abstentions (resolution 74/122).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Persons with albinism”. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 74/123).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Follow-up to the twentieth anniversary of the
International Year of the Family and beyond”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 74/124).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
74/125).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
25 and its sub-item (a).
Agenda item 26
Advancement of women
(a) Advancement of women
(b) Implementation of the outcome of the
Fourth World Conference on Women and
19-41930

18/12/2019

of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/392)
The President: The General Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report.
We shall now take decisions on draft resolutions I
to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Improvement of the
situation of women and girls in rural areas”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/126).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Violence against women migrant workers”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/127).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
74/128).
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): First, I would like
to confirm that Hungary deems the prevention of
violence and the prevention of such violations of the
human rights of women workers as sexual violence,
trafficking in human beings, exploitation, forced
labour and slavery as being highly important. Ensuring
safe working conditions, protecting victims, providing
adequate information about legal remedies, properly
regulating the labour market and empowering women
are prerequisites for eliminating violence against
women workers. However, we believe that the focus
of international discussion on this issue is misplaced.
We should put much greater emphasis on prevention,
especially with regard to situations that force women to
leave their homes.

A/74/PV.50

Ultimately, we have to seriously address root
causes. In this regard, the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration unfortunately does
not represent the right approach. The Global Compact
promotes migration and portrays it as the best thing
that ever happened to humankind, which means, in
essence, that the Compact supports the smuggler’s
business model. Smugglers earn tens or even hundreds
of millions of dollars by taking advantage of people,
especially defenceless women. The international
community should therefore fight smugglers fiercely
and thwart their business models. That would truly
contribute to protecting vulnerable groups, including
migrant women. As long as the Compact is considered
the basis for international migratory policy, however,
there will be increasing numbers of people taking
to the road, and more and more people, including
women and working women, finding themselves in
defenceless positions.
That is why in December, in this Hall, Hungary
voted against the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration (see A/73/PV.60), and we do not
take part in its implementation. We therefore dissociate
ourselves from the paragraphs in resolution 74/127
that mention the Global Compact or the International
Migration Review Forum, which serves to further the
Compact’s implementation.
Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile does not participate in the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. It is therefore not
appropriate for us to make any objections with regard
to its content. Accordingly, Chile dissociates itself from
all references to the Compact in the recently adopted
resolution 74/127, entitled “Violence against women
migrant workers”.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 26 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61
Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating

19-419307/36

A/74/PV.50

to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and
humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/393)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 19 of its report.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of vote or position before action
is taken on draft resolutions I to III.
Ms. Wegter (Denmark): Draft resolution II, entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”, the annual omnibus resolution on the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), is traditionally facilitated by one of the
Nordic countries. This year, it has been Denmark’s
privilege to facilitate the negotiations on the draft
resolution in Geneva and to present it to the Third
Committee and General Assembly in New York.
I wish to deliver a statement today on behalf of
the five Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
The work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is of a humanitarian and
entirely non-political character. Similarly, the annual
draft resolution dealing with the Office’s mandate is a
humanitarian, non-political text. It supports UNHCR
in continuing to provide international protection and
humanitarian assistance and to seek durable solutions
for the persons within its mandate. The draft resolution
deals with the common ground that enables UNHCR to
work in the interests of us all and, most essentially, for
the benefit of those forcibly displaced.
This year’s text includes language on the
implementation of the global compact on refugees
and on the first Global Refugee Forum, which is
taking place in Geneva right now. The support for
and implementation of the global compact will enable
the international community to have a more effective
collective response to forced displacement — one of the
most central global challenges today.
The text was the outcome of extensive negotiations
in Geneva, where the concerns of all Member States
were given full and due consideration in order to
arrive at a text that could receive the broadest possible
support, in the best interests of UNHCR and the people
that it serves so well. The draft resolution enjoys strong
8/36

18/12/2019

and solid support from an overwhelming majority of
Member States across all regions, which was made
evident in its adoption in the Third Committee last
month. With its 79 sponsors, this year’s draft resolution
enjoys the largest number yet of sponsors for the
UNHCR omnibus resolution.
We therefore deeply regret that one Member State
has challenged the draft resolution this year by calling
for a vote, thereby challenging the long-standing
tradition of consensus. As a facilitator of the draft
resolution and on behalf of the Nordic countries, I
strongly encourage all States Members of the United
Nations to support the draft resolution and to vote in
favour of its adoption today by the General Assembly.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I would like to share
with the General Assembly that Hungary is deeply
concerned that the number of displaced persons
worldwide is at a record high. We fully agree that the
international community has the responsibility to assist
those displaced, bearing in mind that all displacements
shall be temporary in nature.
International law speaks very clearly on this issue:
everybody has the right to have a safe and secure life
at home. Anyone who needs to escape, can go to the
first safe country and has to stay there temporarily until
the conditions for return are met. The global compact
on refugees, which was affirmed last year in resolution
73/151, represents another approach, promotes
migration and encourages people to move further away
from home, in clear violation of international law,
because nobody has the right to violate the borders
between two safe countries.
That is one of the reasons for which Hungary
voted against the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration (see A/73/PV.60), and we
do not accept any reference to that Compact in any
United Nations document. That is also why Hungary
dissociates itself from this draft resolution as well.
We strongly reject its approach, as it suggests that a
country’s solidarity should be determined solely on
whether it accepts migrants and refugees on its territory.
We are certain that there are other ways for a country
to show solidarity — for example, humanitarian and
development aid provided to countries affected by
conflict, assistance to countries located around wartorn areas and the provision of care to large numbers of
refugees — which should also be recognized.
19-41930

18/12/2019

Our principles are clear — we have to provide help
where it is needed and should not introduce problems
where there are none. This is the basis for our policy
called “Hungary helps”, through which we have helped
70,000 Christians in the Middle East to stay or to return
to their homes by rebuilding their destroyed houses,
churches and schools and by covering some of the
operational costs of their hospitals.
Our policy is also based on the affected peoples’
request. They ask us not to invite them to leave their
homes because that contributes to the elimination of
their communities, which only furthers the goals of the
terrorist organizations. However, we should not limit
ourselves to appeals to the international community to
help countries in war-torn areas; we should also take
more concrete action, as we are doing, for example, in
Uganda, where we are providing €16 million of support
in the framework of a development programme to
ensure the supply of water for refugees staying in the
territory of their country.
I would like to make a further remark on a
specific part of the document on Africa. We know that
population having been rising in African countries, but
we do not think that the solution to the phenomenon is
to invite these people to come to Europe. Instead, we
think that assistance should be brought to Africa. We
should improve the ability of these countries to keep the
growing number of young people at home by creating
the necessary circumstances for them to choose to
stay. That is the solution. If young and talented people
all leave the countries of Africa, then the question
becomes who will modernize these countries, whose
future could easily be compromised.
Accordingly, Hungary is ready to assist international
efforts to create the necessary conditions for people to
stay at home under safe and secure circumstances and,
for those who have to leave, to give them the right and
possibility to return home as soon as possible.
The President: We will now take decisions on
draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commission for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/129).

A/74/PV.50

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,

19-419309/36

A/74/PV.50

18/12/2019

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

constructively with the Council during the 2020-2022
triennium, for which it was elected in October.

Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Syrian
Arab Republic

Nevertheless, Venezuela also condemns the
adoption of special resolutions and procedures or any
other mechanism on the situation of human rights in
specific countries and rejects selective treatment of
this topic for political ends, as it constitutes a violation
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Accordingly, Venezuela does not recognize and
dissociates itself from document A/HRC/42/25.

Abstaining:
Eritrea, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Libya, Poland
Draft resolution II was adopted by 179 votes to 2,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 74/130).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 74/131).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 61?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/394)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of vote before action is taken on
the draft resolution.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With regard to the draft
resolution on the report of the Human Rights Council for
the 2019 period, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
will vote in favour. This is a principled position
based on the importance of this subsidiary organ as
the privileged venue to address this critical subject
within the framework of cooperation and dialogue
among States. Venezuela renews its commitment to
the promotion and protection of human rights without
distinction and based on the principles of universality,
objectivity, non-politicization and non-selectivity.
My country reaffirms its responsibility to work
10/36

Mrs. Ndayishimiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
would like to make a statement before the voting on the
draft resolution entitled “Report of the Human Rights
Council”, which my delegation supports as a whole.
The delegation of Burundi wishes to reiterate its
principled position reaffirming the importance of
this organ for addressing the issues related to human
rights and rejects to its use to promote hidden interests.
I would also like to express Burundi’s concerns with
specific parts of the report, particularly those on
resolutions that specifically target certain countries,
including Burundi.
My country is convinced that all progress on
human rights requires dialogue and cooperation in the
framework of the universal periodic review, as well
as national assistance and capacity-building of all
stakeholders in this area. We cannot stress enough that
politicization, selectivity and double standards are real
obstacles to the process of promoting human rights,
and the international community must break with this
counterproductive attitude and address the suffering of
the people of this world with the same level of attention,
without other geopolitical motivations.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to dissociate
itself from the section of the report that targets Burundi,
namely, the parts referring to the Commission of Inquiry
on Burundi, established by the Human Rights Council
following its politically motivated resolution contained
in document A/HRC/33/24 of 30 September 2016 and
without taking into consideration the position of the
Government of Burundi. My country will therefore pay
no heed to the written or oral reports already produced
by the Commission..
The President: We will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
19-41930

18/12/2019

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Israel, Myanmar
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of

A/74/PV.50

Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uzbekistan
The draft resolution was adopted by 120 votes to 4,
with 59 abstentions (resolution 74/132).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Ireland informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to speak in explanation
of vote after the voting.
Mrs. Fangco (Philippines): I am taking the floor
on behalf of the Philippines to explain our abstention
in the voting on resolution 74/132, on the report of the
Human Rights Council, which contains a reference to
Human Rights Council resolution 41/2 and the human
rights situation in the Philippines. As a member of
the Council, Philippines fully supports it and always
voted in favour of its report in previous years. This
year, however, the report refers to Council resolution
41/2, on the human rights situation in the Philippines.
We want to emphasize that this resolution was not
adopted unanimously but only by a minority, a total of
18 members, which is not even half of the Council’s
membership. Moreover, almost as many members either
voted against the resolution or abstained. Given those
figures, the resolution’s validity is highly questionable
and clearly does not represent the will of the Council’s
entire membership, much less that of the developing
countries that are always a target of such resolutions
and bear the brunt of them.
The Philippines would like to stress that respect
for States’ sovereignty and non-interference in
their internal affairs, objectivity, non-selectivity,
impartiality, transparency, cooperation and dialogue
are important principles that the United Nations and the
Human Rights Council should uphold. We support the
centrality of the Universal Periodic Review as the sole
mechanism for addressing situations regarding human
rights in States.
Given the current budgetary issues that the United
Nations is dealing with, we are concerned about the
proliferation of country-specific resolutions within
it. We urge Member States to evaluate the costs of
unilateral, country-specific resolutions versus their
impact on the ground in terms of improving the
capacities of the States concerned. Will they really be
constructive and helpful, or will they only further the
politicization of human rights? The resolution on the

19-4193011/36

A/74/PV.50

Philippines, for example, is expected to cost $331,000,
or more than ₱16.8 million. That is a huge amount for
us, and it will only cover the salaries, consultancy fees
and travel expenses of the researchers who will be hired
to prepare a so-called comprehensive report on the
human rights situation in the Philippines. That overbroad scope clearly has no intention of generating an
objective assessment of the real situation on the ground
but speaks to the real motive of the resolution’s authors,
which is to name and shame, for which no amount of
money will ever be enough.
The Assembly should consider carefully whether
it should allow itself to advance the political agenda
of a few. We further urge it to assess the effectiveness
of unilateral, country-specific resolutions in having a
positive impact on the ground and on people’s lives.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 65?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/395)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 31 of its report.
We shall now take a decision draft resolutions I and
II, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Rights
of the child”.
A separate recorded vote has been requested on
operative paragraph 13 of draft resolution I.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
12/36

18/12/2019

(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland,
Thailand,
Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Egypt, Libya, Mauritania, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Comoros, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Mauritius, Pakistan, Rwanda, Samoa, Sudan,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates
Operative paragraph 13 was retained by 138 votes
to 10, with 20 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Ethiopia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended abstain.]
19-41930

18/12/2019

The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution I, entitled “Rights of the child”, without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 74/133).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “The
girl child”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/134).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, who wishes
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My delegation cannot support the language
of operative paragraph 20 of resolution 74/133, entitled
“Rights of the child”, concerning the International
Criminal Court, and dissociates itself from
that paragraph.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 66 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 67
Rights of indigenous peoples
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples
(b) Follow-up to the outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/396)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution, entitled “Rights of indigenous peoples”,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 10
of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 74/135).

A/74/PV.50

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile is not a participant in the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, and is therefore
not responsible for its content in any way. We therefore
dissociate ourselves from all the references to the
Compact in resolution 74/135, entitled “Rights of
indigenous peoples”.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 67 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/397)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 20 of its report. The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Combating
glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic

19-4193013/36

A/74/PV.50

People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Ukraine, United States of America
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tonga, Turkey, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

18/12/2019

and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Draft resolution I was adopted by 133 votes to 2,
with 52 abstentions (resolution 74/136).

Against:
Canada, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Israel,
Marshall Islands, Nauru, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “A
global call for concrete action for the elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,

14/36

19-41930

18/12/2019

Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine
Draft resolution II was adopted by 135 votes to 9,
with 43 abstentions (resolution 74/137).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Australia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 68.
Agenda item 69
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/398)
The President: The Assembly has before it
three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 23 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,

A/74/PV.50

Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Colombia, Fiji, Mexico, Palau, Switzerland,
Tonga
Draft resolution I was adopted by 130 votes to 52,
with 7 abstentions (resolution 74/138).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “The
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

19-4193015/36

A/74/PV.50

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, United States of America
16/36

18/12/2019

Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Guatemala, Honduras,
Kiribati, Lesotho, Palau, Rwanda, Togo, Tonga,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 167 votes to 5,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 74/139).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Latvia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We now turn to draft resolution III,
entitled “Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 74/140).
The President: I call on the representative of
Canada, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote.
Mr. Hinton (Canada): I have requested the floor
this morning to explain Canada’s vote on resolution
74/139, on the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination.
Canada is a strong ally and close friend of Israel,
continuing a partnership that has advanced the shared
values and interests of our two democracies for 70
years. Canada is strongly committed to the goal of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, including the creation of a Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel.
Canada’s vote today is a reflection of this longstanding commitment.
Canada voted in support of this resolution, as it
addresses one of the core issues of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Canada strongly supports the international
consensus on a two-State solution so that both peoples
can have a secure and prosperous future. This is
particularly important at a time when the prospects for
two States for two peoples is increasingly under threat.
Today, Canada strongly reiterates our long-stated
concern that there are too many resolutions related to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, a situation that unfairly
singles out Israel for criticism. These resolutions do
not speak to the complexities of the issues or seek to
address the actions and responsibilities of all parties,
including the destructive role in the conflict of such
terrorist organizations as Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad. Canada continues to vote no on these
19-41930

18/12/2019

one-sided resolutions. We would prefer to see the
international community channel its efforts towards
helping both sides resume direct negotiations and work
towards achieving a lasting peace for both peoples.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/399)
The President: I would like to inform members
that we will take action on sub-items (a) to (d) of agenda
item 70 immediately after taking action on the main
agenda item.
The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 69
of its report.
I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): We consider it of the
utmost importance to come to a common understanding
of and universal respect for international law. If we
seriously considered international law, we would find
that the right to migrate is not among the fundamental
human rights but that, in contrast, the right to a safe
and secure life at home is clearly a fundamental human
right for all peoples.
Indeed, it is not a fundamental human right to wake
up in the morning, pick a country where one would
like to live and, in order to get there, violate a series
of borders between safe countries. Furthermore, the
international community should respect that migration
policy is an exclusively national prerogative and all
countries have the right to decide on their own who
will and will not be allowed to enter their territory. All
nations have their own sovereign right to decide whom
they would and would not like to live with in their
own territory.
The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration does not show respect for those national
prerogatives. Nor does it say anything about the people
who simply want to have a safe and secure life in their
homeland. Furthermore, the Compact considers, as a

A/74/PV.50

matter of definition, that every country on the globe
must fall into one of three categories from the point of
view of migration — source country, transit country
or destination country. On the contrary, our position
is that all countries have the sovereign right to decide
that they do not fall into any of those three categories.
Moreover, any interpretation of migration that does not
consider its security aspects is a false interpretation.
We have had sad and regrettable experiences
in Europe in that regard. Our experience proves that
massive, illegal and uncontrolled migratory flows give
an opportunity to terrorist organizations to send their
fighters, activists and proponents of extreme ideologies
all around the world. An additional risky outcome
of massive illegal migratory flows is that dangerous
societies can be created.
I would also like to draw the Assembly’s attention
to the importance of the protection of borders. The
protection of borders is not only a national competence
but also a State obligation in terms of protecting the
security and citizens of that country. The violation of a
border is a crime against the sovereignty of that country
and should not be considered as a human rights issues.
Furthermore, border violations should not be promoted.
With regard to draft resolution IV contained
in document A/74/399/Add.2, entitled “Protection
of migrants”, we believe that the best way to protect
migrants is to create circumstances such that people do
not become migrants. If they need to escape from their
homes, we should make it possible for them to return
to their homes as soon as possible. Let me underline,
once again, that the international community must
recognize that all persons have the right to live in peace
and security in their homeland. That is why it would be
a good thing if the United Nations intended to reaffirm
that right in a migration-related resolution.
For all those reasons, Hungary voted against
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration (see A/73/PV.60) and we dissociate ourselves
from the paragraphs of the draft resolution that contain
any reference to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration or the International Migration
Review Forum.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): In
recognition of other statements made today, the United
States takes this opportunity to make important points
of clarification on some of the language we see reflected
across multiple draft resolutions. We understand that

19-4193017/36

A/74/PV.50

these texts and resolutions adopted in the General
Assembly are non-binding documents that do not create
rights or obligations under international law.
The United States understands that General
Assembly resolutions do not change the current state
of conventional or customary international law. We do
not read resolutions to imply that States must join or
implement obligations under international instruments
to which they are not a party, and any reaffirmation of
such convention applies only to those States that are
party to it.
For the United States, that understanding includes
references to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, to which we are not party. Moreover, United
States co-sponsorship of, or consensus on, resolutions
does not imply endorsement of the views of Special
Rapporteurs or other Special Procedures mandate
holders as to the contents of international law.
We note that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights does not create binding obligations on States.
With regard to universal access to health care, the
United States aspires to help increase access to highquality health care, but we understand that each country
should develop its own approach to achieving access to
health care within its own context.
The United States also recognizes the important
role of partnerships with the private sector,
non-governmental organizations, including faith-based
organizations, and other stakeholders. As we said (see
A/74/PV.14) at the time of the adoption of resolution
74/4, entitled “Political declaration of the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage”, patient control
and access to high-quality people-centred care are key.
With regard to women’s equality and empowerment,
the United States is committed to promoting women’s
equality and empowering women and girls. Accordingly,
when the subject of resolution texts is women or, in
some cases, women and girls, our preference is to use
those terms rather than gender for greater precision.
Further, the United States recalls the unequivocal
objections of two delegations to the adoption of the socalled agreed conclusions of the sixty-third meeting
of the Commission on the Status of Women, which
18/36

18/12/2019

included substantive concerns that the United States
shared. Many of those same problems are endemic
among Third Committee resolutions, including
problematic references to abortion, the proliferation of
ill-defined gender jargon and the inclusion of language
that undermines the role of the family. The United
States does not consider the outcome documents from
this year’s meeting of the Commission on the Status of
Women to be the product of consensus.
With regard to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the United States does not and cannot support
references to the ICC and the Rome Statute that do not
distinguish sufficiently between parties and non-parties
or are otherwise inconsistent with the United States
position on the ICC, particularly our continuing
and long-standing objection to any assertion of ICC
jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute absent a referral from the Security
Council or consent of such a State. Our position on
the ICC in no way diminishes our commitment to
supporting accountability for atrocities.
Additionally, the United States notes that any
references to certain acts as crimes against humanity or
war crimes under the Rome Statute should be understood
in the context of how those terms are defined in the
Statute itself, including that crimes against humanity
must include a widespread or systematic attack against a
civilian population and/or must be committed pursuant
to a State or organizational policy.
With regard to sexual and reproductive health,
the United States defends human dignity and supports
access to high-quality health care for women and girls
across the lifespan. We do not accept references to sexual
and reproductive health, sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights, safe termination of pregnancy
or other language that suggest or explicitly states that
access to legal abortion is necessarily included in the
more general terms “health services” or “health-care
services” in particular contexts concerning women.
Each nation has the sovereign right to implement related
programmes and activities, consistent with their laws
and policies. There is no international right to abortion.
Further, consistent with the 1994 International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development
Programme of Action and the 1995 Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and their reports, we do not
recognize abortion as a method of family planning, nor
do we support abortion in our global health assistance.
19-41930

18/12/2019

With regard to migration, the United States
maintains the sovereign right to facilitate or restrict
access to its territory in accordance with its national
laws and policies, subject to our existing international
obligations. The United States did not participate in the
negotiation of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration, objected to its adoption and
is not bound by any of the commitments or outcomes
deriving from the Global Compact process or contained
in the Compact itself.
The Global Compact and the New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants contain goals and objectives
that are inconsistent and incompatible with United
States law and policy and the interests of the American
people. We refer interested parties to consult the
national statement of the United States of America on
the adoption of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration, as delivered on 19 December
2018 (see A/73/PV.60).
With regard to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we underscore that it is non-binding
and does not create or affect rights or obligations
under international law, nor does it create any new
financial commitments.
Further, the United States understands references to
internationally agreed development goals to be referring
to the non-binding 2030 Agenda. The United States
recognizes the 2030 Agenda as a global framework
for sustainable development that can help countries
work towards global peace and prosperity. We applaud
the call for shared responsibility, including national
responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda, and emphasize that
all countries have a role to play in achieving its vision.
The 2030 Agenda recognizes that each country must
work towards implementation in accordance with its
own national policies and priorities. The United States
also underscores that paragraph 18 of the 2030 Agenda
calls for countries to implement the Agenda in a
manner that is consistent with the rights and obligations
of States under international law. We also want to
highlight our mutual recognition, in paragraph 58, that
implementation of the 2030 Agenda must respect and be
without prejudice to the independent mandates of other
processes and institutions, including negotiations, and
does not prejudge or serve as a precedent for decisions
or actions under way in other forums. For example,
the 2030 Agenda does not represent a commitment to
providing new market access for goods or services. Nor
does it interpret or alter any World Trade Organization

A/74/PV.50

agreements or decisions, including the Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights.
With regard to climate change, on 4 November
2019 the United States submitted a formal notification
to the United Nations of its withdrawal from the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The withdrawal will
take effect one year from the delivery of the notification.
References to the Paris Agreement or to climate
change are therefore without prejudice to United States
positions. With regard to references to special reports
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC), the United States has indicated at the IPCC
that the IPCC’s acceptance of such reports and approval
of their respective summaries for policymakers does
not imply United States endorsement of the specific
findings contained in the reports. References to the
IPCC’s special reports are also without prejudice to
United States positions.
Regarding trade, as President Trump stated in his
address to the General Assembly on 25 September
2018 (see A/73/PV.6), the United States will act in its
sovereign interests, including on trade matters. This
means that we do not take our trade policy direction
from the United Nations. It is our view that the United
Nations should respect the independent mandates
of other processes and institutions, including trade
negotiations, and should not involve itself in decisions
and actions in other forums, including the World Trade
Organization. The United Nations is not an appropriate
venue for such discussions, and there should be no
expectation or misconception that the United States
would heed decisions made by the Economic and Social
Council or the General Assembly on such issues. That
includes calls that undermine incentives to innovation,
such as technology transfer that is not voluntary or on
mutually agreed terms.
Furthermore, the United States is disappointed
to see references to the world financial and economic
crisis. We note that the effects of the financial crisis
are no longer of any real relevance, and that continued
references to it detract from efforts to focus both on
today’s challenges and on the steady global economic
growth we are experiencing. We would like to take
this opportunity to make important clarification points
regarding the reaffirmation of the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda. We want to note specifically that much of the
trade-related language in the Addis Ababa outcome
document (resolution 69/313)has been overtaken by
events since July 2015. It is therefore immaterial,

19-4193019/36

A/74/PV.50

and our reaffirmation of the outcome document has
no standing for ongoing work and negotiations that
involve trade.
The right to development, which is not recognized
in any of the United Nations human rights conventions,
does not have an agreed international meaning.
Furthermore, work is needed to make it consistent
with human rights, which the international community
recognizes as universal rights held and enjoyed by
individuals and which every individual may demand
from his or her own Government. We also continue
to be concerned about the possibility that the right to
development referenced in resolutions this year protects
States rather than individuals. States must implement
their human rights obligations, regardless of external
factors, including the availability of development and
other assistance.
The President: It is time to wrap up.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): We
therefore continue to oppose references to the right
to development in draft resolutions presented to the
General Assembly during this session.
Finally, we reiterate statements we have made
during Third Committee discussions, and it is our
intention that this statement applies to all agenda items
addressed by the Third Committee.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “The
human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/141).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International Equal Pay Day”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/142).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 70.
20/36

18/12/2019

(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Commit tee
(A /74/399/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/143).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol
thereto: accessibility”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/144).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position after adoption.
Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to reiterate our position on
a number of paragraphs in resolution 74/143, entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. Our delegation cannot support
the language in the seventh preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 4 that refers to the International
Criminal Court and its Rome Statute, and dissociates
itself from the consensus on those paragraphs.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
19-41930

18/12/2019

enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee 		
(A/74/399/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it 21 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 90 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions I to XXI, one by one. After all the decisions
have been made, representatives will again have an
opportunity to explain their vote or position.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Freedom
of religion and belief”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/145).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementing the Declaration on the Right and
Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of
Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms through
providing a safe and enabling environment for human
rights defenders and ensuring their protection”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/146).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Terrorism and human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 74/147).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 74/148).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled “The
right to food”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,

A/74/PV.50

Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America

19-4193021/36

A/74/PV.50

Draft resolution V was adopted by 188 votes to 2
(resolution 74/149).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
22/36

18/12/2019

States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Liberia, Mexico, Peru
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 128 votes to 53,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 74/150).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Strengthening United Nations action in the field of
human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution VII without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 74/151).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“The right to development”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
19-41930

18/12/2019

Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovenia
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 138 votes to
23, with 26 abstentions (resolution 74/152).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Albania informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution IX without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 74/153).
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/74/PV.50

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,

19-4193023/36

A/74/PV.50

Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution X was adopted by 135 votes to 55
(resolution 74/154).
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Promotion of equitable geographical distribution in
the membership of the human rights treaty bodies”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
24/36

18/12/2019

Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Brazil
Draft resolution XI was adopted by 134 votes to 52,
with 1 abstention (resolution 74/155).
The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“National human rights institutions”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution XII without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution 74/156).
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“The safety of journalists and the issue of impunity”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XIII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution 74/157).
The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“Strengthening the role of the United Nations in
enhancing periodic and genuine elections and the
promotion of democratization”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XIV without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution 74/158).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“Human rights and cultural diversity”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
19-41930

18/12/2019

Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution XV was adopted by 136 votes to 55
(resolution 74/159).

A/74/PV.50

The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution
XVI without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution 74/160).
The President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled
“International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution XVII without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft
resolution
(r e s olu t io n 74 /161).

XVII

was

adopted

The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution XVIII without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft
re solut ion
(resolut ion 74/162).

X V III

wa s

adopted

The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“United Nations Human Rights Training and
Documentation Centre for South-West Asia and the
Arab Region”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,

19-4193025/36

A/74/PV.50

Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Palau
Draft resolution XIX was adopted by 187 votes to 1,
with 2 abstentions (resolution 74/163).
The President: Draft resolution XX is entitled
“Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XX was adopted (resolution 74/164).
The President: Draft resolution XXI is entitled
“Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
26/36

18/12/2019

Linguistic Minorities”. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XXI was adopted (resolution 74/165).
The President: I now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position after voting or adoption.
Mr. Kashaev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to once again reiterate our
position on a number of paragraphs in some of the
resolutions just adopted.
With regard to resolution 74/160, “Protection of
and assistance to internally displaced persons”, our
delegation cannot support the language in the twentysixth preambular paragraph regarding the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and dissociates
itself from the consensus on that paragraph.
Regarding resolution 74/158, “Strengthening the role
of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine
elections and the promotion of democratization,” we
want to again dissociate ourselves from the consensus
on operative paragraph 14.
Lastly, we feel compelled to dissociate ourselves
from the consensus on operative paragraph 3 of
resolution 74/148, on “Protection of migrants”. We
do not agree with the reference to the activities and
recommendations regarding natural disasters of the
Agenda for the Protection of Cross-Border Displaced
Persons in the Context of Disasters and Climate
Change, and the Platform on Disaster Displacement.
There is so far no reliable and universally recognized
scientific evidence that enables us to talk about a
direct dependence between climate change and the
movements of people or of environmental issues as
dominant factors in forcing such movement. In addition,
the activity of the Platform on Disaster Displacement
does not have the support of every country, and its
conclusions have not been endorsed by the specialized
platform of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. We have already expressed our
position regarding this language during the adoption
of the Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, and we justifiably assumed that repeating it
would be unnecessary. However, for some reason some
delegations, whether mistakenly or in bad faith, have
interpreted the absence of a repetition of our statement
on this subject in the Third Committee as agreement
19-41930

18/12/2019

with the paragraph and recognition of the consensus on
the language. We believe this repetition of it will clarify
our true position for those delegations.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile is not a participant in the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, which is why
its content does not apply to us in any way. Chile
therefore dissociates itself from all references to the
Global Compact in resolution 74/148, on “Protection
of migrants”.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/399/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it five
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 47 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution IV, entitled
“Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and
other minorities in Myanmar” is postponed to a later
date to allow time for the review of its programme
budget implications by the Fifth Committee. The
Assembly will take action on draft resolution IV as soon
as the report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications is available.
I now give the floor to delegations wishing to
deliver explanations of vote or position before voting
or adoption.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are now about to vote on so-called countryspecific draft resolutions, whose defining feature is an
egregious politicization that has nothing to do with
the protection of human rights. There is basically no
dialogue at all on this group of resolutions in the Third
Committee, and the confrontation keeps building every
year. We have not just come to a halt, we are sliding
backwards. We get the feeling that the authors of
these resolutions are purposely trying to undermine
constructive, mutually respectful cooperation on a
broad range of issues regarding the agenda on the

A/74/PV.50

protection of human rights, and we do not accept that
kind of approach on principle.
We will vote against the draft resolutions on the
human rights situations in Iran, Myanmar and Syria,
and we dissociate ourselves from the consensus on
the draft resolution on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The draft
resolution on Crimea deserves separate comment. I will
not repeat my statement in the Third Committee but
simply touch on the main points.
In 2014 the people of Crimea freely and
consciously realized their right to self-determination.
Today Crimea is part of the territory of the Russian
Federation and fully integrated into Russia, politically,
legally and economically. The Russian Federation
guarantees the protection of human rights and freedoms
throughout its territory, including Crimea. No one is
firing on residential neighbourhoods in Crimea with
large-calibre weapons and mortars or burning people
alive, as happened in Odessa on 2 May. No one is
killing journalists or holding neo-Nazi marches or
forbidding people to speak their native language. Life
in Crimea is calm and peaceful, and anyone who wants
to can see that for themselves. We welcome them to the
peninsula and to Russia. Incidentally, in addition to air,
sea and road links, a passenger railway link will soon
be opening across the Crimean bridge.
Do not believe the militaristic rhetoric we hear from
various representatives of Ukraine or the horror stories
in the draft resolution. Friendliness and understanding
are what are desperately needed now for a dialogue with
the good people of Ukraine who have become victims
of a cynical geopolitical experiment. A vote for this
draft resolution is a vote against the Russian Federation
and against the interests of the Ukrainians, Russians,
Crimean Tatars and members of other nationalities
living in Crimea. It is a vote against the interests of
Ukraine itself. I would therefore like to thank all 126
States that refused to vote in favour of this odious draft
resolution in the Third Committee.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation totally rejects the draft resolution
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”, sponsored by the European
Union. It has nothing to do with the genuine promotion
and protection of human rights and is an impure product
of a political plot by hostile forces that seek to tarnish
the identity and image of the Democratic People’s

19-4193027/36

A/74/PV.50

Republic of Korea and overthrow its social system. As
we have already made clear on several occasions, the
entire contents of the draft resolution are nothing but
completely false and fabricated sophism. The human
rights issues mentioned in the draft resolution have
never existed and could not be allowed to exist in my
country, where the dignity and independent rights of
human beings are fully recognized.
The reality is clearly that hostile forces obsessed
with inveterate hatred against us are becoming more
hell-bent on human rights rhetoric against our country
and seeking to destroy our social system. Even if hostile
forces may criticize so-called human rights issues, they
cannot conceal the truth about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, where all people are provided with
appropriate rights as masters of their State and society,
nor can they justify the perverse human rights record of
their own despicable entities.
The United Nations should discern the sinister
political motivation behind the so-called human rights
racket and should no longer allow any infringement
upon sovereignty or misuse of the good name of the
United Nations.
The European Union, the main sponsor of the draft
resolution against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, should reflect on and correct its own serious
human rights situations, including such crimes against
humanity as Islamophobia, xenophobia, mistreatment
of minorities, racial discrimination and the refugee
crisis, which are widespread throughout its own
territories, and should bring criminals to justice rather
than inquiring into non-existent human rights issues in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
actively contribute to the dialogue on cooperation for
the promotion and protection of human rights, but we
will respond strongly to such provocative or hostile
acts as the adoption of human rights resolutions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that aim to
overthrow our social system.
My delegation condemns in the strongest terms
the adoption of the draft resolution, which is a typical
manifestation of hostile intent against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that infringes upon the
sovereignty and dignity of our State and represents a
grave political provocation. As such, we consider that
there is no need or justification to put it to the vote.
28/36

18/12/2019

In conclusion, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea opposes and rejects all
country-specific human rights resolutions — against
the Russian Federation, the Islamic Republic of Iran or
the Syrian Arab Republic — based on our principled
position against politicization, selectivity and double
standards relating to human rights.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With regard to the
draft resolutions under agenda item 70(c), the Bolivian
Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its principled position
on the adoption of resolutions and special procedures
or any other mechanism relating to the human rights
situation in a specific country, noting that we reject the
selective approach to addressing such topics based on
political motivations as a violation of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Cooperation and dialogue are the appropriate tools
for the effective promotion and protection of human
rights. In that regard, we support the repeated calls by
the Non-Aligned Movement in this matter, with the
understanding that human rights issues must be dealt
with under the principles of universality, non-selectivity
and non-politicization. Based on this principled position,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will dissociate
itself from any consensus that may be reached on the
draft resolution on the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic of
Iran): I am delivering this statement in relation to draft
resolution II as contained in document A/74/399/Add.3,
on the so-called “Situation of human rights in Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the decision
by Canada, though heavily guarded and conditional,
to revisit its position on the inhumane apartheid
policy pursued by Israel in Palestine. We hope it is not
temporary and will lead to other prudent decisions, such
as abandoning that politicized, futile draft resolution.
No one should take that recurring show of dishonesty
seriously. Iranians do not. After all, why should such a
draft resolution be taken seriously when Israel, which has
committed all core international crimes, has constantly
been among its main advocates? After all, why should
anyone take human rights advice from the main
sponsors of the draft resolution, when they have been
the long-standing proponents of racism, colonialism,
19-41930

18/12/2019

foreign occupation, interventionism, preventive wars
and the uprooting of indigenous peoples?
Those who have a consistent historical record of
betraying their promises and violating values such as
justice, the rule of law and democracy cannot reserve
for themselves the right to intervene and the privilege to
interpret human rights and international law. Assuming
that those few self-appointed guardians of global
virtues genuinely care about human rights in Iran is
both farcical and insulting. History attests to their truly
destructive behavioural pattern, which continues to this
very day.
Even today, the leading sponsors of the draft
resolution are the worst adversaries of human rights
and democratic values in Iran and beyond. Even today,
my people are struggling to protect their basic human
rights against the genocidal economic war waged by the
United States. The economic terrorism that the United
States has unleashed against Iranians, especially
the most vulnerable among them, deliberately and
indiscriminately violates their basic human rights,
including the right to food, the right to education, the
right to health and the right to life.
Those acts of economic terrorism purposefully and
ruthlessly deprive children with cancer and genetic
diseases, as well as patients with diabetes, multiple
sclerosis, asthma, polycythemia and other patients with
life-threatening or rare conditions, of their basic rights
to health and life.
Meanwhile, the imposition by the United States
of its national laws on sovereign States is both the
manifestation of tyranny at the international level and
an open assault on the principle of equality among
United Nations Member States. Let us not forget that it
is in the United States where a white man’s gun is more
protected than a black child’s life.
Therefore nothing could appear more absurd
than observing the outcry for human rights in Iran by
Governments that have never cared about them in the
first place – Governments that have actively assaulted
the human rights of the same people for whom they
hypocritically claim to be concerned.
In orchestrating their Iranophobic campaign,
nothing is off-limits. They shamelessly collude with
renowned terrorists, cults and separatists to incite
violence and destruction. They openly abuse all
available platforms to provoke hate and misinformation.

A/74/PV.50

Therefore, there is no reason for them to exclude the
United Nations and its human rights machinery in order
to exert even more pressure on Iran and Iranians.
Such behaviour is conducted routinely against
anyone who dares to challenge their short-sighted
political objectives, which are essentially based on
arrogance, hypocrisy and mind-boggling lies. The
issue of human rights is just another chapter in the
blueprint of what is sinisterly dubbed “the maximum
pressure policy” against Iranians —a code name
for regime-change. While the Islamic Republic of
Iran unambiguously believes in multilateralism and
international law, it regards the draft resolution as
harmful to the prospects for progress on the protection
and promotion of human rights and as merely a reflection
of the political agenda of a few States who consistently
disrespect international law and advocate unilateralism
and coercion. Please do not give them another chance to
weaponize human rights against Iranians.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I have the honour to thank
all Member States that supported the draft resolution
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine”
during the vote in the Third Committee on 14 November.
We are grateful to all delegations that stood firm in the
face of unprecedented direct threats emanated from
one Member State during the consideration of the draft
resolution in the Committee.
The General Assembly has considered this
resolution for the fourth year in a row with a view to
condemning all attempts to legitimize or normalize the
attempted annexation of Crimea, which is an illegal act
under international law and the root cause of massive
human rights abuses and violations. The purpose of the
draft resolution to be adopted today is to put an end to
the ongoing human rights violations perpetrated by the
Russian Federation in temporarily occupied Crimea.
In addition, the draft resolution highlights the
obligations and legal responsibilities of the occupying
Power for serious intentional breaches of applicable
human rights treaties and international humanitarian
law. The occupation of Crimea and its negative impact
on human rights is an issue that is on the agenda
of many international organizations and is being
considered by international courts and tribunals. The
General Assembly has directly examined it under three
different agenda items.

19-4193029/36

A/74/PV.50

By voting in favour of the draft resolution, the
international community will further strengthen its
non-recognition of any attempt to redraw borders
by military force in violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. Ukraine
strongly denies all the Russian delegation’s mantras
with reference to occupied Crimea as exemplified
once again by the cynical statement of the Russian
representative moments ago. Crimea is and will remain
an integral part of Ukraine.
The draft resolution to be adopted today is an
important instrument for putting an end to all human
rights violations and abuses against residents of Crimea
and contributing to the inevitable deoccupation of the
Ukrainian peninsula. The vote of members will help
to achieve those goals and protect our shared values as
enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
the consistent position of China to tackle differences
in the area of human rights on the basis of equality and
mutual respect and through constructive dialogue and
cooperation. We oppose the politicization of human
rights or using the issue of human rights to exert pressure
on other countries and we also oppose country-specific
resolutions on human rights. Therefore, we disassociate
ourselves from the consensus on the draft resolution on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and will vote against all the other
country-specific human rights resolutions.
The President: We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I, II, III and V, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/166).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
30/36

18/12/2019

Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Afghanistan,
Armenia,
Belarus,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Serbia, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution II was adopted by 81 votes to 30,
with 70 abstentions (resolution 74/167).
19-41930

18/12/2019

[Subsequently, the delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mexico,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Paki-stan, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

A/74/PV.50

Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 65 votes to 23,
with 83 abstentions (resolution 74/168).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Mauritania, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,

19-4193031/36

A/74/PV.50

Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 106 votes to 15,
with 57 abstentions (resolution 74/169).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nigeria informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The President: I now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I take the floor
to provide an explanation of our vote on resolution
74/169. The crisis in Syria began when the democratic
aspirations and legitimate demands of Syrians were
crushed by force. Innocent civilians have been killed
with chemical weapons and barrel bombs or have been
subjected to arbitrary detention, torture, starvation and
abduction. In the face of those grave violations, the
General Assembly has adopted this annual resolution
through the Third Committee to advocate for the
protection of human rights in Syria and to combat
impunity. Turkey has supported those efforts from the
very first resolution adopted in 2011 (resolution 66/176).
We have co-sponsored all subsequent resolutions ever
since and have actively contributed to their drafting.
Needless to say, the focus of the resolution is
supposed to be the widespread violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law suffered by
the Syrian people at the hands of Bashar Al-Assad.
However, we regret that this year’s drafting exercise
was handled inadequately by the penholder and in a
manner far from impartial, as reflected in the statement
made by that delegation during the deliberations of the
32/36

18/12/2019

Third Committee, which casts serious doubts on the
competence of that delegation to continue holding the
pen on this issue.
In particular, paragraph 49 on developments in the
north-east of Syria deliberately distorts the facts on
the ground. It is clear that such language is motivated
by the political calculations of certain Member States,
whose interests are not served by the results of Turkey’s
limited cross-border counter-terrorism operation.
That language is not intended to inform us about the
suffering of Syrian people but instead tells us why
certain Member States are almost always remembered
by their frequent use of double standards and hypocrisy.
In contrast to those countries, we cannot condone
lies or the selective reflection of events. Therefore, for
the first time in nine years, Turkey has regrettably been
forced to vote against the adoption of the resolution,
although I would like to underline that, except for one
specific paragraph, we subscribe to its core message.
With regard to paragraph 49, I should like to the
record straight. The violence in north-eastern Syria has
been inflicted by the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
(YPG), the Syrian offshoot of the terrorist organization
the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), and we are not
surprised to see that those most concerned with the
so-called recent escalation of violence in north-eastern
Syria are those who also supported that terrorist
organization, both politically and materially.
Yet, PKK/YPG attempted to establish its own
totalitarian state in north-eastern Syria in contravention
of the territorial integrity and unity of Syria. It is
widely documented that they oppressed the local
populations who opposed their rule, in particular the
Arabs and Kurds, and forcibly displaced them from the
areas under their control. That is the real demographic
change that has already occurred in the region, which
resolution 74/169 conveniently disregards.
That group went as far as releasing Da’esh terrorists
to carry out terror acts in Turkey or north-western Syria,
yet there is no mention of those outrageous actions in
resolution 74/169. Turkey, on the other hand, as the
only country that has engaged in hand-to-hand combat
against Da’esh, has recaptured hundreds of Da’esh
combatants that were released from prisons by YPG. To
claim that Turkey’s operation eroded the fight against
Da’esh is disingenuous to say the least, particularly
given the fact that the leader of that terrorist group was
recently eliminated.
19-41930

18/12/2019

The text is also misleading in its interpretation of the
humanitarian situation. As one of the leading donors in
the humanitarian field, Turkey ensures every month the
safe passage of lifeline convoys to millions of Syrians
through the United Nations cross-border mechanism.
We provide protection to about 9 million Syrians in
both Turkey and Syria. Our humanitarian support to
north-eastern Syria continues unabated today.
More than 370,000 Syrians have voluntarily
returned to their homes in areas we have liberated from
terrorism in the north-west. We are working towards
the same objective in the north-east and are continuing
to alleviate the suffering of the population, in close
co-operation with the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations. We should also not forget that some
European countries that are giving lectures on those
issues have continued to suspend humanitarian aid to
Syrians under false pretexts.
Finally, on the political track, as the guarantor
of the opposition, Turkey played a pivotal role in the
launch of the Constitutional Committee, which met
in Geneva following the launch of Operation Peace
Spring. Therefore, the political process, far from
being undermined as claimed in the text, is advancing
thanks to our ceaseless efforts to that end. On the
other hand, it is those who have supported the PKK/
YPG and have attempted to lecture us in our fight
against terror that bear primary responsibility and have
“seriously undermined the stability and security of the
whole region”.
Sensitive issues require careful, transparent and
fair consideration, and, above all, impartiality and
objectivity. Unfortunately, the process of deliberations
on resolution 74/169 was driven by the biased and
revanchist agendas and obsessions of some countries,
which is why our calls during the deliberations to
include mention in the resolution of vital issues such as
the repatriation of Da’esh fighters, the ethnic cleansing
and demographic engineering pursued by PKK/YPG
and the European Union’s pledges regarding Syrian
refugees fell on deaf ears.
That is not surprising given that shame is in retreat
in some parts of the world, but Turkey will never accept
outrageous allegations and we will never be intimidated
by hypocrisy. We will continue our efforts to address
the suffering of the Syrian people, protect their human
rights and work towards the transformation of Syria
into a democratic, secular and stable country.

A/74/PV.50

Mr. Cepero Aguilar (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation is making this statement in order
to disassociate itself from the consensus on resolution
74/166, entitled “Situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”, pursuant to
our position against the imposition of selective and
politically motivated resolutions and mandates. We
believe that only genuine international corporation
based on the principles of objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity constitutes the ideal way effectively to
promote and protect the human rights of all.
We hope that in this case, as in many others, an
opportunity will be given for the universal periodic
review mechanism to foster debate free from
politicization or confrontation and to encourage
respectful cooperation with the country concerned.
Resolution 74/166 continues to advocate the path
of sanctions and the dangerous and counterproductive
involvement of the Security Council in matters outside
its jurisdiction. Cuba cannot therefore join consensus
on a resolution that seeks to expand punitive Security
Council sanctions in situations that do not represent
a threat to international peace and security. We will
not be complicit in attempts to deny the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea their right to
peace, self-determination and development.
We wish to indicate that our opposition to that
selective and politicized mandate is not based on
value judgments on other pending matters mentioned
in the twenty-fourth preambular paragraph, which
calls for a fair and honourable solution agreeable to all
parties concerned.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): My delegation would like to disassociate
itself from resolution 74/166. In our view, the
counterproductive and confrontational approach of the
resolution contravenes the principles of universality,
non-selectivity and objectivity in addressing human
rights issues.
Mrs. Ndayishimiye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
I have the honour of making this statement after the
voting on resolutions 74/166, 74/167, 74/168 and 74/169,
regarding which my delegation would like to recall that
it rejects as a matter of principle all country-specific
resolutions. Burundi firmly believes that dialogue,
cooperation and consensual mechanisms constitute
the appropriate tools for considering human rights
issues. Unfortunately, politically motivated selectivity

19-4193033/36

A/74/PV.50

and double standards have diverted the Human Rights
Council from the objectives assigned to it at the
time of its establishment by the General Assembly.
The delegation of Burundi therefore voted against
those resolutions.
The President: Before I call on speakers in exercise
of the right of reply, I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first statement and five minutes
for the second and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I am exercising the right of reply following the
statement made by the representative Turkey.
The representative of Turkey mentioned her
country’s concern about the Syrian people and for
protecting them and preserving their rights. That
is null and void. Turkey has carried out aggression
against the protected population in the northern part
of Syria under the pretext of fighting terrorism. This
is nothing but a reflection of the policy of a State that
clearly wishes to perpetrate massacres while hiding
behind humanitarian slogans. Despite international
condemnation, Turkey persists in its blatant aggression
against Syria and continues to sow chaos and death,
in stark contravention of international laws and norms.
These actions and policies publicly unveil Turkey’s true
intentions behind its aggressive policies.
The Syrian Arab Republic has confronted the
aggression of Turkey in many areas by fighting and
defeating its proxies and terrorists. We stress that we
will address the flagrant Turkish aggression in all its
forms and in all parts of Syria using all legitimate ways
and means. We emphasize that counter-terrorism in
Syria is ongoing and that nothing — especially such
statements by the representative of Turkey or her
likes — will stop it. The protection of the Syrian people
is exclusively the mission of the Syrian Arab Army and
the Syrian State.
It would appear that the representative of Turkey is
harbouring illusions, especially when she talks about
the behaviour of her country towards the crisis in Syria.
Turkey opened its borders to more than 70,000 terrorists
who have been perpetrating killings and terrorist acts
in Syria for more than eight years now.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I will be very brief.
I would like to underline that I do not consider the
34/36

18/12/2019

Syrian representative to be my legitimate counterpart.
He is the representative of a regime that has the blood
of innocent Syrians on its hands and I will therefore not
honour him with a response.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic on a point of order.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, I request that you compel the
representative of Turkey to abide by the rules and
procedures, and to address my country as the Syrian
Arab Republic. We are under the dome of the General
Assembly. We must speak first and foremost in
accordance with the established rules and procedures.
The President: The General Assembly has
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 70.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/399/Add.4)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 74/518).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has
concluded this stage of his consideration of sub-item
(d) of agenda item 70.
Agenda item 106
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/400)
The President: The General Assembly has before
it eight draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 29 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to VIII, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Integrating sport into youth crime prevention and
criminal justice strategies”. The Third Committee
19-41930

18/12/2019

A/74/PV.50

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise, taking into account the oral revision?

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 74/170).

Draft resolution VII, as orally revised, was adopted
(resolution 74/176).

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
and preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 74/171).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Education for Justice and the rule of law in the context
of sustainable development”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 74/172).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Promoting technical assistance and capacity-building
to strengthen national measures and international
cooperation to combat cybercrime, including
information-sharing”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 74/173).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Countering child sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
online”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 74/174).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Technical assistance provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime related to counter-terrorism”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 74/175).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
”Improving the coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons”, as orally revised by the
Rapporteur. The Third Committee adopted it without

The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution 74/177).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 107
Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/401)
The President: I should like to inform members
that action on the draft resolution contained in the report
of the Third Committee is postponed to a later date
to allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on the draft resolution as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 107.
Agenda item 108
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/402)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision on
the draft resolution entitled “International cooperation
to address and counter the world drug problem”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 74/178).

19-4193035/36

A/74/PV.50

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 108?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/404)

18/12/2019

Agenda item 136
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/74/403)
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 74/520).

The President: The General Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report.

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.

We will now take a decision on the draft decision
entitled “Draft programme of work of the Third
Committee for the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank Mr. Christian Braun, Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg to the United Nations and Chair of
the Third Committee, the members of the bureau and
delegates for a job well done.

The draft decision was adopted (decision 74/519).

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of the reports of the Third Committee
before it at this meeting.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 121.

36/36

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

19-41930
