ITEDNATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFIC'IAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEILDE ·SECURITE
-

PROCES·VERBAUXOFFIC IElS
DEUXIEME ANNEE-

No. 9
inety-eighth and
~ ety-ninth meetings

.:

"

..

Quatre-vingt..dix-huitieme-et
quatte..vingt-dix-neuvieme seances

. February1947

4fevrier1947

Lake Success

New York

~~4"'~~~~~~~W-~~~~~~~~~~~
,\;L·
··.~TABLE Pf.CONTENTS',
. r~' .':' TABLEDESMATIEIlE:S':
,

.

..'.

.'

o; ; ' "

.,.

.

i.>

','

.

Quatl'e-vin9t~dix-huinel1leseanc:e

·'Ninety-eighth m'Adng
~~.

~ . ~~

Provisional agendf... . . . . . . . .. • . . . . .• 14.7

33. Ordre dti jour provi'soire. . . . . . . . . . . ... 147

Opening remarks by th~PresicJent.... . .. 148

34. Allo~iition du ·President;

Communication conctinmg the ~val9f
the representative of Albania. . . . . . . . . .. 148 "-

35.Communicatioll au 'sujet de l'arrivee du
representant de l'Albanie
.' ....• " 148

Adoption of the agendl:l..•........ : ... 150

36. AdoptioJI de l'ordre du jo~r

CcntiW:Jation of the Wscussionon the
.general regulation and reduction of armaments •.............................. 150

37. Suite de la discussion'sur la reglementa~
tion.et la.reduction generales des arme~
ments
~
:. .. . . . . . . . . . .. 150

148

:.

-:: . . . . .. 150

Quafre-vingt-dix-neuvieme seam:e

Ninety-ninth. meeting
Continuation of the discussion on the
general'regulatioIl and reduction of armaments .. :
'
, 160

38. Suite de la discussion sur la regle~enta~
tion et la reduction generales des arme...
menta
160

DtJcuments

Documents
Annex

~ _. '!'he .. following documents reievant .to the

Annexes
rapporta~t aux quatrevingt~dix-huitieme et.' quatre-vingt-dix~neu­

Les documentfJ se

.' .,ninety-eighth and ninety-ninth meetings appear as follows: .~ .
.

vieme sea!lces figurent dans les publications
suivantes:

-Supplerdent No. 2~ Second Year

Suppleme"}t No 2~ Deuxieme Annee

Letter fronlthe representative of the Union
of .S()viet '. Socialist Republics on the
Security Council to the Secretaty~General,
elated ·27 December 1946 (document

Lettre adressee au Secretaire general Rar le
representant de 'I'Union des RepubHques
.. socialistessovietiques, au . Consejl de securite, ·en date du27 decembi"e 1946
(document S/229) .:................

3

4

.Resolution de I'Assemblee generale sixr les
"informations relative~ aux forces armees
des Nations Unies" (documentS/230)..

4

5

Resolution de I'AssembIee' generale sur les
"prlncipes regissant la. reglementationet
. _ la reduction generalesdesarmements"
(document 8/231)
:...

5

6"

ProJet de resolution soumis par' le representant des Etats-Uni~ d'Ameriqtie'1ors de la
quatre-vi~gt-huitieme seance du CQnseil
desecurite (document S/233) ,. . .•. . . .. < 6

S/229) .....•...•..... ;............3

. Resoiution of the'General Assembl}t conGerp.· •. ·.itlg. "information on armed forces of the
. United Nations"- (ilocument·S/230).:.. .
Resolution of the Gener~lAssembly on the
."principles.governing the' general.regul~­
tion and reduction ofa.rlIlf.Urients" (docu;? men(Sj231)
.... ~" .••. . . . . . . ....

Dr~tiesoluiionsubmitted bytlje representa.;
tiveofthe United States.of America at
"'t;JIe eighty-eighth meeting of the 'Security
C~uncil (docl@entSj233).;.........
. Draft,f~solution ~ubmitted by therepresentative of .France· at' the' ninetieth' meeting
of the Security Council (document
S/243) ..... ;......................
, ....

~i"ojet de resolution presente par le repre-

7

seritantde la France a la quatre-vingtdixieme seance. du .Conseil 'de securite
(docunxent 5/243) .;
\... . 7

'

."S-upplement No. 5~ Second Year

Letterfto~ the Chafrman.. of. the Atomic

Energy Commission to the President of
the Security Council 'dated 31 December
1946, transmitting the First .• Repon .of
the' Atomic.. Energy Commission to the
Security Council (docUment S/239). •.. 14,

Supplement No 5~ Deuxieme Annee
Lcttre du President' de la Commission de
l'energie atomiqueau President. du
Conseil de securite, en date du 31 decembre 1946, et tran.smettant le" Premier..
'. Rapport de la Commissiol} de I'energie
atomique (doculpent S/239).... .. .... 14

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES.

~SECURITY

COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFiCIELS

SECOND YEAR

/'

No. 9

DErJXIEME ANNEE

No9

NINETY-EIGHTH MEETING

QUATRE-VINGT-DIX-HUITIEME SEANCE

H tU at Lake Success, New York,
on Tue:.'day~ 4 February 1947, at 11 a.m.
President.. Mr. M. F. VAN LA~oENHOVE

lemardi 4 Nvrier 1947, 11 ~eures.

Tenue aLake Success, New-York,

a

President: M. M. F. VAN J..ANGENHOVE

(Belgium).
Present: Th,,~ representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, tT~lt~d Kingdom, United
States of America.

Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Cb.iIJe, Colombie,
France,Pologne,Syrie, Union des Republiques
sociaIistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni,Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

33. Provisional agenda

33.0rdreduiour provisoire

(Belgique) •

Presents: Les.representants des pays suivants:

[document S/261]
1. Adoption of the agenda.

2.

[document 8/261]

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
Resolution of the General Assembly on
2. Resolution de l'AssembIeegeneralesur les
the "principles' governing the general' regula"principes regissant la. reglementation et la
tion and reduction of armaments" (docureduction generales des a.rmements" (~ocu­
ment S/230,1 and the proposals regarding
ment S/231 )1 et propositionS relativeS a sa
its implementation:
mise en reuvre:
,
a), -Lettre au Seeretair~ general dureI;f~sen-­
(a) Letter' from the representative of the
tant de rUnion des'Republiquess6ciaIisUnion of Soviet Socialist Republics on
tes sovietiques aupres duConseil de sethe Security Council to the Secretarycurite, en date' du27 decembre 1946
General, dated 27. December 1946
. (document 8/229)2.
, (d'Jcument S/229).2
b), Projet de resolution soumispar lerepre(b) Draft resolution submitted by the representant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique lors
sentative of the United States of America:
de la quatre-vingt-huitieme seance du
at the eighty-eighth meeting of the'
'Coriseil de securite (document S/233) s.
Security Council (document S/233) .c) Projet de resolution presente par le repre(c) Draft resolution submitted by the representant de la France a 'la quatre-vingtsentative of France at the ninetieth
dixiemeseance du Conseil de securite
meeting of the Security Council (document S/243).'
(document S/243)·.
d) Projet de resolution soumis par le repre(d) Draft resolution submitted by the representant de I'Australie Jors de laquatresentative of Australia at the' ninety-secvingt-douzieme ,seance du Conseil" de seond meeting of the Security Co.uncil
(document S/249),G
cprite (document 8/249 )15.
, :
e) Projet de resolution soumis par le t:epre(e) Draft resolution submitted by the representant de la Colombie lors de la' qua,tresentative of Colombia at the ninety-third
.vingt-treiZieme seance dn Conseil de semeeting of the Security Council (docu- .
curite (document 8/251)6. I
rilent S/251).6

--- Voir
- -Proces-verbaux officlefsdu, Conseilde securite.
See Official Records of the Security Council. Second
'O. 1

'.
'lear, Supplement No. 2, Annex 5.
2 Ibid., Annex 3.
I Ibid., Annex 6.
tIbid., Annex 7.
'O. G See Official Records of the Security Council. Second
'lear. No. 4, page 69.
I Ibid•• pages 94 and 95.

"II!I'__~

1

Deuxieme Annee. Supplement 1';0 2, Annexe 5.
2 Ibid.• Annexe 3.
8 Ibid., Annexe 6.
tlbid.,Annexe 7.
I Voir Proces-verbauxofficiels du Conseil de securit',
Deuxieme Annee, No 4, page 69.
I Ibid., pages 94 et 95.

3. Rerolution of the GeneralAssemblyconcem. ing "information. on armed forces of the
United Na'ti0ns" (.docl.lment. S/230) .1

3. Resolution, de l'AssembIee generaIe sur les
"informations relatives aux forces armees des
Nations Unies" (document S/230) 1"

4.' Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy ·Commission to the Presiden~ of. the
Security Council. dated 31 December 1946~
. transmitting the First Report of the Atomic
Energy Commission· to the Security Council
(documentS/239}~2 ·
'

4. Lettre du President de la Comw.ission de
I'energie atomique au President du Conseil
de securite; en date du31 decembre 1946, et
t,ansmettant le Premier Rapport de la Commission. de l'energieatomique au Conseil de
,~curite (document S/239?. ~

34. Opening remarks by the President

34. AUocution clu President

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Les regles en vigueur m'imUnder the existing rules of procedure,though a
posent ie devoir, en menie temps que l~honneut,
bien' que je som nouveau··. venu ., au Conseil de
newcomer to the Council, I have the duty, as
securite, d'en assumer la presidence pendant le
well as the honour,.of presiding over the Security
Council during the month of February.
mois de fevrier.
1 atll not unaware of· the· difficulties of -my
Je ne saurais me dissimuler les difficultes de
.task ·at ca time when· th... Council is about to' ma tache, a un moment ou, precisement, le
.Conseil aborde des problemes importants et
enga~e on importantan( complicated problems.
. '
ardus.
I regret that there was not more time in which
Je regrette de n'avoir pu beneficier plus longtemps. de l'enseignement qui se. degageait de
I could profit froxp. the instructive example of
l'exemple de mon distin~e predecesseur. Je
my distinguished predecessor. However, I am
somewhat comforted by the thought that I can
trouvecependantquelque reconfort dans la
pensee que je puis comptersur la bienveillante
count on the indUlgent co-()peration of my
cooperation demes colle~es.
c~~~es. . - .
'
Le'role du President est avant tout de veiller
The function of The President is above all to
! l'ordre et a la regclarite des debats,.et de '
ensure the. orderliness. and regularity of debates
contribuera leur fructueux aboutissement. Son
and. to assist· in bringing them' to a successful
premier devoir est l'impartialite. Je puis assurer
conclusion. His first duty is that of impartiality.
mes colle~es que j'aurai a creur de m'y
I can assure my colleagues that I shall endeavour
conformer.
who~eheartedly to conform to this duty.
.

35. C~mtrlgnica.tion concerning the' arrivai 'of the' representative of Albania

35. CommulJicQtion au suiet de I'arrivee
clu representant de I'Albanie

ThepiEsIDENT. (translated from French ) :
Le PRESIDENT:~ Avant de· passer a l'adoption
Before we proceed to the adoption of the agenda,
de l'ordre dujour, je voudrais fl!ire une commuI have a communication to make to the CoUncil.
nication au COmleil.
Document S/263 entitled "Communications
Le document 8/263 iutitule "CommunicaconceI'llingthe arrival in New York of a rt:pre- . . tions concemant l'arrivee a New-York d'un re-_
sentative of the Peopl~'sRepublicofAlbania to
presentailt de la Republique populaire d'Albanie
the Security Council",. ~as just been distributed
au Conseil de securite"vient d'etredistribue aux
to members of the Council.
membres du Conseil.
.
..'

The document reads as follows:

Ce document est I:edige dans les termes suivants:

1. CABLEGRAM FROM THE ACTING SECRETARY-

1. ChLOGRAMME DUSECRETJ.nU: GENERAL PA'R
INTERIM AU MooSTRE DES AFFAIRES ETRANGERES DE LA. REpUBLIQUE POPULAIRE D'ALBANIE; EN DATE DU 28 JANVIER 1947.

GENERAL TO THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN
AFFAIRS OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
ALBANIA, DATED 28 JANUARY 1947.

[Original text: English]
[Texte original en anglais]
Colonel-General Enver Hoxha,
Au colonel-general Enver Hrixha
President of the Republic of Albania,
,President de la Republique d'-Albanie
Tirana (Albania)
Tiral1a. ,(Albanie)
,
5566 .
5566
'
I have honour to acknowledge your telegram
J'ai l'honneur d'accuse~ reception de votre
of 24 Januaryiconcerning appointment Hysni
teIegramme du 24 janvier concemant la designation de M. Hysni Kapo comme representant de
Kapo to represent Albania before .Security Coun.cil.Thic;reply Was 'brought tC)-attentiQn' of Secul'Albanie aupres du Conseil de securite. Votre
reponse a ete portee a l'attention du Conseil, de
rity Council at its meeting toda~ and, Council
1 See Offit;fal Records pf the Secunt:! Council, Second
Veal'. Supplement N'o.2, Annex ,4.
'
S Ibid., Supplement No. 5, Annex, 14.
"

.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de Mcurite,
Dewdeme Annee, Supplemep.t No 2, Annexe 4.
S Ibid., Supplement No 5, Anne~e 14.

~-i'~~~~~~~Q~~4~{;~4l'?-'?;-""""'/PJIo,~y
......w.~t;m>.'r.;,~n.::..~~~~~~~~""".~~"r<f~...r',~~~

.

...~rJN'fj<''''''_'7''''~''"~-,;,,,-=,~_',£'.-r6-':~.'';;~?''f_6Jl-='''''-~''''''':'''~

decided to adjourn discussion of British Governsecurite au cours de sa seance d'aujourd'hui, et
ment's complaint until its next meeting to be "le Conseil a decide d'ajourner la discussion de la
called at discretion of President. Under instrucplainte du Gouvemement britamiique jusqu'a sa
tions of Council I have honour to request you
prochaine seance, qui sera convoquee a la disto inform me by cable of approximate date of
cretion du President. Aux terines des instmctians
which Albanian representative can arrive in New
du Conseilde securite, j'ai l'honucJll' de v.OJIS
York giving due consideration to desire of Cowiprier •demefaire connaitre par cable la date
cll to, proceed with discussion of this qu~tion as
approxima~ve a laqueIIe le representant de
soon as possible. Please acknowledge receipt of
I'Albanie pourra arriver a' New-York, eu egal'd
this cable. .
.,
au desir· du Conseil de proceder, le plus tot. possible a la discussion decette question. Je vous
prie d'accuser r&eption du present cable.
(Signe) David OWEN,
(Signed) David OWEN"

Acting Secretary-General~

Secretaire general par interim.

2. CABLEGRAM FROM THE SECRETARy-GENERAL

2. CABLOGRAMME DU SECRETAIRE GENERAL AU

TO THE MINISTER FOR FOP-EIGN AFFAIRS OF
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA, DA'rED
,31 JANUARY 194:7.

MINISTRE DESAFFAIRES ETRANGERES'DE·LA
REpUBLIQUEPOPULAIRE D'ALBANIE E~ DATE
pu 31 JANVIER 1947.

,

. IOriginal text: French]

[Texte originalen jrangais]

Au colonel-general Enver Hoxha
Colonel-General Enver Hoxha,
President de la RepubIique d'Albanie
Presioent of the Republic .of Albania,
Tirana (Albanie)
Tirana, Albania
With -reference to our telegram 5566 of 29 _ Reference notre teIegramme 5566 du 28 janvier concemant venue ,M~nistre Hysnl Kapo pour
January concerning arrival bfMiliister Hysni
representer AIbanie devant Conseil securite. Ai
Kapo to represent Albania·before Security CoUnhonneur vous informerqu'agents voyage Nations
cil I have· honour. worm you that United
Uni~ a Paris et Naples ont J;'e~u instructions
Nations travel agents in Paris and NapleS have
pour lui accorder l'assistance necessaiI'eafin lui
been instructed to give him all necessary assist..
permettre d'arriver New-Yorkaussit8": que posance to enable him to reach New York as soon as
possible. I have. honour request you to corifirm 1I sible. Ai honneur vous prier vouloir confirmer
notre teIegramme5566 et accuser receptiondu
our cablegram 5566 and acknowledge receipt of
this one.
present.
(Signe) Trygve ~?
(Signed) Trygve LIE,

Secretary-General.

Secretaire general..

3. CABLEGRAM· FROM THE MINISTER OF FOR-

3. ChLOGRAMME DU MINISTRE DESAFFAIRES

EIGN AFFAIRS OF THE PEOPLE'S REpUBLIC
OF ALBANIA TO THE SECRETARy-GENERAL,
DATED 31 JANUARY 1947, AND RECEIVED
3 FEBRUARY 1947.

:ETRANGERES DE LA REpUBLIQ,UE POPULAIRE
n'ALBANIE A11 SECRETAIRE GENERAL PAR
,. :INTERIM, EjS" DATE Du31JANVIER 1947, ET
REgU LE 3 FEVRIER 1947?

, [Orig!1!~ltext: French]

[Texte original en frangais]

Trygve tie, 'Secretary-General, .
United Nations,'
Lake Success, New York
I:'l"o.43/30 '
I have the honour to worm you that I only
had knowledge ~f your telegram 5566 of 28 January yesterday evening. United States Eml:>assy
at Belgrade informed' our legation that it had
been authorized to issue a visa to our representative and his suite; they will leave Belgrade immeqiat~lyfor .N~w York via Paris by any available
means. It. is impossible to :fix the exact date of
their- arrival at New York.
Colonel-General Enver HOXHA

AM. Trygve Lie
Secretaire general des Nations Unies
Lake Success, New-York
No 43/30
Ai l'honneiIrvouS3nnop.cer que j'ai pris
connaissaJlce devotre tcIegramme 5566du
28 janvier seulement hier· soir•. Vambassade
americaine a Belgrade a averti notre legation
qu'~ne avait re~u autorisation d'accorder visa, a
notre representant et a sa suite; ceux-ci quittent
immediatement Belgrade par tout moyendisponible pour· New-York. via Paris. Impos.sible
fixer date exact~ de leurarriveea New-York.
(Signe) Enver HOXHA,

President
of the Republic.
.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

President de la Republique.

.• ~

.

In .accordance with the decision. adopted by
the Security Council at its last meeting,! the
Secretary-General informed the. Albanian Gov.ernment that he was placing the Travel Section
of the United Nations at its Qisposal, in order to
speed the Albanian -:repres~ntative's· arrival at
New York.
.,.
;

1 See· Official Records of the Security Council~ Second
ear, No. 8.
..
c ,

1Irn'

...

,

..1

- . Le PRESIDENT: En efiet, conformement a la
decision adoptee par le Conseil de securiteasa
derniere· seance1, le. Secretaire .general a worme
le Gouvemement albanais qu'il mettait asa dis:position les services de voyages des NatioI1;S
Unies, en vue de faciliter I'arrivee du repres~n­
tant de I'Albanie a New-York.
.-' -,.
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseilde s6curitl,
Deuxieme Annee, No 8.
.
n

Vg

. . . .iiild.IX 1,,. ·l$iiIPiI~~R.~\fliiUfl'~~~£Iff~!/.'P.,lW~Il:i~~

36~'Ad«:!Ption"oftheagenda"

36. ,Adoptiokl"t;lel'crdre du iour

The agendawasadopte.d.

L'Qrdre du jourest-adopee.

37•. C:ontinuationof the discussion on tlie
generGI'cregulbtion and reductil'" , of
armaments'
'.

37. Suite de la discussiopsur ia reglementafion et la' reduction generales des
armements
.

The., PRESII>E~T(transl~eCl fr(J1f1,Frenck) :

Le PREsD>ENT:L'ordredu jour appelle en
premier lieu l'examen de la resolution de I'AssenibIee generale Fur les "principes regissant. la
reglementation 'et la. reduction generales des
armements".
.

'I'he :first iteJll,OIl tl,u;agendaAs the discussion of.
the resQlution of~e General As$emblyon "the
principles'.governiIlg-the·-general regulation and
reduction ofarinaments°~.
leaD upon the representative of the United
States. ..
,.
,

.

~,

La pf,U'ole est aurepr~sentant des' Etats-Unis.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) :
Before pronouncing. a few brief .remarks) I wish
tQ addr~' a "parliamentaty" enquiry to the
Chair. Is there ~ymotion pending before the
Security Council at this time?

M. ~USTIN ,(Etats-Vnjg d'AmeI'ique) (tr.aduit de l'anglais) : Monsieur le President, je voudrais, .avant de presenter les breves observations
que je me propose'de faire, VOllS poser une question de procedure "parlementaire'~, a savoir:
y a,;,t-il une motion ,. actuellement soumiseau_
Conseil de securite~

'I'hePRESm:E~ (tranS~ted. from French) :
The SecUrity ,Council has before it the draft
resolutions listedm,theagenda;but, if I understa:i:ld the meaning of the United States representative's' question correctly, there is no formal
motion before the CounciL
.

Le' PRESIDENT: Le Conseil de securitea ete
saisi des projets de resolutions enumeres dans
l'ordre du jour; mais) si je comprends bien le
sens de la question dJI representant des EtatsUms, le Conseil n'est pas saisi d'une motion a
proprement parler.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
del'anglais): Je remercie le Conseil de securite
d'avoir bie'n voulu ajoumer jusC{u'aujourd'hui
eratiQn in postponing to this ,<lay the' discus·
l'examen au point' 2 et des autres points figurant
sioI! of item, 2 and the remaining items on the
a
l'ordre du jour. Au cours de la periode qui
agenda. During the time that has elapsed, we
vient de s'ecouler," nous avons ettS. tres occupes.
h;ilVf; be,en very busy. We have been consulting
the President of the United States.. and the Secre- Tout d'abord, nous avons consuIte le President
tary of State, as well as various leaders of the d.es Etats-Unfu, le Secret3.ire d'Etat) les divers
lc::gislative branch gf -our Government,' in oraeI' dirigeants d'u corps legisl;iltif ae notre Gouvernethat we might be 1?etter preparetL to appear in . mcnt et de nombreuses autres personnalites, pour
this. Security .Council "andpenorm whatever mieuX pouvoir nous presenter devant le COD-sell
function is entrusted to the delegation of the de s~curite et remplir toutes les fonctions qui
United States to the United Nations; it is in the' incombent a la delegation des Etats-Unisaupres
spirit of conference arid consultation,and not in des Nations Unies; c'est pour conf6rer et nous
an attempt to try 'to •ten-anybody hpw the matter concerter, avec les membres du .Conseil,et non
ought to be settled, thatthe United States dele- pour leurdire comment les questions doivent
gation to the United Nations has endeavoured to etre regIe~, que la. delegation des-.Etats-Unis
C:onsult every member of the Security Council in &' est efforceedc·, prendre' contact avec tDUS les
membres du Conseil de secunte afin clecon'
orderto obtain it'; views.
,naitre'leurs points de vue.
a result' of' ..those . conferences, . the dele·
Ala suite deces consultations; madeIegation
gation has from time to timcaltered· the draft of
a apporte' quelque~ modificatiops a ~()n projet de
. its-resolution!n'an attempt to take full advantage resolution, pour essayer de, tirer le :-nieilleur parti
of thewisdolIl of-the suggestions made by other possible des sages'suggestions des autJ:'es membres
members of 'the Security· Council. It is still the
du Conseil de securite; La delegation des Etatspurpose of the Uillted Sta;tes delegation to draw
Unis .desire toujours tenir compte des opinions
de ses distingnesccillegues au Conseil. La resobenefit· from the views of its distinguished colleagues "on this Council. Thus, .the .resolution !ution que. je va~maintenant proposer au. nom
''Vhich I am goingt{) presentand move on behaH .,des' Etats.,llnis est'le restiltat d'une etude approfond,ie' et attentive faitt par les. cerveaux les· plus
of ~e United States. represents the sttldied and
careful consideration of the leading minds of this
eInine!1ts de ce pays et' du .Gouve1'l1~meIJ.t ,des
country and that of the Government of-.:the
Etats-UniS .d:Amerique. ~eaIlmOins'Ilotre4eIe­
gation se presente devant cette haute- ass'embIee
United~ States of America. Nevertheless) .our
pour demander I'avis, les opinions et .la .libre
d.elegation comes to this great body; asking for
critique de nos collegues du Conseil de securite.
the. judgement) opinions and full discussion of
our fellow members on this Security.Council.
_Before proceeding wiilia statement on behalf
Av~:nt de.:fair~ unedeclaration' ,fornielle, je
soumets a votre approbation la resolution suiof OUT delegation, 1 now presentan~ move the
Mr••Ausmf •(UnitJaStates .of America): I

wish, to thank the Security Councilf()I' its consid-

As'.

W4

. 1iiiT

,~,~_~.~.,

prAl,..~:?¥''''''''''=- .....'"':''''''~-

.,._,

~_ .._ ••.' .• ~ ... _~.

'_.. _~_~.~~ .•--.-, ,~_. "..--.-~..,._~_•. ~.. ,.~.~,~_,..--..-"",,,• . ~.~_~~._.~,,,,"""_•.-,,,,~-r,,,,",,,,"~"'''''';''''''_''_~-'''''''''''''~'~1'~ ••~~'''~'''''''~'''~

,n,·

adoption of the following resolution, copies· of
which are, I believe, before the members of the
Council. I shall read it:
"The Security Council, in consideration of
the General Assembly resolution of 14 December 1946 on the principles governing the
re~lation and reduction of armaments,

Resolves:

tt

. "1. To establish a· comnnsslon composed
of the members of the Security Council, the
function of which shaH be to make recommendations to the Security Council regarding
the practical measures, incIudingthe provision
of effective safeguards for the general regulation and reduction of armaments and armed
forces, except as regards those matters which
fall within the competence of the Atomic
Energy Commission as determined by the General Assembly resolutions of 24 January 1946
and 14 December 19461 ;
'(2. To create a committee of the Security
Council consisting of a representative of each
member of the Council which shall make
recommendations· to the Secudty Council regarding the terms of reference of the proposed
commission, including its reiations with the
Security Council, the Military Staff Commit~ee and the Atomic Energy Commissioh~ . ~
"3. To begin, at its next meeting, consideration of the First Report of tke Atomic
Energy Commission dated 31 December 1946,
with particular reference to the recommendations contained in Part III thereof."
That is the whole of the draft resolution
respectfully submitted by the United States dele..;
gation to the United Nations.
,
And now I present for the consideration of the
Council the following thoughts, which represent
the thoroughly considered opinion of the Government of the United States-that is to say, the
opinion of the offices of the President, the Secretaries of State, War and Navy and the opinion
of the leaders of the legislative branch of our
Federal Government.
. You will note that this resolution calls upon
the Council to begin consideration of the Atomic
Energy Commission report at its next meeting.
It is common sense for the Security Council to
take full advantage of the arduous efforts of the
Atomic Energy Commission during the past year
in formulating a set of principles upon which a
majority of the members of the Security Council
have found it possible to a.g'ree.
The control of atomic energy is of supreme
importance, not only because of its terrible and
destructive effects when used as a weapon, but
also. because of its tremendous possibilities for
the benefit of mankind. In order that this great
discovery, may be employed to the full for
1 Sce the Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
dhurin g the first part of its first session, page 9, and during
t e second p&rt of its first session, pages 65, 66 and 67.

vante, dont les membres du. Conseil ont tous un
exemplaire; je vaisvous en donner lecture~:

HLe Conseil de securite, considerant la reso,,"
lutionodeI'Assemblee generale clu 14 decembre
1946sUl'Ies principes regissant la reglementation et la reduction des armements,

"Decide:
"1. De creel' une commissioncomposee des
membres du Conseil de securite, 'qui aura paur
mission de faire· des recommandations au
Conseil de securite ell ce qui concerne les
mesures pratiques, notamment les mesures
efficaces de garantie, susceptibles d'amener
une reglenientation et une reductian generales
des armements et des forces armees; toute£ois,
cette cOnInnssion n'aura pas a connattre des
questions relevant de la competence de· la
Commbc;ion ·de l'energie atomique, telle que
cette competence a.ete fixee par les.resolutions
de J'Assemblee generale du24 janvier1946
et du 14 decembre 19461 ;
"2. De creer un comite du Conseil· de seeurite, comprenant un representant de chacun
des membres du Consen; ce comite fera des
recommandations .au Conseil de securite en
ce qui coneeme le mandat de la. commission
pro.ietee et definira ses rapports avec le Conseil
de securite, le Comited'etat-major et la Commission de l'energie atomique;
. "3. 'De commencer,' lors de sa prochaine
seance, l'examen du Premier Rapport de la
.Comrnission de l'energie atomique en date du
31 decembre 1946 et d'etudier tout particum~rement les recommandatioIlB contenues
dans la partie III de ce rapport."
Tel est le projet de resolution que la delegation des Etats-Unis a l'hoIl..neur de soumettre a
l'a_pprobation des Nations Unies.
Et maintenant, je voudrais livrer a l'examen
du Conseil les considerations suivantes qui representent la doctrine murement refte-chie et posee
duGouvernement des Etats-Unis,c'est-a-dire du
President, du Secretaire d'Etat, des Ministres de
la Guerre et de la Marine et des chefs du corps
Iegislatif du Gouvernement federal.
Vous observerez que cette resolution invite le
Conseil a commencer, lors de sa prochaine
seance, ·l'exatnen clu rapport de la Commission
de l'energie atomique. Il tombe sous le sens que
l~ Conseil de securite doit tirer pleinement parti
de tout l'effort ardu soutenu par la Commission
de l'ene~gie atomique au cours de l'annee passee
et qui a abouti a l'enonciation d'une serie de
principes sur lesquels lamajorite des membres
du Conseil de securite areussi a s'entendre.
Le contr8le de l'energie atomique est d'une
importance supr~me, non seulement en. raison de
ses terribles. effete destructeurs lorsqu'e1le est employee comine une arme, mais aussi du fait de
ses immenses possibiIites pour le bien-etre de
I'humanite. Pour que cette grande decouvetfe
1 Voir les Resolutions adoptees jJar l'Assemblee generale
pendant la premiere partie de sa premiere session, page 9,
et pendant la seconde partie de sa premiere sessi~m,
pages 65, 66 et 67.
. .

puisse etre'utilisee adcs fins purem~nt pacifiques,
elle eoit etre controIee de tellemanierequ'elle
ne puisse etre utilisee commc armede guerre.
My Government believes that the international
Mon Gouvernement eStime que' le controle
control of atqinic, energy, including effective safeinternational· de l'~nergie atoIIlique; comportant
guards by way of inspection and other IIle~, notarilInent des ·garanties efficaces assurees p.ar
and effective provision for the collective enforce- voie d'inspection ou autre et des mesures posiment of sanctions against violations, ,;..s, fundatives visant a la mise enceuVre de sanctions colmental to the, establishment of ·international lectives contre toutes violations,est essentiel pour
peace,' and security "and to 'the regulation and
l'etablissement de la paix. et de la securite internationaIes et pour la reglementation et la reducreduction of other weapons.
tion des autres armements._
A la suite de la preIIliere guerre niondiale, les
Mter the First 'World War,.the United States
Etat&-Unis ont fait l'ainere experience d'Ull
had a bitter experience with unilateraldisarmadesarmement unilateral.Mon Gouvernement ne
ment. My Government will not repeat tliat error.
commettra pas de nouveau cette erreur. Deux
Twice in the past generation we have' been comfois, au: cours d'une generation, nous avons ete
pelled to take part in great and bloody wars. In
contraints de prendre partade grandes guerres
. neither case were we equipped at the outset with
sanglantes. ,Ni la premiere fois, ni la seconde,
the armaments,which other peace-loving States
nous ne possedions au debut les armenients que
IIlight have wished us to possess. Had we pos:'
les autres Etats pacifiques auraient peut-etre sousessedadequate armaments, both wars IIlight
haite de no~ voirposseder. Si nous avions dishave been avoided.
.
. pose d'armements suffisants, nous aurions pu
eviter ces deux guerres.
Les Etats-Unis sesont engages a observer les
The United States is committed to the prinprincipes de ia secUrite collective intemationale
ciples of mtet!lational collective security set forth
tels qu'ils sont exposes dansla Charte des Nations
in the United Nations Charter. In fulfilment of
Unies.Pour s'acquitter des obligations qui leur
its obligation under thiS Charter, the United
incombent, aux, termes de la Charte, les, EtatsStates IIlust, insist that inany plan or programme
for the general regulation and reduction of arma- .Unis deVront insister sur le fait que, dans tout
plan ou programme relatif a la. reglementation
ments, practical security arrangements must be
et, a la reduction. generales ,des armements, le
a' primary consideration. The Memberr of' the
soud primordial doit etre d'assure( des mesures
United Nations mnst have definite, concrete
pratiques de secunte. Les Membres des Nations
assurances that effective and enforceable safeUnies doivent avoir ISassurance precise et
guards with regard to security arrangements have
concrete que des mesures de garantie efficaces et
been established before committing themselves to
realisables seront etablies en ce qlll concerne les
final plans for the reduction of armaments and
accords relatifs 'a la securite; ensuite seulement,
armed forces.
ils pourront souscrire' a des 'plans definitifs, pour
la reduction des armements et des forces armees.
En outre, la negociation et la conclusion Cl.ul
Furthermore, the negotiation and conclunion
traitesde paix avec I'Allemagne et le Japon afof the peace treaticil with Germany and Japan
fectent,directement l'avenir de la reduction et de
haye a direct bearing on the' prospects for the
reduction' and. regulation of' armaments . and la reglementation des armements. L'organisation
du monde pOUf la paix est liee a la solution des
,'armed forces. ,The organization of the wofId for
peace depends upon the solution of the many problemes, multiples et graves, que comporte la
grave problems involved in theSe peace settle- negociation de ces traites de paix. ·n fautdonc
ments. The progress of the work in this field . tenir pleinement compte du progres accompli
dans ce domaine au moment ou nous nousachemimust, therefore, be taken fully, into account as
,we go forward in the United Nations towards nons, aux Nations Unies, vers lareglementation
the general regulation and reduction of arma- et la reduction generales des armements et des
.
forces armees.
'
ments and armed forces.
peaceful pUrposes, it must be controlled so that
it cannot be used for warfare.

This does not, mean t.."J.at the United, States is
opposed to any concurrent discussion ()fthe problems involved in ,the general regulation and
reduction. of armaments. On the contrary, our
'draft resolution provides for the establishment of
a comIIlission for this purpose and provides for
,its composition. It seems clear that before such a
comIIlission can began any effective work, it is
most important to define precisely its teI'Ill3 ~f
reference, particularly its, relationship with the
Atomic Energy ComIIlission and the Military
Staff Committee. The exercise of a little care
to solve these problems properly now, IIlight well
avoid difficulties later on. We should be particu'larly careful to avoid overlapping functions

Cela ne veut pas dire que les Etats-Unis soient
opposes a discuter simultanement les problemes
concernant lareglementation et, la reduction
generales des armements. Au contraire, le projet
de resolution df'-s Etats-Unis prevoit la creation
d'une comIIlission a cette fin, ainsi que la fa~on
dont elle sera constituee. n est clair qu'avant que
cette comIIlission puisse se mettre effectivement
au travail" i1 est de la plus haute importance de
definir d'une maniere precise le mandat qui lui
sera confie, et notanunent ses rapports avec la
ComIIlission de l'energie atoIIlique et le Comite
d'etat-major. Avec 'un peu d'attention, mainte.nant, ces problemes peuvent etre resolus convenablement et nous eviterons probablement des

-~

,,-111"'1&&. lliil!NtI.~.~~~"'; i !I'll."!!» lellllldZ&dlil!lP.
between th~ new' commission and. the Atoprlc
Energy Commjss!on.

IIlilii

w:

U~UlIIV\'iik'

difficultes dans l'a,v~nir: NoU$ devrions apporte,:t:
un soin tont particulier a, eviter tout .double
emploientre les attributions de la nouvelle com.;
mission et celles de la Commission de1'energie
. I
atomique.
_. J the~em1;lers of the CQllncil will realize
Tous ifS membres du Conseil savent que1&
the advantages which have accrued from the
avantages nous avons retires d'une redaction. soi":
c~reful drafting which compressed the terms of
gneuse qui a precise, sous one forme condensee,
reference of the Atomic Ep.ergy Corrnnission. In
le mandat de la Commission de l'energie atopassing, aIIow me to C;>Q~~rve that those functions
mique. Permettez-moi, en passant, de signaler
were determined ~y the General Assembly, and
que ces fonctions ont ete defipjes par I'Assemblee
not by' the Atomic En\lrgy Commission itself.
generale et non par la Commission de 1'energie
The Atomic Energy Commission's contribution
atomique elle-meme. Les recommandatioIis prein the way of recommendations probably expe-:
sentees par la Commission de l'energie atomique
d~ted the Gener91 Assembly's consideration of
OD". probableinent hate.l'ex~en· de cette questl¥s question, butl:he Atomic Energy .Commis- tion par I~AssembIee generale, mais la Commission did not raise itself by its own bootstraps. The
sion die l'energie atomique ne s'est pas formee
General Assembly fixed its tenns of reference.
par sell propres moyeus; c'est l'Assemblee generale qui en a defini le mandat.
Tous les menbres du Conseil connaissent les
All the members of the Council will realize
avantages que cette methode nous a procures.
the advantages which have accrued from that
Notre tache actuelle est,a coup sUr, comparable
method. Our present task is certainly a compaa la precedente. Etant daunt que le Conseil a
rable one. Since the Council has a great deal of
beaucoup de questions complexes a son ordre du
complicated business on its agenda, since quesjour; que les questions de principe semblenf avoir
tions of principle have appatently been settled
ete reglees au Conseil; et qu'un certain nombre
in the Oouncil, and since there are a number of
de resolutions relatives a la question qui ilOUS
:resolutions befor,e the Council relating to this
occupe ont ete soumises au Consei1, il semble
.very matter: it would appear that it would be a
qu'il serait hautementopportun de creer un
matter of substantial convenience to the Council
comite charge de rediger une resolution sur lato set up a committee to draft an a~eed resoluqueUe les membre$ du Conseil pOUl'raient s'ention.
tendre,'
.
Lorsque la Cor.nnission se mettra au travail1
When the Commission gets to work, the
les problemes qu'elle devra resoudre consisteront
problell1s with which it will have to deal 'will
esscntiellement a rechercher quanti et commtmt
primarily be the problems of how and when.
atteindre ses objectifs.
Comment? Eh bien, la Commission devra
,.By how, I mean what safeguards must be
les garanties qui devront figurer danS'
rechercher
included in any treaties or conventions to proles traites et conventions visant a proteger les
tect complying States against the hazards of
Etats respectueux de leurs engagements contre
violations and evasions.
lea risques de violations et de subterfuge.
Quand? Eh bien, je pense d'abord a ce que
In referring to when, I have in mind, first
of all, what I have just said with respect to. the je viens de dire de3 traites de paix, mais je pense
aussi au rapport qui existe entre la reglementapeace treaties. Howeyer, I also have in mind,
tion des armements et l'obligation de fournir des
the relationship between the regulation of armaforces armees comoI'lIlement a l'Article 43 de la
ments and the provision for armed forces under
Charte, et en vue d'une action collective prevue
Article 43 of the Charter and - for collective
action under any treaty. There are other ele-· dans tout traite. n faudra tenir compte d'autres
mentswhich must be considered in determining .elements pour determiner la date de la mise en
reuvre de la reduction des armements, mais Ies
the timing of arms reduction, but these are,-in
elementf! que je viens de signaler sont, a mon
our opinion, the most important ones.
avis, les plus importants.
C'est seulement en repondant a ces d~ quesIt is only by answering the questions of how
tions, comme le demande d'ailleurs clairement la
, and when, as clearly pointed out in the General Assembly's resolution of 14 December, that
resolution de l'Assemblee generale du 14 decemthe. regulation and reduction of conventional
bre, que l'on pourra realiser la reduction et la
reglementation des armements de v;pe classique
armaments and armed forces can be accomplished.
et des forces armees.
To sum up, my Government sincerely believes
En resume, mon: Gouvemement croit sincerethat the resolution it is now proposing embodies
ment que la resolution qu'il propose aujourd'hui
the most effective first steps towards the regula- . represeilte la premiere mesure la plml efficace
tion and reductio.a of armaments and armed
vers la reglementation et la red:uction des armeforces and the eventual establishment of freedom
ment~ et des forces armees et vers l'organisation
from the appalling fear of war.
d'un monde enfin delivre de la crainte horrible
de la guerre.
The policy of the United States of America
La politique des Etats-Unis d'Amerique a touhas been, and will continue to be, to contribute
jours vise, et visera toujours a contribuer, dans
toute lalimite du possible, a etablir une securite
~ the :,:n0st towards the achievement of
'J

collective security and iniern:ational control of

There is only one road to disannament: it is
the road of genuine collective security and gen~
uine international control of all annaments and
of armed forces. Along that road the United
States desires to advance as fast and as far as
our fellow Members of the United Nations will
travel with us.

collective et un controle international des armements et des forces armees. Telle est la poIitique
que nous avons suivie et que nollS continuerons
de suivre au Conseil de securite, a la Commission
de.l'energie atomique et dans tous les autres
organes des Nations Unies, ainsi qu'en dehors
des Nations Unies, dans I'elaboration des traites
de paixavec les Puissances de l'Axe et le regie,;.
: ment d'autres differendsqui ont surgi entre les
, Allies par suite des hostilites.
' .
Les Etats-Unis considerent que c'est la tache
primordiale du Conseil, clans les mois a venir, ·de
progresser aussi rap~deriJ.ent que possible dans la,
voie d'un accord sur un systeme international de
controle assurera, I "au moyen. d'inspections
ou d'autres procedes, les garantiespratiques et
efficace5; protegeant les Etats respectueux de leurs
obligations contre les risques. de violations et de
subterfugeO>!. Ce contrele, l'AssembIee generale
l'a' reconllu comme essentiel a la reglementation
et ala reduction des annements.
Dne seule voie mene au desarmement, a savoir
la securite collective reelle et le contrOle. inter~
national reel de tous les annements et de toutes
les forces armees. Les Etats~Unis desirent avancer sur cette voie avec les' autres Membres des
Nations Unies, aussi loin et aussi vite que ceux-ci
voudront aIIer.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenck):
In the course of the earlier meetings which the
Security Council devoted to the question of dis",
annament, several proposals were fonnulated.
We have just heard the representative of the
United States, who submitted a motion for the
adoption of a new proposal. One of our'cQIleagues said recentIythatin dealing with this
. question, we should endeavour above aUto single
out points on which we are agreed. I consider
that this is the President's special duty. I should
therefore like to try to define some of the points
on which members of the Council appear to be
agreed and to subn.rlt them Jor your consideration; we could then proceed to· consider the
points on which divergent opinions have been
expressed. '.
. The following seem to me to b~ the main ideas
.(and I insist on this word, for I should like to
make a distinction between ideas and their expression) ,on which there is either explicit or,
implicit agreement at this stage in the discussion.
1. I think that we are now agreed in decid~
ing to establish a commission.
2. In the second place, I believe that we are
agreed to give'this commission the function of
making proposals or recommendations to the
Security Council regarding the practical mea~
ures to be taken for the general regulation and
reduction of armaments and anned forces, 3$ also
for the establishment of international control to
ensure this reduction of annaments and anned
forces, in accordance with the resolution of the
General Assembly of 14 December 1946. I think
~ have used, or very closely followed, the terms

Le PRESIDENT: Au cours des seances ante~
rieures que le Conseil de securitea consacrees a
la question du desarmement, plusieurs proposi:.
tions ont ete fonnulees. Nous venons d'entendre
le representant des Etats-Unis presenter une
motion tendant a I'adoption d'une nouvelle pro~
position. L'u.Tl de nos collegues a dit recemment
que, dans la question qui nous occupe, nous
devions principalement nous preoccuper de de~
gager les points sur Jesquels nous sommes d'ac~
cord. Je crois que c'est le devoir tout particulier
duPresident; je voudraisdonc essayer de definir
quelques points sur lesquels les membres du
Conseil semblentetre d'accord et les soumettre
a votre examen; nous pourriom ensuite passer
a I'etude des points sur lesquels des opinions divergentes ont eteexprimees~ .
Voici quelles me paraissent etre les idees prin~
cipales (et j'insiste sur ce mot, car je distingue
l'idee de son expression) sur lesquelles, a ce
stade de la discussion, il y a accord, soit explicite,
soit implicite:
,
1. n me semble y avoir, a present, accord
pour decider de creer une commission.
2. n me semble y aV':lir, en secondlieu,accord pour confier a cette commission la mission
de faire au Conseilde securite des propositions
ou recommandations relatives aux mesures pra~
tiques a prendre en vue de la reglementation et
de la reduction generales des armements et des
forces armees, ainsi que de I'etablissement d'un
controle international destine a assurer cette reduction des annementset des forces armees,
conformement a la resolution de l'AssembIee
generale du 14 decembre 1946. Je crois avoir,

1 General Assembly resolution of 14 December 1946 on
"prinCiples governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments", Official Records of the Security
Council, Second Year, Supplement No. 2, Annex 5.

1 Resolution de l'Assemblee generale en date du 14. de;.
cembre 1946 sur lea "pr.ncipesregissant la reglementation
et la reduction generales des armements". Proces~verbaux
officielsdu Conseil de securite. Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No· 2, Annexe 5..
.

·armaments~ and 'armed forces.. That policy we

have pursued and shall continue to pursue'in the
Security Council, in the Atomic Energy Commis~
sion and in alL other organs of the United
Nations, as well as outside the United 'Nations,
in the making of the peace treaties with the Axis
Powers .and in the settlement of other issues
between the Allies which, have arisen from the
war.
The United States considers that it is the
primary task of the Council, in the coming
months, to progress as rapidly as possible towards
agreement on an international system of control
which will provide the "practical and effective
safeguards by way of inspection and other mcliJ:l$
to protect complying States against the hazarQ'I
of violations and .evasions"1 that the General
Assembly has recognized are essential to tht. reg~
uiation and reduction of armaments.

p.-----------f115~5----------found in several of the resolutions submitted to
the Security Council.

3. The next point is certainly more dellc,ate.
In approving the resolution (If the General
Assembly of 14 December, the Security Council
also approved paragraph 8 of this resolution, according to which the Atomic Energy Commission
retains all the powers granted to it by the resolution of the General Assembly of 24 January
1946.
Are we agreed-and I put this to you in the
fonn of a question-in stating that - a result of
this, the scope of the new commission-and we
agree that it must be established-eannot extend
to matters within the competence of the Atomic
Energy Commission without overlappmg the
functions of the latter?

as

a peu de chose pres, reproduit les termes que
I'on retrouve dans plusieurs des resolutions soumises au Conseil de securite.
3. J'en arrive a un point certainement plus
delicat. En approuvant la resolution de I'Assemblee gena-ale du 14 decembre, le Conseil de
securite -a approuve le paragraphe 8 de cette
resolution, aux termes duquel la Commission de
l'energie atomique garde la totalite des attributions que la resolution de l'Assemblee generale
du 24 janvier 1946lui a donnees.
Sommes-nous d'accord-je presente id I'idee
sous la forme interrogative-pour constater qu'il
en resulte que la mission de la nouvelle coIDIIlission-dont nous sorrnnes d'accord pour dire
qu'e1le doit -etre creee--ne saurait s'etendre aux
matieres qui sont de la competence de la Commission de I'energie atomique sans faire double,
emploi avec la mission de cette derniere?
4. Le- Conseil de secirrite, en approuvantla
resolution de l'Assemblee generale du 14- decembre, a accepte, conformement a son paragraphe 4, d'examirier sans delai les Tapportsde
la Commission deI'energie atomique. Le.premier rapport de la Commission de 1'energie atomique figure, depuis le debut de janvier,al'ordre
dn jour du Conseil de securite. A ma connaissance, aucune objection n'a ete formulee contre
son examen, des la decision de creer la nouvelle
commission- _que j'appellerai commission. _du
desarniement.
Avant de passer a I'enonce des points sur lesquels des opinions c:livergentes oilt eteformulees,
je reprendrai l'un apres I'autre les points que je
viens d'enumerer, afin de m'assurer du - degre
c;l'accord qu'ils renCOhtrentparfni les meIhbres
du Conseil.
Je crois que le premier point ne soulevera pas
dediffi.culte. LeConseil, a mon avis, est bien
d' a~cord pour de~ider_de creer une commission..
A ce premier point je puis immediatement lief
le second, qui vise la mission de cette commission. Le Conseil parait d'accord pour confier a
la commission la mission de faire .des propositions ou recoriunandations au Coruieil de securite
au sujet des mesures pratiques a prendre en.vue
de la reglementation et de la reduction generales
des armements et des forces armees, a.itJsiq1.le de
l'etablissement cl'un controle international des-.
tine a assurer cette reduction des armements et
des forGes armees, conformement a la resolution
de l'ASsembIee generale du 14 -decembre 1946.
Je reserve, bien entendu, la question de la
competence de la Commission de l'energie atomiqueqlli fait l'qbjet du point suivant.

4. In approving the resolution of the General
Assembly of 14 December, the Security Council
undertook, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
the resolution, to expedite cQnsideration of the
reports of the Atomic Energy Commission. The
Fmt Report of the Atomic Energy Commission
has been· on the Security· Council agenda since
the beginning of January. To the best of my
knowledge, there has been no objection to its
being conSidered as soon as a decision has been
taken to establish the new commission, which I
shall call the disannament commission.
_Before I proceed to _enumerate _the points on
which divergent- opinions have been expressed,
I shall once again go over the points I have mentioned, one by one, to ascertain to What extent
they meet with agreement amongst members of
the Council.
. Ido not think that the first point raises any'
difficulti~. I believe that the Council· agrees to
establish. a commission.
,'.The second point, which relates to the functions of this commission,· is closely bound up with
the first. The Council' seems to agree to give the
commission the task of making. proposals or recommendations to the Security Council regarding
the practical measures to be taken for the general
iiegulation and reduction of armaments .and
~l'l:J:!.ed _forces,- a.&- -also- for the. establishment of
international·control to ensure this reduction of
a~aments arrei anned forces, in conformity with
t~e resolution of the GeneraJ Assembly of 14 December 1946.
' You will understand that I reserVe the question,of. the C0mpetence of the Atomic.- Energy
90 iri,!pission; which is dealt with in the Jollowing
point.
:. I think- that the third point, which I have
J'en arrive au trbisieme- point, dont j'ai (Jeja
donne connaissance et que jecrois pouvoir foralready put before you, may be formulated in
this:way: does the Council agree that, by approv~, muler, peu pres,. de la maniere suivante: Le
ing the resolution of the General Assembly of
ConseH est-il d'accordpourestimer qu'en~p~
11,:, DeGember and, consequently, .paragraph 8 of prouvant la re,solution de l'Assemblee generaIcd1.l J. 4 _deGenillie. et, par consequent, son para~hat -resolution, it understands that th~ fun-ctions
gr~phe8,:il ehtend que lamissioh de la nouvelle
of -th.e new disarmament commission cannot. ex-'
~enQ,~oi11atters -within $e _compete~ce,o(the' commissi(m dudesarmement ne sauraits'etendre
iiux mati~resfafuan.t· parrle des attributions· de la.
Atomic Energy Commission without overlapping
the,functions of the' latter?
\ .;: "
CaJ::nmillsion:d~:' r6nergie, atonrlque, : sans . . faire
~• •'I"• •
• •-~Il-:.:
'- .d.o.ub.l.e.e..m
. p.l.o.i.a.v.e.c..la.".il1is
••·.'s..i.on.-.d.e.c.e.tt.e.'.d.ei'.m.·c.r.e.?.

a

I-.

i.M

"11.!

11

Id

III

a

00

Can I interpret the silence of the Council as
denoting acquiescence?

Puis-je interpreter le silence du Conseil comme
un acquiescement?

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) ~ First of
all, Mr. President, I do not quite understand the
meaning of the question put to you by Mr. Austin,
nor do I understand the meaning, of your
reply, regarding the "parliamentary" ,aspect of
the procedure at today's meeting. As far as I
can make out, Mr. Austin wishes to know
whether there are any formal proposals on the
question before the ,Council? As ~r~ident, you
replied that in the strict sense of t4e te~ there
appeare.d to be no such proposals at the, present
meeting. I do not know how you have dj,yided up
all the proposals which have b~en submitted into
those which are proposals in the strict sense of
the term, 'and those which are npt proposals in
the strict sense of the term.
We know that there are proposals which, from
. the point of view of "parliamentary" procedure,
should be given equal treatment, and on which
the Security Council must in due course take
a: decision. In any case the Soviet proposal submitted for the consideration of the Council on
27 December is a proposal on which the Security
Council has' to take a decision.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistt;s sovietiques) (traduit durusse): Monsieur
le President, tout d'abord je dois dire que je n'ai
pas tres bien compris le sens de la question que
vous a posee M. Austin, ni cclui de votre reponse,
au sujet de la procedure "parlementaire" qui
s'appliquerait a cette reUnion. D'apres ce que
fai cm comprendre, M. Austin VG~ldrait savoir
si nous sommes saisis de propositions fonnelles
relatives a la question en discussion. Vous avez
repondu, en votre qualite de President, qu'a
proprement parler, nousn'avions devant nous
aucune proposition de ce genre. Je ne sais pas
comment vous avez fait pour diviser les propositions dont nous sommes saisis en propositions
"proprement dites" et en propositions "non
proprement dites".
.
Ainsi que nous le savons tous, nous avons
devant nous un certain nombre de propositions
que nous devons considerer comnie formelles,
d'apres la procedure "parlementaire"; sur chacune d'elles, leConseil doit prendre une decision
au moment voulu. En tout cas, la proposition .
sovietique, qui aete pre~entee le 27 decembre
dernier, est de celles sur lesquelles le Conseil de
securite doit prendre une decision.
Je voudrais maintenant faire quelques observations au sujet du nouveau projet de resolution
que vient de presenter M. Austin.
l,a premiere pame du premier paragraphe de
cette resolution prevoit la creation d'une "commission composee des membres du Conseil de
securite, qui aura pour mission de faire des recommandations au Conseil de securite en ce' qui
concerne le& mesures pratiques, notamment les
mesures efficaces de garantie, susceptibles d'amener ,une reglementation et une reduction generales des armements et des forces armees • • ."
M. Austin ne fait que repeter ma proposition du
27 decembre dernier\ OU il. etaitquestion de
Creel' une commission chargee de soumettre au
Conseil de securite des propositions en vue de
hater la mise en pratique de la resolution ,de'
l'AssembIee generale en date du 14 decembre
1946. On saitque ma proposition a ete appuyee
par la gt.'ande majorite des membres du. Conseil
resolutions S6Uet que tous les. autres projets
mis au Conseil desecurite s'en sont insp~es. '
Ainsi donc, cette pame de la resolution americaine ne fait que repeter les propositi011s qui ont
ete fOffi'1ulees anterieiIrement et ne renferme
aucun element nouveau. A quoi bon repeter une
proposition dont le Conseil est deja 'saisi? Si le
representant des Etats-Unis approuve la proposition de cre~r une co~sion composee de representants de' tous les Etats membres du Conseil
de securite, ne ferait-il pas mieux de le dire
ouvertement et de se rallier a cetteproposition?

I now wish to make a few remarks on the new
draft resolution submitted by Senator Austin.
The first part of the first paragraph of this
draft reads: "To establish a commission composed of the members of' the Security Council,
the function of ,which shall be to make recommendations to the Security Council regarding
the practical measures, including the provision
of effective safeguards, for the general regula,tion and reduction of armaments and armed
forces . . ." This only repeats a proposal which
I made on 27 Dec.ember 19461 for the creation
of a commission, the function of which should
be to prepare proposals for submission to the
Security Council, regarding the measures for
implementing, as soon as possible, the General
Assembly resolution of 14 December 1946. This
prop6sal, as is well known, was supported by an
overwhelming majority in the Security Council
and was reflected in .other draft resolutions submitted to the Council.
Therefore this part of the United States resolution repeats what is already contained in other
proposals, and it ,adds, nothing new. I fail to see
why we need a repetition of'the proposal already
submitted to the Security CQuncil. If the representative of the United States agrees to the
proposal to establish a commission composed of
representatives of all the States which have a
seat on th~' Security Council, would it not, be
better if he frankly stated, that he agrees to this
proposal and supports it?
j\s regards that part of the first paragraph of
the United States dn,l.ft, containing inst~ctions
whereby this, commis.sio.n shall., not' deal with
m.atters falling withjn -the competence of the

Je passe maintenant a la partie du premier
paragraphe du projet americain quiprevoit que
cette" commission p.'aura pas, a connaitre des
questions relevanfde'la competence de la .Com.,.

. i See Official Records of the Sei:uriW Council; Second
Yeat; Supplement No.: 2,' Annex 3. . "
".

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels. du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 2, Annexe 3.

de

a

4

157

A

Atomic Energy'Commissionas determined by the
General Assembly resolution of 24 January 1946,
so ,far as I am aware,. none of the representatives
on the Security Council has submitted any proposals, to review, the ,jurisdiction of,the Atomic
Energy Commission. No such proposals have
been receiyedby the Security Council. Furthermore, it is well known that the General Assembly
resolution of 14 December 1946 also contains a
paragraph 8, which reads: ,"Nothing herein contained'shall alter or limit the ,resolution of the
General Assembly passed on 24 January 1946,
creating the Atomic Energy COITll-mssion."
As is well Jmown, the SecuritY C0UD:cil has
approved this ,resolution of the General ,Assem.,
bly.We may well ask, therefore, what need there
is for a special decision on a questionori which
we have already, reached agreement, and Oll
whiCh an appropriate' decision' has already, been
taken. Consequently, this part ,also of the first
paragraph of the 'United States resolution adds
nothing substantially new. ' ; 1
The second paragraph of the United ,States
draft resolution provides for the creation, in
addition to thecomniission referred to in paragraph 1, of a special committee to determine
the programm:e of work of the: coi:nmission, and
also the 'relations 'between the commission'-a.nd
the ',Security CQllncil, "between the, coinritission
and the Military StaffC6riunittee and between
the commission and the Atomic Energy' Commis..
sian. I am conviIiced that there' is no' necessitY
for the adoption of the proposal to, create a special conunittee for these purposes.
"
'
The General Assembly resolution constitutes
thcprogranime of 'the 'coIn111ission, for the creaproposal on
tion 'of whlcli IsubIID.tted'
27 December 1946 which was sripported by the
overwheimingmajority of the other r~presenta.:
tives on the'CoUncil. The resolution lays down
definite, even though general ta.skS' in the' field
of the regwation and reduction'ofarniaments
and armed forces. These tasks must form the
basis of the work of the commission.

a

Wor-king on the basis of this programme, as
la~d down and affinned by the General Assembly;
the, commission sJiould ptep~re' concrete, pio;.;

posals. for submission to theSecurityCounci1~
which would'ehable :the' decision 'of' the General
Assembly regarding the regulation'and tedtlctioJ;i
of 'armaments and, anned'foIces,fobeirnplemerited- Within the shorteSt ,p'ossible time; It: is,
for the proposed 'cornmiSsiQn to detemiine what
specmc"qriestionS it should deal with ill the
course' of -its work arid, what' concrete, proposals
it should prepare for subriliSsion to the SecuritY
Council. There is no necessity to fonn a special
comriIittee' to 'aetermine 'these speCific"questionS';
I consider the proposal 'to fornia special- corn'"
mittee unacceptable for another reason. The
Greation of sU(~ha conunitt.ee would lead ~t(')a
delay ill-the ~~iderati';n:~nd prep~~tton,- pf,
proposals regarding' practical, measures: for' the
br ~plementation
- of thert:solution
'
, of the.,Gem~ral,

niission de I'enel'gie atomique, telle quecett€
competence a ete definiedans la resolution de '
l'Assemblee generale en date du 24janvier 1946.
A ma connaissance, personne n'a fait au Conseil
de securite de propositions en vue de modifie;r
le mandat de la Commission de l'energie atomique. Aucune proposition de ce genre n'a ete
soumise au ConseiI. On sait,en outre, que la
resolution de l'AssembIee generale en date du
14 decembre 1946 renfermeentre autres le paragraphe 8 qui stipule qu' "aucune des dispositions
coritenues 'dans la presente, resolution ne modifiera la resolution de l'Assemblee generale adoptee le 24 janvier 1946 instituant la Commi.~on de
l'energie atomique, ou n'en limi.tera la portee".
Onsait'que le Conseilde securitea approuve
la resolution de I'Assemblee generale. A quoi }:lon
prendre, une decision speciale s\a': une question
que nollS avons dejatranchee d'un commun accord et sur laqlielle une decision a deja ete prise?
Cette partie du premier paragraphe de la resolutiondes Etats-Unis ne nollS apprend donc rien
de nouveau. '

Le programme de la commission qlle j'avais
propose de creel' 'le 27_decembre dernier, proposition soutenue par la grande majorite'des membres du Conseil, est tout trace dans la resolution
de I'Assemblee generale. Tout entraitant dUprobleme danS seslignes generales, la resolution de
I'Assemblee definit neanmoins avecprecision les
t~<;hes quinous incombent dans le domaine de la
reglementation et de la reduction des armements
et des forces armees., Les termes de la resolution
doivent done constituer hi base, des travaux de la
commission. '
" En ,appliquant - et en developpant' ce programme,e1:abli •et ratifie par l'Asseniblee gene~
tale, la commission doit soumettre au Coi:J.seil de
securite -des :propositions' concretes eri. vue de
h~ter la mise en pratique de la resolution de
I'AssembIee generale sur la reglementation, et la
redQ.ction des armemen1$ et d(:8,forces armees. n
appattient ,a, la commission elle-meme de delimi- .
ter aveC exactitudeles questions qu'elle aura a
exatnirrer au cours de ses trava~ et de definirla
nature des propositionsconl.cetes qu'elle devra
soiImettre au, Conseil de securite. n, n'est pas
besoin de creer· un comite special 'pour mener it.
Jien l'execution de cette t~che. '
J'estime qu'ilexiste entoreune autre raison
qui rend inacceptable la proposition de creer,Ull
comite: la creation de ce comite retarderaitl'exaJ;I1en et I'elabora~on des, propositions relatives
aux' niesurespratiques ,necessairespour ~ettre
en.application la resolution de l'AssembIee 'gene-

2Wb
Assembly. The creation. of one commission 'orily "
would' enable it·.to.ptoceed inuilediately with the
work of 'preparing such concrete· practical pro':'
posals. On the other hand, to create a special
committee, parallel with the commission, would
lead to the commission's being unable' to
start its work for a considerable time, as' it, would
, be deprived 'of the right even to draw up its
concrete programme, and the result would ne
that for a month, or possibly two or three months,
the' commission would have to delay startingjts
work· on· fundamental questions until the other
organ had prepared the progranimeof work of
,"
"
'
the' c6n:imission. .
Is it not clear that the fonnationof a 'special
committee, parallel with the corrunis$ion, can
orily: lead to delays in the consideration of the
questions deriving from the' reSolution of the
General Assembly of 14 December? The Security
Council should be interested not in delaying, but
in accelerating the consideration of these questions.ltseems to me that this conclusion is in
agreem.ent with the opinion expressed, as I have
already pointed out, by the overwhelming majority: of the representatives on ' the Security
Council. '
.:, There is a further .reason why the formation
oIa special committee cannot be justified. Ac~
co:rding to the United States"draftresolution, the
committee should 'also detennine the relations
between the commission created by the'Security
Council on ·the one hand and the Security Council, the Military S~aff Cdminittee-and the Atomic
,Energy O:mllnission on the other hand;'I think it
should be our task as far as possible to make
complicated and obscure matters simp1e and
clear;' and not the reverse:
The relations between the comrhission and the
Se~urity Council are fairly well defined. The
coinmisSion' envisaged by the Soviet proposals
should be a su!Jsidiaryorgan of' the SecliritY
Council.: Is it· not clear' what the relations between the Security 'Council and its, 'subsidiary
organ should be?
.
,
.~Then'why set,up a special organto study w~at

is quite clear? The Security Council c~!1' ~t any
time give any tasks or instructions· to such
a .commission; The commission must' at ,all times
accept' and a,ct·, upon any tasks or instructions
fiom. the Council regarding the nature of its
work and '.the questions With which' it has to
deal.

The same consideration applies to the rela. tJons hetweenthis conu:iliSs~on a~d the Military
Staff Committee.' Both organs must'work under
the: .gufdart~e· of' the Sec~ty Council." The
Security COUI~C~ is f~yeJltitledto give 3:ny
inStructions it .considers necessary both to the
Military .Staff 'Committee and 'to ,the COl11~
mission. What is there obscure in 'the relations
betWeen .the commission and the Military'-5taff
Cornrillttee? '.
, ,
. 'aaye we really encountereq. any' difficuiti~s in
ilie relationS betWeen, for ins~ance, the Military,
&ta~ Cpmmittee, a~d ·the Corr.mnttee ,of,Experts?
The lattei,as is well known, is also 'a subsidiary
tno'"

ri"

,

usa

rale. Si nous nous borirlonsa creer tine' COntmission, celle-ci pourrait entreprendre immediatement l'eIaboration de ces propositions. Si,
au contraire, nous creionS un comite special appcle a fonctionner paraIlelement a la commission,
celle-ci se trouverait paralysee pendant quelque
temps; en effet, dans ces conditions, la commis,;
sion n.'aurait meme pas le droit d'etablir son
propre programme et serait obligee d'attendre
qu'un autre oiganisme le luicommuniquat; dIe
seraii ,done obligee de' retarder peut-etre d'un,
de deux ou meme de trois mois ses travaux portant sur les questions de fond. '
N'est-il pas clair qu'en creant un organe special appele a fonctionner paralleIement a la commission, :nous ne ferions que retarder I'ex:amen
des questions que pose la resolution de l'AssembIee generale en date du '14 decembre?Le
Conseil de seeurite doit s'efforcer de hater, et
nOll pas de retarder, l'ex:ameil de ces questions.
n me semble,' ainsi que je .I'ai deja dit, que ee
point de vue est conforine a I'opinion de la
grande majorite des membres du Conseil de
securite.

n existe une autre raison encore qui';rend
inacceptable la creation d'un cornite special.
D'apres 1e'projet des Etats-Unis, ce comite aurait
en partictilier pour tache de determiner la nature
des relations de la commission que le Conseilde
securite se propose de creer avec le Conseil de
securite, avec le Comite d'etat-major 'et avec la
Commission de l'energie atomique. 11 me semble
que nous devons simplifier et clarifier ces pro'blemes complexes et obscurs, et non pas les embrouiller davantage.
'
La nature des relations qui doivent exister
entre la commission et le Conseil de securite est
claire, me semble-t-il. La commission que nous
avons propose de creer doit ette un organe auxiliaire du Conseil de securite. n n'est vraiment
pas difficile' de' detenniner la nature des relations
qui doivent 'exister entre le Conseil de securite
et son organe auxiliaire~
Mais aIors, polirquoi creer un comitespedaI
charge d'etudier une question aussi simple? II est
clair que le Conseil de seeurite peut a tout moment, donner n'importe quel ordre ou li'importe
quelle' instruction' a cette commission. La com';
mission doit accepter a tout moment toutes les
instructions 'et tous les ordres du Conseil de seeurite relatifs a la nature de ses travaux et ani
questions dont elle aura a s'occuper.
lIen va de. meme des relations de cette comniission avee le Comite d'etat-major: LeS deux
organes aoiverit travamer sous la direction dti
Conseil de securite.IAe Conseil de securite a le
pouvoir de dOID1er au Comite d'etat-major, aussi
bien qu'a la commission, toutesles instructions
qui lui semblentnecessaires. Qu'y a-t-il done
d'obscur .danS les relations entre' IacomriJission
et leComite d'etat-major?
AVClns-nous eu des' diffic~~es pour de~.l~
na:ture des reIatioris,qui' doivent exister 'entre
le, CoID:ited'etat-niajoret ~e Comite d'experts,
Par' exemple? '. On saitque'" ce~ Germet' est, Jtii

•••.---------------ri3"§!1._..

~

a

_

organ of the Security Oouncil. Although they
auSsi, un organe auxiliaire du Consei1 de securite.
both deal with certain commqn questions, neithe!" Quoique les deux Comites soient charges quelof these organs has complained to the Security quefois cl'examiner des questions qui se trouvent
Council' that any such differences have arisen
etre les memes, aucun des deux ne s'esfplaint
between them so as to hinder their work. That encore au 'Consei1 de divergences de vues propres
is a small illustration which I think bears out a gener leur activite. Cela illustre, me semble-t-il,
the',view that there is no necessity to create the ma these qu'il est inutile de creer un comite
proposed committee even from the point of view special pour definir .la nature-des relations entre
of' establishing normal relations between the : la commission et le Comite d'etat-major.
conimission and thf~ Military. Staff Committee.
".As regardS the relations between the commisQuant aux relations qui. doivent exister entre
sion and the Atomic Energy Commission envis- . la commission dont la deIegati0n sovietique a
aged in the Soviet proposals, I think that this propose la creation, d'une part, et la Commis-:question is already settled by the fact that the sion de l'energie atomique, d'autre part, cette
tasks· of the Atomic Energy Commission are de- question me semble resolue par le simple fait
fined both in the resolution of the General . que les taches de la Commission de l'energie ato~embly of 24 January 1940 and in its resolumique ant ete definies dans la resolution de l'Astion of 14 December 1946. I repeat that I have sembIeegeneraIe en date du 24 janvier 1946,
not heard of any proposals calling for the reconaussi bien que dans la resolution du 14 decembre
sideration or abrogation of these decisions of the dernier. Je n'ai pas connaissance, je le repete,
General: Assembly with regard to the. Atomic de propositions qui aient ete faites ,en. vue de
Energy Commission.
modifier ou d'abroger les decisions. de l'AssembIee generale relatives a la Commission de
controle c'.erenergie atomique.
With reference to paragraph 3 of the United'
Quant au paragraphe 3 duprojet de resolution americain, je l'estime inutile, pour la simple
States draft resolution, there is, in my opinion, no
raison que le Conseilde securite a deja adopte
necessity for it, for the simple reason that the
Security Cbuncil has already adopted its agenda.
1'0rdre du jour. L'examen du rapport de la ComItem 4 of the agenda is the consideration of the
mission de l'energie atomique y figure au point 4~
report of' the Atomic Energy Commission. The
Le Comeil a adopte cet ordre du jour,ainsi queSecurity Council has adopted this agenda and 1'0rdre' dans lequel seront examinees les diffethe order in which questions should be consid- rentes questions. A qUQi bondedder de nouveau
d'examiner le rapport de la Commission de
ered. Why should we again pass a resolution on
the'necessitY of studying the report of the Atonnc l'energie atomique, puisque, en adoptant l'ordre
du jour, nous avons deja prisunedecision dans'
Energy Coinmission, when such a resolution has
already been passed by the adoption of the ce sens? Serait:'ce pour donner plus de poids a
agenda? Surely this is not essential to make the cette decision? Je ne crois pas qu'enprenant
deux fois la rileme decision, on lui confere plus
resolution more convincing? I do not think resod'autorite. C'est plutot le contraire.
lutions are made any weightier by being passed
tWice; rather the contrary.
Therefore, as regards paragraph 3, I do not
Ainsi done, pour ce qui est du panigraphe 3,
see why we have to 'pass a special. resolution on
je ne vois pas deraison de prendre une decision
a question on which agteement has already been speciale sur une question que nous avons deja
reached.
.
ttanchee cl'un commun accord.
In his speech, Mr. Austin again touched on a
Dans sa declaration, M. Austin 'a de nouveau
number of general questions. I do not intend to
pade d'uncertain nombre de questions generales.
dwell on $ill the questions referred to in Mr.
Je n'ai pas l'intention de m'arreter sur touies
Austin's speech. I do not intend to do this, chiefly ces questions, d'autant qu'il s'agit de choses fort
because they are old questions on which we have anciennes et qui ont fait l'objet de plusieurs
already heard repeated statements by the 'tepre- declarations de· la part des representants des
sentatives oIthe United States of America both Etats-Unis d'.Amerique, aussi bjen au Conseil de
in. the General Assembly and here in the Security securite qu'a I'Ass~mbIee gener~e. Les., autres
Council. The delegation of the USSR, as wen delegations, y compris la delegation de I'URSS,
as oth~r delega..tions, has made frequent replies.
y ont repondu a plusieurs reprises.
.. .1 only want to touch upon one question.
J .;ais m'arreter a une seule de cesquestions.
There is one idea which is repeated very Une idee qui revient tres souvent dans les dec1a~requently in the speeches made by the reprerations des representants des Etats-Unis, est celle
seuta-tives of the United States-namely, that the qui affirme que Iew: pays ne peut consentir au'
United States of America cannot proceed to dis- desarmement ou a la reduction des armements
armament or to'the reduction of armaments and
et des forces armees, tant qu'iI n'a pas ~te cree
armed fOfcesuntil a "system of security" with. un "systeme de securite" avec toutes lesgaranties
all' necessary safeguards has been created. Thus necessaires.·- Ainsi donc, on' oppose la reduction
the regulation and reduction of armaments and
des armements et des forces armees a la creation
a~ed forces is set in opposition to th~ creation ; d'un "systeme 4e .securite" et de garanties capa~f a· "Syst~in of security" and safeguards emur- : bles d'assurerla· rriise en pratique 4e la resolution
mg the· implementation of the regulation and sur la reglementation et la reduction des-arme~duction of armaments and armed forces.
ments et des forces armees.
_

-

. . . .,

T

.-

,,·or·'~~"~_·_-~C_-.~_••~.-,.~~-~•.~._.,.--.~-~--~.-.-

..-....~~----- ..........._ - -

.t

&CO

,

4

IQ

Such contrapositions nmy. cause perpl~ty;
Cette, contradiction •peut surprendre les gens
andmisunderstandiIigamong ~e politically
qui inanquent d'experience politique. En fait, il
uninitiated, .whereas in this case,. there is no' n'y aaucune contradiction. Il n'y a pas lieu d'opcontradiction whatever and to set these two
poserl'un a I'autre le systeme de securite et le
propositions _inoppositioIl~is wrOlig, beca1lSe the
desannement, car la reductiol;l des armements et
des force~ armees estl'ull des elements essentiels
reduction of armaments and armed.forces is one
of the essentiaielements in the creation of secnrde la securite, de cette securite quirepond aux
ity, in which all the peace-loving nations' are
interets de tous les peuplespacifiques. L'accominterested. This is precisely the· task with •. which
pllssem.ent de. cetti:':. tache· faitegalement l'objet
the resolution of· the General Assembly of
de la. resolution de l'Assemblee generale en date
14 December 1946 is concerned~ The regulation •~du 14 decembre 1946. Oune sauraitseparc-.!' la
arid reduction of armaments and armed foices is . reglementation des· armements et des' forces
not something apart from the process "p(creat:'
anneesde la creationd'un "systeme de securite"
ing a "system of security'·' with the :necessary . dote de toutes les garanties necessaires et les lier
s·afeguardS. It is a constituent and inseparable
d'une fa~on organique a la securite et aux garanpart in the creation of security and the n~ces.. : ties necessaires pour'son maintien; C'est ainsi, que
sarysafeguards for its maintenance. That is how, se pose:la question. Qu'ilexiSte unecontradicthe matter stands in reality. Any assertion'that tion entre les propositions de reduire les armethere is any contradiction between the de!Dands .. ments et les forces armees, cl'une part; et de creer
and. proposals for the ·reduction of armaments
un "systeme de securite"· dote dE garanties neces.and armed forces .and the ·~ablishment of a
saires, d'autre part, cette affinna,tion ne soutient
"system of security" and the necessary safegriardS : pas l'analyse. La contradiction· n'est ici qu'une
does not bear criticism. The contradictioriisarti- ' fiction, un artifice, e11e n'a aucune existence
ficial, far-fetched and non-existent in reaJ.ity;
reelle. De telles affirmations ne font que troubler
Such assertions merely confuse the situation and· ' la situation. et rendent plus difficile la bonne
thereby prevent aright understanding of .the
intelligence du probleme.·· .
'. •.. ,' '...
' ,
"
question.
I wish to conclude my statem~nt: by pointing
Pour conclure, je veux rappeler que les peuples
out that the peoples who are anxious to estabqui desireritetablirune paix durable et une secu."
lish durable peace and to create real security "will
rit~ reellene jugeront pas des progr~s realises
judge the progress of the United Nations in
par lesNations ,Uniesdans l'application de la
implementing the General Assembly's resolution
resolution de l'AssembIee generale du 14 decem, of,14 December 1946, not by the statements
bre 1946,d'apres les declarations par lesquelles
m~de by the representative of this or that coun-:les membres du' Conseil veulent teinoigner Jeur
desir' de donner effet a cette· resolution. Les
try .in the' Security Council about -desiring to
implement this resolution, but by the actionS of peuples jkgeront d'apres les' actes; ils jugeront
these countries, how far these actions are in fact
'clans· quelle .mesure les actesde Ces pays contridireCted towards the implementation of the decibuent a ]amise en pratique de la: resolution de
sion of the General Assembly, which may, if it
l'Assemblee; resolution qui, si elle.est app~quee
is implemented as it should be, play a great part
conuneilcoilvient, pourra jouer .un grand role
dans l'etablissement d'une pabc dlU'able et de la
in the building up of durable peace and international security.
securite internationale. '
I

The PRESIDENT: (transltiled from French):'
As I still have several_speakers on my list, i pro,pose to adjourn the meeting until 3 o'clock this
afternoon.

Le PRESIDll:NT:Etant donne queplusieul'S
orateurs restentinscrits, je 'proIJOse de suspendre
la seance jusqu'a 15 heures.

The meeting rose at 1.3(Jp.m. ..

La seance est levee a13 h. 30~

NINETY-NINTH MEETING

QUATRE-VINGT:"DIX-NEUVIEME SEANCE,

Held at Lake Success, New Yor1c,
on Tuesday; 4 February'1947; at 3 p.m;

_ Tenu~ a Lake Succe,fs, New-York; ,
le mardi 4 fevrier 19~7, a15·hfJure.s. .

' . '

.

President: Mt.M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium). .

Prlsident: M. M. F. VAN UNGENHOVE
.; (Belgique).

, Presen"t: The representatives of the fo1l9':Ving
countries: .Australia, .Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia,. France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representa,nts des pays ~uivants:
AllStra}ie, Belgique, Bresil" ChiIJ,~, Cololllhie,
Franc:;e, Pologne~ Syrie, Union desRepubliques
soci~tessovi~tiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats~Unis
d'Amerique. . ,.
,.

38. Continuation of the discussion' on the
seneral .regulation and reduction' of
armaments'
,

38.' Suite de la discussion 5ur:la reglementationetla r~du~ion gen~rale!r'des
armements
.

The PRESIDENT ·(translated from French):
The meeting is called to order. Icall:,on the
representative of Australia.

est

Le PRESIDENT: 'Lase~nce
puverte. La;
parole est au representant de l'Australie..
"

Q
