A /S-30/PV.1

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Thirtieth special session

1st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 19 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

Temporary President: Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Item 1 of the provisional agenda
Opening of the session by the Chair of the
delegation of Denmark
The Temporary President: I declare open the
thirtieth special session of the General Assembly on the
world drug problem.
As representatives are aware, this special session
is being held pursuant to resolutions 67/193 of
20 December 2012, 69/200 of 18 December 2014 and
70/181 of 17 December 2015. Pursuant to paragraph
45 of resolution 67/193, the special session will review
the progress in the implementation of the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, including
an assessment of the achievements and challenges,
within the framework of the three international
drug control conventions and other relevant United
Nations instruments.
Item 2 of the provisional agenda
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The Temporary President: I now invite
representatives to stand and observe one minute of
silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

16-10939 (E)

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/S-30/2)
The Temporary President: I should like, in
keeping with the established practice, to invite the
attention of the General Assembly to document A/S30/2, concerning Article 19 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Appointment of members of the Credentials
Committee
The Temporary President: Rule 28 of the rules of
procedure provides that the General Assembly, at the
beginning of each session, shall appoint, on the proposal
of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of
nine members.
In accordance with precedents, the Credentials
Committee of the thirtieth special session should have
the same membership as that of the seventieth regular
session of the Assembly, namely, Argentina, Austria,
Barbados, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Kazakhstan, the
Russian Federation, South Africa and the United States
of America.
If there is no objection, I shall consider the
Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1610939*

A/S-30/PV.1

The Temporary President: In that connection,
may I invite the attention of the members of the
Assembly to a note verbale from the SecretaryGeneral, dated 4 February 2016, in which it is stated
that credentials should be issued for all representatives
to the special session in accordance with rule 27 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. I
would urge all members to submit the credentials of
their representatives to the Secretary-General as soon
as possible.
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Election of the President
The Temporary President: I now invite the
Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of
the General Assembly at its thirtieth special session.
In that connection, it has been proposed that
the President of the seventieth regular session, His
Excellency Mr. Mogens Lykketoft of the Kingdom of
Denmark, be elected by acclamation as President at the
thirtieth special session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
elect Mr. Mogens Lykketoft President of the General
Assembly at its thirtieth special session by acclamation?
It was so decided.
The Temporary President: I extend my sincere
congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft and invite him to assume the presidency.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
President to the podium.
Mr. Lykketoft took the Chair.
Statement by Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, President of
the General Assembly at its thirtieth special session
The President: I am thankful for my election
as President of the General Assembly at this special
session. Before we begin, let me extend my sincere
condolences and the solidarity of the General Assembly
to the Governments and people of Ecuador and Japan,
who have been deeply affected by deadly earthquakes
over the past weekend. Our thoughts are with all those
who lost loved ones and, indeed, all those who are
working hard at the relief efforts.
It is a great honour to welcome all participants to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth special session, on the
2/34

19/04/2016

world drug problem. I wish to thank Minister Løhde for
presiding over the opening of this session. I also wish
to thank the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)
in Vienna for leading the preparations for this special
session. I recognize the commitment and engagement
of all that resulted in the document we have before us
today (see A/S-30/4).
When young people see their health deteriorate,
their life opportunities evaporate and their families
disintegrate; when those seeking treatment are
stigmatized or discriminated against, and HIV/AIDS
sufferers are marginalized; when poor farmers struggle
to find alternative sources of income and indigenous
peoples face challenges to their centuries-old practices;
when organized criminals bring in immense profits,
attract disenfranchised youth and take over and destroy
communities; when courageous politicians and officers
are gunned down, others are corrupted and the entire
State-apparatus is undermined; when millions are
imprisoned for possession, including of small quantities,
and others are executed for trafficking; when supply
and demand affect societies differently and solutions in
one country result in problems in another; when those
who need controlled substances for medical purposes
cannot have access to them; when all of this and more
comes together, we have the world drug problem — a
problem that demands international action; a problem
that can be overcome.
The presence and engagement of so many
distinguished representatives here today is a show
of commitment to doing just that. A little over six
months ago, many of them gathered in this very
Hall to embrace the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) and to send a signal to
people everywhere that the transformation towards a
more sustainable and just world was under way. Today,
bearing in mind the linkages between the two, we can
deliver a similar message that, together, we can more
effectively address the world drug problem. With
openness and a willingness to learn, we can understand
better that which separates us and rally around that
which unites us. We can build upon actions that have
proven to work.
During these three days in the plenary, round tables
and side events, we will discuss the great challenges
associated with this issue and how best to address
them. No society can claim to be completely free from
the dire consequences that illicit drugs bring, or to
have no relation to many causes, and no country can
16-10939

19/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.1

deny that addressing this problem is a common and
shared responsibility.

doing so, I hope that it helps us to address the complex
world drug problem more effectively and humanely.

Clearly, this is a problem with many dimensions,
from human rights to sustainable development, from
health impacts to the perspective of the drug users, and
from corruption to organized crime. Tackling illicit
drugs therefore requires a long-term, integrated and
multidisciplinary approach. It also calls for coherence
among our public health, social and education sectors,
sustainable development and law enforcement policies,
together with cooperation on the local, regional and
international levels, as well as multilateral responses.
It requires that consideration be given to all the major
causes, consequences and related aspects such as
respect for proportionality, human rights and the rule
of law; considerations regarding the well-being of
society and of the individual; and measures to bring
about social stability and security, while striving for
comprehensive and balanced policy interventions.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson.

Furthermore, the past has shown that we can
equip ourselves better for this challenge if we listen to
each other as Member States, because every country
experiences this problem and applies solutions in
its own way. We must also listen to civil society, the
scientific community and academia, parliamentarians,
youth, women, children and affected communities. I
recognize and applaud the role played by each of these
stakeholders in the preparatory process.
Notwithstanding the ever-increasing efforts
and progress made by States, relevant international
organizations and United Nations entities, as well
as civil society, the world drug problem continues to
affect the lives of millions of people and to undermine
sustainable development, political stability and
democratic institutions. It is indeed time to evaluate the
progress achieved since the last session, to reflect on
new approaches and to address evolving and emerging
challenges. I hope therefore that the next three days will
be an opportunity to look ahead to where we would like
to be by 2019, when the current Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem comes to an end.
The special session on the world drug problem is
now open. I sincerely hope that it will provide a space
for a productive discussion based on the document
prepared by the CND that we are about to adopt. In

The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to address this meeting
of the General Assembly at its thirtieth special session,
on the world drug problem, on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, who is travelling.
The special session provides an opportunity to
assess the achievements, shortcomings and challenges
of the international drug-control regime. The world drug
problem affects virtually every nation and all sectors of
society. I am sure that everyone here thought about the
victims and tragedies created by this scourge when we
observed a minute of silence just now. Drug trafficking
and organized criminal networks fuel violence and
feed corruption. They weaken institutions and the rule
of law. As the Security Council has recognized, profits
from drug-trafficking are funding terrorism and violent
extremism in today’s world.
Drug policies have serious human rights
implications. Some people dare not seek the care they
need, fearing punishment or forced treatment. Drug
abuse results in tragic and terrible human costs to
users and, not least, to their families and communities.
It kills and injures millions of people. It is linked to
the spread of HIV, tuberculosis and hepatitis. It is vital
that we engage at the highest level to provide care and
treatment to those affected. We must end the cynical
exploitation for profit of the most vulnerable people in
our societies.
The ultimate goal of the international drug control
conventions is to ensure the health and welfare of
humankind. In applying them, we must balance
security and public safety concerns with considerations
of health, human rights and development. We all know
that some aspects of the drug agenda are sensitive and
controversial. We also know that some countries and
regions have suffered more than others. It is therefore
important that we listen to each other and learn from
one another’s experiences, not least about how people’s
well-being is affected.
I commend Member States for their informed
and wide-ranging discussions in the lead-up to this
special session and for their dedication to reaching a
consensus on a draft outcome document (A/S-30/L.1,

16-109393/34

A/S-30/PV.1

annex). I thank the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
especially Ambassador Shamaa, Chair of the Board
of the Commission, for their work on this important
document. I would also like to thank civil society around
the world for its critical contributions to moving this
important agenda forward. Addressing the world drug
problem requires the active and continued involvement
of all Governments, all sectors of society and, I would
argue strongly, all parts of the United Nations system.
Now is the time for implementing what has been agreed
on after serious and productive negotiations.
It is encouraging that Member States are
committed to treating and rehabilitating people with
drug-use disorders. Prevention and treatment require
human-rights-based approaches adapted to the needs
of individuals. We must, for instance, recognize that
people in need should have access to vital medicines.
Drug policies should make use of all the tools of the
conventions and agreements on drugs, but also of those
on corruption, organized crime and terrorism. At the
same time, respect for human rights and accountability
in operations aimed at enforcing the law are critical.
That means considering alternatives to conviction or
punishment when appropriate. It means sentencing
those convicted in proportion to their crimes. And in
our view, it means refraining from applying the death
penalty, thereby conforming to human rights obligations.
Poverty and inequality drive illicit drug production
and use. The best prevention policy is working decisively
and universally to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1), which was so skilfully negotiated and
endorsed in September of last year. We have a new tool
in our hands that we must use. Countering drug-related
crime and corruption is critical if we are to achieve
stable societies and effective institutions, which form
the foundation for sustainable development. Drugs not
only threaten development and lives lived in dignity,
they also threaten stability and security.
The challenges posed by the world drug problem
require a global response that is simultaneously
effective, compassionate and humane, alongside
parallel national action, of course. We need to mobilize
our efforts and good forces on that basis and in that
spirit. Looking forward to 2019, we should focus on
new challenges and threats, including the emergence
of new psychoactive substances. The States Members
of the United Nations, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the World Health Organization and
4/34

19/04/2016

the whole United Nations system must respond in a
timely, effective and flexible fashion to those and
other looming dangers. We must base our decisions on
research, data and scientific evidence, and we must not
shy away from new ideas and approaches, even if they
may sometimes challenge traditional assumptions.
The health and welfare of people around the world
should be our overarching objective, in the spirit of
“We the peoples”— the first three words of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is the peoples whom we are
here to serve. I encourage everyone here to continue
the debate as openly and inclusively as possible as we
advance towards the conclusion of the 10-year period
established in the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan
of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem. The draft outcome document before us
represents a good basis from which to take concrete
steps forward both nationally and internationally.
Again, I congratulate Member States on reaching a
consensus outcome at this critical stage of our work.
Let us make the most of this special session to set a
course for policies that support our common aspirations
for healthy people, peaceful and just societies, and a
better future for all.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/181, I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Vladimir Galuška, Chair of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs.
Mr. Galuška (Commission on Narcotic Drugs):
It is an honour to address the General Assembly at its
thirtieth special session dedicated to the world drug
problem. As the Chair of the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs (CND) at its fifty-ninth session, I had the
opportunity during the preparatory process in Vienna
to witness the intensive efforts and commitment of
all — Member States, United Nations entities, regional
organizations and civil society. This special session is
the culmination of those efforts, and I look forward to
our discussions here.
In 2009, Member States adopted the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem and set a
series of important goals for 2019. This special session
represents one of the milestones of that 10-year period.
The Commission on Narcotic Drugs is the United
Nations organ with the primary responsibility for drug
16-10939

19/04/2016

control matters. I am pleased to say that the debates
held over recent years have enriched its work to an
unprecedented degree. Vienna has become a forum to
discuss the world drug problem in any and all of its
multiple dimensions. Those dimensions include the
prevention and treatment of drug-use disorders; human
rights; crime and violence; the availability of drugs
for medical purposes; the value of scientific research,
evidence and data; new psychoactive substances;
alternative development and socioeconomic issues;
international cooperation and the provision of
adequate resources.
Owing to the preparatory process for this special
session, the CND has been focusing intensified
discussions on sharing information on how to
effectively implement programmes and policies on the
ground, taking into account the very different nature
the world drug problem presents in different parts of
the world. The discussions among Member States
have been enriched by the wide participation of other
relevant stakeholders from around the world.
At the most recent meeting of the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, held just last month, I watched
more than 1,800 participants from Governments,
United Nations entities and specialized organizations,
intergovernmental and regional organizations, civil
society, the scientific community, academia and
youth sharing information on the various challenges
posed by the world drug problem. There were 74 side
events held on topics ranging from the flexibility of
the three international drug control conventions and
legislative responses to new psychoactive substances;
from addressing tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS as a public
health priority and considering alternative livelihoods
to the use of the darknet for drug trafficking.
In Vienna, the Commission continues to act
in a spirit of consensus. Through consensus, the
Commission contributes to substantive dialogues
among Governments and fosters international
cooperation to effectively address and counter the
world drug problem, despite differences in national
legislative approaches and policies and despite the
various challenges faced by people around the world.
I welcome the constructive engagement of Member
States during negotiations, which recently resulted not
only in the draft outcome document (A/S-30/L.1, annex)
but also in the adoption of important and innovative
resolutions on, inter alia, proportionate sentencing for
drug-related offences, networking within the scientific

A/S-30/PV.1

community, mainstreaming the gender perspective into
drug policies, promoting standards for the treatment of
drug-use disorders, and the continuing need to target
new psychoactive substances and amphetamine-type
stimulants.
Recently, the Commission enhanced its work
following an increased number of recommendations
received from the World Health Organization on the
scheduling of substances pursuant to the international
drug control conventions. To that end, I very much
welcome the productive cooperation among the
Commission, the World Health Organization and the
International Narcotics Control Board. The multiple
dimensions of the world drug problem and enhanced
cooperation among the various stakeholders are also
reflected in the draft outcome document, adopted by
the Commission and transmitted for adoption at this
special session. The document contains numerous
calls for Member States to share with the Commission
information, lessons learned, experiences and
best practices.
In the outcome document, Member States commit
themselves to taking the necessary steps to implement
the operational recommendations, in close partnership
with the United Nations and other intergovernmental
organizations and civil society, and to share with the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs timely information
on the progress made in that implementation. The
Commission stands ready to provide support to Member
States in their implementation of the recommendations,
in follow-ups to this special session and leading up to
2019 and beyond, by continuing to work in an inclusive
and comprehensive manner with all stakeholders with
whom the Commission has been engaged during the
preparatory process.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all Member
States for their endless efforts to address and counter
the world drug problem. I also thank the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for providing substantive
and organizational support to the Commission. Lastly,
I thank all stakeholders who have been contributing to
and enriching the discussions held at the Commission
for their willingness and perseverance in sharing lessons
learned, experiences and views to assist Member States
to have the information necessary to implement a truly
comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach to
the complex and multifaceted world drug problem.

16-109395/34

A/S-30/PV.1

The President: In accordance with resolution
70/181, I now give the floor to the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Mr. Yury Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov (United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime): The General Assembly’s thirtieth special
session, on the world drug problem, is a culmination
of years of intensive groundwork and inclusive and
frank debate, bringing together Governments, United
Nations entities, scientists and civil society. It has been
an honour for the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) to support the wide-ranging
preparations led by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
(CND). If there is a message that emerges from the many
discussions held, formal and informal, and from the
substantive contributions provided by United Nations
partners and numerous intergovernmental bodies and
non-governmental organizations, it is that the global
drug policy must put people first.
Putting people first means reaffirming the
cornerstone principles of the global drug control
system and placing emphasis on the health and welfare
of humankind, which is one of the founding purposes
of the international drug control conventions. Putting
people first means creating balanced approaches based
on health and human rights and promoting the safety and
security of all our societies. Putting people first means
looking to the future and recognizing that drug policies
must above all protect the potential of young people to
foster healthy lifestyles and safe development. Putting
people first ties responses to the world drug problem to
the broader goals of the groundbreaking 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
Putting people first means acknowledging our
common responsibility with respect to the world drug
problem in all its forms and manifestations. That
requires us to assist countries with limited resources
and capacities to address the threat to peace, security,
development and health posed by illicit drugs,
including through support for alternative livelihoods,
building accountable, effective judiciaries, enlarging
capacities to tackle supply, and enhancing prevention
and treatment services. However, our integrated
and balanced approaches to the world drug problem
stand little chance of succeeding if stated political
commitments are not fully backed by adequate
financial resources.
6/34

19/04/2016

This special session of the General Assembly has
provided a critical opportunity at a critical moment
to build a more comprehensive and more collective
understanding of the challenges we face together. I
very much hope that the aspirational recommendations
contained in the draft outcome document (A/S30/L.1, annex) — which was adopted by consensus by
the CND and is now expected to be endorsed by the
Assembly — can really help to promote the urgent,
united and concerted action we need so much.
As a lead entity in the United Nations system in
addressing the challenges posed by the illicit drugs,
UNODC remains dedicated to working with the
international community to put agreed commitments
into practice. We count on the political and financial
support of Member States to enable us to do so effectively
and efficiently. In close cooperation with our partners,
UNODC will continue to support States through our
global and field office programmes, which are informed
by our extensive on-the-ground experience and research
expertise, and to promote integrated responses at the
global, interregional, regional and country levels.
We remain fully committed to helping Member
States to ensure access to controlled drugs in order
to relieve pain and suffering; to promote prevention,
treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration approaches
rooted in evidence, science, public health and human
rights; to stop criminals and to prevent and counter illicit
cultivation, production and traffic. We use all the tools
at our disposal, as provided by the relevant conventions
concerning drugs, corruption, transnational organized
crime and terrorism, as well as the relevant United
Nations norms, standards and guidelines to tackle
related organized crime, money laundering and illicit
financial flows. Member States can count on UNODC’s
support in the follow-up to the special session through
the 2019 review and beyond.
The President: In accordance with resolution
70/181, I now give the floor to Mr. Werner Sipp,
President of the International Narcotics Control Board.
Mr. Sipp (International Narcotics Control Board):
It is an honour to address the Assembly today at this
special session on the world drug problem in my
capacity as President of the International Narcotics
Control Board (INCB). It is fitting that this landmark
thirtieth special session should address the global drug
problem, the effects of which pervade all of humankind,
all regions and all spectra of our societies.
16-10939

19/04/2016

I acknowledge the extensive preparations that have
been under way for this special session, including by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs. Yet the work has only
just begun. Deliberations over the next three days will
be aimed at reviewing progress in the implementation
of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
and at assessing the achievements made and challenges
faced in countering the world drug problem.
The General Assembly has recognized that this
special session is an opportunity for a high-level and
wide-ranging discussion in the lead-up to the target
date of 2019, in order to further implement the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action. Indeed, the SecretaryGeneral has encouraged Member States to use this
year’s special session “to conduct a wide-ranging and
open debate that considers all options”.
Those present have an important task ahead;
they must take stock of the accomplishments and
shortcomings in drug control and exchange best practices
in addressing the world drug problem. The special
session will map the way forward in drug policy. The
INCB has contributed to this process by clarifying and
highlighting the principles of the relevant conventions,
identifying shortcomings in their implementation,
and by making specific recommendations based upon
those conventions.
The INCB’s assessment of the implementation of the
2009 Political Declaration is ambivalent. Remarkable
successes have been achieved through implementation
of the international drug control system. For example,
due to the control of the licit international trade in
scheduled substances, diversions from the licit trade to
the illicit market have been significantly reduced. In the
past decade, efforts have been made in many countries to
establish programmes for the prevention and treatment
of drug abuse and to reduce the negative consequences
of drug abuse. Finally, international cooperation in
drug-related matters has been strengthened.
However, some of the targets of the 2009
Political Declaration have still not been met. The
availability of controlled substances for medical and
scientific purposes is still not satisfactory. Globally,
the illicit demand for and supply of drugs has not
been significantly reduced, and we are facing the
continuing emergence of new psychoactive substances.
Moreover, some of the fundamental principles of the

A/S-30/PV.1

conventions and the Political Declarations are not being
adequately implemented.
In the coming days, those present will have the
opportunity to agree upon and commit to a course
of action. In just three years’ time, in 2019, the
international community will review conclusively the
implementation of the 2009 Political Declaration and
Plan of Action and the commitments made at this special
session. The next task for each representative here, upon
return to his or her capital, will be to transform political
will into the implementation of those commitments. In
launching this call to action, allow me to emphasize
that the framework for such implementation is already
available — the three international drug control
conventions and the Political Declarations. I will
briefly highlight a few key areas where the action of
the international community is required.
The promotion of the health and welfare of
humankind is the ultimate goal of the drug control
conventions. To that end, the State parties formulated the
conventions with the aim of ensuring the availability of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances for medical
and scientific purposes, while preventing their illicit
cultivation and manufacture, diversion, trafficking
and abuse.
There exists a grave imbalance in the availability
of and access to medicines containing controlled
substances. About three quarters of the global population
do not have proper access to pain relief treatment.
INCB has been calling on countries to close the global
pain divide and ensure the availability of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances. In our 2015 report
on availability, we made specific recommendations to
Governments, and we stand ready to assist them.
Historically, drug control focused on supply
reduction, but there has been growing recognition
of the importance of implementing the treaties in a
comprehensive, integrated and balanced manner and
with full respect for human rights. Such an approach
is essential to addressing the complex and multifaceted
nature of the drug problem. For example, the promotion
of alternative livelihoods is essential if law enforcement
and eradication efforts are to be effective in the long
term. Promoting social cohesion through a variety of
community-based services can make a significant
contribution to addressing the drug problem, especially
in marginalized communities.

16-109397/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Investing in demand reduction — including primary
prevention, education, treatment, rehabilitation and
reintegration of drug users — promotes public health
and well-being and also helps to reduce the potential
number of users. In fact, demand reduction is perhaps the
best form of supply reduction. Also, demand reduction
programmes and services are cost effective in terms of
reduced crime and health-care costs. The prevention
of drug abuse, especially among young people, must
remain the primary objective of drug control policy and
practice. Preventing and reducing the adverse health
and social consequences associated with drug abuse,
such as the transmission of HIV among people who
inject drugs, should also be an essential element of a
comprehensive and balanced approach.
The evolution of drug control policy and practice
in many countries over recent years, from an approach
relying primarily on criminal justice and incarceration
to a more health-oriented approach, is welcome. That
is entirely consistent with the conventions, which
provide States with some flexibility to adopt measures,
such as treatment and rehabilitation, as an alternative
to or in addition to criminal sanctions for offenders,
mainly those suffering from drug dependency. Indeed,
the international drug control conventions require
proportionate responses to drug-related offences.
While the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of
1971 states that “serious offences shall be liable to
adequate punishment, particularly by imprisonment”,
there is no treaty obligation to incarcerate drug
users who have committed minor offences. The
conventions provide for flexibility on the part of
States in determining appropriate sanctions, including
non-punitive or non-custodial measures, for instance
for drug possession for personal use.
However, flexibility has limits. It does not extend
to any non-medical use of drugs. Recent legislative
developments in some countries that permit and
regulate the non-medical use of controlled substances,
in particular cannabis, are in clear contravention of the
conventions. They defy the international consensus
upon which international cooperation depends. The
States parties to the conventions have a responsibility
to address that challenge.
In recent years, we have seen a number of new
drug control issues that, although not foreseen in the
conventions, have to be and can be addressed within the
framework of the international cooperation they provide.
New psychoactive substances pose a problem for the
8/34

19/04/2016

international community in view of their continued
emergence and transient nature. The INCB is working
with the authorities of Member States to facilitate
the sharing of information on incidents involving
those substances. The Board has issued guidance to
eight Governments in regard to the establishment of
partnerships with the private sector for the control of
precursor chemicals and to help address the emergence
of so-called designer precursors. But no solution to
the problem of new psychoactive substances has been
found as yet.
This special session of the General Assembly
is a timely opportunity to reaffirm commitment to
implementing policies and practices grounded in the
fundamental principles of the three conventions and
the Political Declarations of 1998 and 2009, which are
the principle of a balanced approach, the principle of
shared responsibility, the principle of proportionality,
and respect for human rights. Let me recall that the
conventions never called for a war on drugs. Some of the
policies that exist in some countries — and which are
associated with militarized law enforcement, disregard
for human rights, overincarceration, the denial of
medically appropriate treatment and inhumane or
disproportionate approaches — are not in accordance
with the principles of the conventions.
The future of the global drug policy is not a false
dichotomy between a so-called war on drugs, on
the one hand, and legalization and/or regulation of
non-medical use, on the other. It is also unnecessary to
seek so-called new approaches. In fact, we do not really
need new approaches to the global drug policy. Quite to
the contrary, what we need is to better implement the
principles of the drug-control treaties, which require
a balanced and comprehensive approach where health
and welfare are at the core of the policy.
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the many
individuals working to address the drug problem in all
its facets in all countries of the world. Their efforts are
key to promoting the health and welfare of humankind,
the ultimate aims of our work. The International
Narcotics Control Board looks forward to continuing
its cooperation with Governments and civil society
with a view to assisting Member States in improving
the drug-control situation worldwide.
In closing, allow me to recall the collective
commitment of those present to the principle of common
and shared responsibility in addressing the world
16-10939

19/04/2016

A/S-30/PV.1

drug problem. You have a personal and professional
responsibility to implement the commitments made in
this Hall and to prevent harm to individuals and society
arising from the world drug problem. I wish members of
the Assembly much success in their worthy endeavour.

drugs. WHO recommends the provision of sterilized
injection equipment through needle and syringe
programmes. WHO recommends opiate substitute
therapy as the most effective treatment options for
people dependent on opiates.

The President: In accordance with resolution
70/181, I now give the floor to Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of the World Health Organization.

The evidence shows that such programmes benefit
not only individuals but also entire communities,
because they reduce crime and public disorder. I have
a little story about that. I used to work in a city called
Hong Kong. We had one of the world’s most robust,
liberal harm-reduction programmes. We called it the
methadone replacement programme, and I would like
to point out that after it was implemented, petty crime
fell throughout the city. There were no more snatchings
of women’s gold necklaces by drug addicts driven to
commit such petty crimes to feed their addiction. I
speak from personal experience and I would encourage
Governments to consider such programmes. They are
not easy, but they work.

Ms. Chan (World Health Organization): The world
drug problem is a prime concern for the World Health
Organization (WHO), the lead United Nations agency
for health. But I have to thank all Member States for
according high attention to public health in the draft
outcome document (A/S-30/L.1, annex).
The health and social harm caused by the illicit use
of psychoactive drugs is enormous. The harm includes
direct damage to the physical and mental health of users
and dramatically reduces the length and quality of their
lives. Drug use harms families and communities through
crimes against property and people. It contributes to
traffic and domestic injuries, child abuse, gender-based
sexual violence and other forms of violence. Members
of the Assembly know the global statistics quite well.
They do not need to be reminded. Nonetheless, let me
share the fact that an estimated 27 million people have
drug-use disorders. More than 400,000 of them die
each year. Injection-drug use accounts for an estimated
30 per cent of new HIV infections outside sub-Saharan
Africa. Injection-drug use contributes significantly to
epidemics of hepatitis B and hepatitis C in all regions
of the world. About 10 million people who inject drugs
now are infected with hepatitis C. Do members of the
Assembly know how expensive it is to treat hepatitis
C? It is very expensive; even the richest countries in the
world cannot afford it.
In the view of WHO, drug policies that focus almost
exclusively on the use of the criminal justice system
need to be broadened by embracing a public-health
approach. A public-health approach starts with science
and starts with the evidence. It tells us several things.
First, drug use can be prevented. Drug-use disorders
can be treated. Drug dependence that contributes to
crime can be diminished. People with drug dependence
can be helped and returned to productive roles in
society. WHO promotes a comprehensive package of
interventions to achieve those objectives. The evidence
shows it works. Some of the most effective interventions
aim to reduce the harm associated with the injection of

WHO is engaged with another dimension of the
world drug problem that needs urgent attention. The
international drug control conventions place a dual
obligation on Governments: to prevent abuse, diversion
and trafficking, but also to ensure the availability
of controlled substances for medical and scientific
purposes. Many controlled substances play a critical
role in medical care — in pain relief and in anaesthesia,
surgery and the treatment of mental disorders.
Unfortunately, the obligation to prevent abuse has
received far more attention that the obligation to ensure
availability for medical care. WHO estimates that
80 per cent of the world’s population lives in countries
with zero access, or very little, to controlled medicines
used for relieving moderate-to-severe pain.
As everyone here goes home after adopting the draft
outcome document and begins to implement it, I urge
all to remember the people, as the Deputy SecretaryGeneral said. We must remember the right of those
people to treatment and care — the right of those with
cancer, dying in agony for want of pain relief; of those
who want to be drug-free but who get no help from
health or social services; and of the millions whose use
of injected drugs adds HIV or hepatitis to their misery.
WHO and its partners, especially my brother agency
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, stand
ready to implement the tasks that will be assigned to us
during this special session.

16-109399/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Introduction of the report of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and its preparatory work
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Khaled Shamaa, Chair of the Board
tasked by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs with
the preparations for the special session, to introduce
the report of the Commission on its preparatory work,
contained in document A/S-30/4.
Mr. Shamaa (Commission on Narcotic Drugs): It
is a great pleasure to address the Assembly today in
my capacity as Chair of the Board established by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and tasked with the
preparations for this special session.
During the special session, representatives of
Member States, international organizations, civil society
and other stakeholders will be able to share information
and views during the general debate and in five roundtable discussions, as well as at a wide variety of other
events. Representatives of Member States will have the
opportunity to commit to effectively addressing and
countering the world drug problem in all its complexity
and numerous manifestations by recommending
operational measures to be taken to improve the health,
safety and well-being of all humankind.
Today I have the honour to present the report of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on its preparatory
work, as contained in document A/S-30/4. The
document reflects the highlights of the past two years
of commitment and intense preparatory work on the
part of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna,
acting in an open-ended manner. The Commission
embarked on an intensive preparatory process, starting
with its fifty-seventh session in March 2014, followed
by the Assembly’s adoption of resolution 69/200.
Fourteen intersessional meetings and four formal
special preparatory segments were held on the margins
of the Commission’s fifty-seventh, fifty-eighth and
fifty-ninth sessions. In addition to formal meetings,
a series of informal events was held throughout
the two-year period. They included special events,
consultations, informal interactive discussions and
other events, in Vienna and elsewhere. We felt it was
crucial to hear different perspectives that also reflected
different situations, challenges and lessons learned on
the ground.
10/34

19/04/2016

Inclusiveness,
openness
and
substantive
information-sharing have been key features of the
preparatory process. The Board worked closely with a
wide range of stakeholders, including intergovernmental
organizations, United Nations entities, regional
organizations, civil society, the scientific community
and, most importantly, young people. The dedication
and determination of all stakeholders in their efforts to
bring their experiences to the attention of Member States
and one another are to be applauded. The statements,
outcomes and presentations delivered at all events have
been continuously posted on the website dedicated
to the preparatory process, which in itself became a
repository of in-depth information on approaches to the
world drug problem around the globe and has enabled
all to contribute to the process.
With regard to the modalities of the special
session, a significant moment in the preparations took
place in March 2015 at the fifty-eighth session of the
Commission with the adoption of its resolution 58/8,
containing the recommendations that the General
Assembly acted on in its adoption of resolution 70/181.
Organizational arrangements for the round tables that
will be held during the special session, alongside the
plenary meetings, were defined in the Commission’s
decision 58/16, adopted in December 2015. The
modalities mirror the five interactive discussions held
in March of last year during the special segment on
preparations for the special session, which were also
chaired by the members of the Board and supported by
a panel consisting of representatives of Member States
nominated by the five regional groups, civil society
and United Nations entities. The Vienna interactive
discussions served as a template for the five round
tables that will be held during this special session and
that will be dedicated to the same themes. I am greatly
looking forward to the round tables and I am sure that
the discussion on each topic will be as useful as it
proved in Vienna last year.
As for the draft outcome document (A/S-30/L.1,
annex) , the Commission began working on it in early
autumn 2015. All the information gathered during the
numerous events I have described, along with more
than 200 pages of inputs from Member States, served as
the substantive foundation for the elements paper that
the Board presented on 24 September. During the first
phase of negotiations, in the autumn of 2015, Member
States focused on defining the main elements. In the
second phase, starting in January this year, delegations
16-10939

19/04/2016

built on the elements paper by engaging in intensive,
open-ended negotiations on the draft text of an outcome
document, shaping its structure and substance. Finally,
at its fifty-ninth session, a month ago, the Commission
agreed on a draft document, entitled “Our joint
commitment to effectively addressing and countering
the world drug problem”, and decided to transmit it to
the special session and recommend its adoption.
The draft outcome document addresses the multiple
dimensions of the world drug problem. It contains a
comprehensive set of operational recommendations
covering prevention and treatment as well as other
health-related issues, including the prevention,
treatment and care of HIV and AIDS; the issue of the
availability of controlled substances for medical and
scientific purposes; the prevention and countering of
drug-related crime and its links with other forms of
organized crime; human rights, including the rights
of young people, children, women and communities,
as well as proportionate and effective policies and
responses; evolving challenges, trends and existing
circumstances and emerging and persistent problems and
threats, including that of new psychoactive substances;
strengthening international cooperation based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility; and
socioeconomic issues, alternative development and
viable economic alternatives.
The preparatory process has demonstrated that there
can be no one-size-fits-all approach. The challenges
and situations on the ground vary from region to region,
within regions and from one country to another. In
responding to our shared but differentiated challenges,
the document contains important operational
recommendations and demonstrates our common
determination to address and counter collectively the
various aspects of the world drug problem.
All of those challenges require our urgent attention.
It is crucial to ensure that the draft outcome document
is translated into concrete action on the ground, and
I urge Member States, United Nations entities, civil
society and all other relevant stakeholders to promote
and contribute to its implementation as much as
possible by taking all the steps necessary for that. I
also urge everyone to share timely information with
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on progress made
and results achieved in the period leading up to 2019
and beyond.

A/S-30/PV.1

On behalf of the members of the Board, I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Mogens Lykketoft,
President of the General Assembly, who has provided
support and guidance throughout the process and with
whom I have had the pleasure to work closely, as well as
the President of the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session,
His Excellency Mr. Sam Kutesa of Uganda. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Ambassador Vladimir
Galuška, Chair of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
at its fifty-ninth session, as well as his predecessor
His Excellency Ambassador Arthayudh Srisamoot of
Thailand, Chair of the Commission at its fifty-eighth
session, for their cooperation with the Board. I also
thank the secretariat of the Commission, which has
been at the disposal of the Board, the Commission
and delegations throughout the two-year preparatory
process, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime generally, through its Executive Director, for
its substantive expertise and technical support during
the whole process. Finally, I am truly grateful to all
the members of the Board for their hard work and
commitment throughout the process.
This special session is and must be about human
beings. It is our collective responsibility to make sure
that our response to the world drug problem in 2016 and
beyond is built on international cooperation, solidarity,
common and shared responsibility and concerted
international action, with the aim of promoting and
ensuring the well-being of peoples and societies.
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Organization of the session and adoption of the
agenda
The President: In order to expedite the work of
the thirtieth special session and in accordance with
precedents, it is proposed that the Vice-Presidents of
the thirtieth special session shall be the same as those of
the seventieth regular session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to
that proposal?
It was so decided.
The President: Likewise, it is proposed that the
Chairpersons of the Main Committees of the seventieth
regular session shall serve in the same capacity at the
thirtieth special session.
May I take it that the Assembly also agrees to
that proposal?

16-1093911/34

A/S-30/PV.1

It was so decided.
The President: The General Committee of the
thirtieth special session of the General Assembly is
thus fully constituted.
I should like to draw the attention of delegations
to a matter concerning the participation of the Holy
See and the State of Palestine, in their capacities as
observer States, in the work of the General Assembly.
The observers of the Holy See will participate in the
work of the thirtieth special session in accordance with
Assembly resolution 58/314 of 1 July 2004, with no
further need for a precursory explanation prior to their
intervention. The observers of the State of Palestine
will participate in the work of the thirtieth special
session in accordance with Assembly resolutions 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 43/177 of 15 December
1988, 52/250 of 7 July 1998, and 67/19 of 29 November
2012, with no further need for a precursory explanation
prior to their intervention.
In accordance with resolution 65/276 of 3 May
2011 and the note by the Secretary-General contained
in document A/65/856, observers of the European
Union will participate in the work of the thirtieth
special session with no further need for a precursory
explanation prior to their interventions.
I should now like to request the cooperation of
representatives on the length of statements. Given
the short duration of the special session and in order
to hear all the speakers inscribed on the list, it would
be appreciated if representatives would keep their
statements in the debate as brief as possible. I would like
to appeal to representatives to limit their interventions
to five minutes when speaking on behalf of a group and
three minutes when speaking in a national capacity.
I strongly encourage speakers to adhere to those
time limits.
We now turn to the adoption of the agenda. The
provisional agenda of the thirtieth special session of the
General Assembly is contained in document A/S-30/1.
In order to expedite its work, the Assembly may wish
to consider the provisional agenda directly in plenary
meeting without referring it to the General Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to this
procedure?
It was so decided.
12/34

19/04/2016

The President: May I therefore take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the provisional agenda as it
appears in document A/S-30/1?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 8
Adoption of the final document
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively
addressing and countering the world drug problem”,
contained in document A/S-30/L.1. The Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt it?
The resolution was adopted (resolution S-30/1).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, I would remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): Armenia joined the
consensus on the outcome document of the General
Assembly special session (resolution S-30/1, annex),
which shapes the strategy for the United Nations to
address the world drug problem in full conformity with
all of the purposes and principles set forth in the United
Nations Charter. However, my delegation would like to
mention that the outcome document has failed to fully
and properly reflect those principles and purposes.
With all due respect to the Charter, we have to
“develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, and to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen universal
peace”.
Armenia will continue to take appropriate measures
to strengthen international and regional cooperation to
combat the world drug problem based on respect for the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination of
peoples in line with the purposes of the United Nations
as enshrined in its Charter.
Mr. Berset (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland, like other countries, regrets that the
outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex) does not
address the issue of the death penalty, which is still
applied by some countries for drug-related crimes. We
are strongly opposed to the use of the death penalty
regardless of location or circumstances.
16-10939

19/04/2016

For drug-related crimes, there is no evidence that
the death penalty has a deterrent effect that is more
important or more effective than other severe penalties
such as long-term sentences, and, moreover, the death
penalty applied for drug-related crimes does not
meet the criteria for the most serious crimes, that is,
crimes committed with intent to kill, pursuant to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
We share the concerns of countries facing
emergency situations with respect to drug trafficking,
and we are interested in having a dialogue with them
on truly effective deterrents and on exemplary good
practices. I would refer, for example, to the fundamental
need for functional police and penitentiary institutions
that are free from corruption.
Experience shows that the death penalty does not
allow a country to be rid of the drug problem because
that will require much more effort, more substantial
efforts and other types of efforts to achieve results.
Switzerland therefore invites all States Members of
the United Nations that still apply the death penalty
to consider a moratorium on executions, because a
moratorium is a solid framework for conducting serious
research into more effective means for solving the
problems that exist.
Mr. De Paiva (Brazil): We warmly welcome the
adoption of the outcome document of the General
Assembly special session (resolution S-30/1, annex).
We praise your leadership, Mr. President, as well as that
of the Chair of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the
work of the Board of the special session, particularly its
Chair, and of all participating delegations. We see this
document as an important step towards more balanced,
effective and humane drug policies. It is a good basis
for further progress towards 2019.
However, at this time, we would like to reaffirm
Brazil’s concern about the application of the death
penalty to drug-related crimes. My country believes that
no crime warrants the application of the death penalty,
which we consider to be a human rights violation. We
therefore regret that there was no agreement to address
this issue in the outcome document. Brazil remains
concerned about the recent increase in executions for
drug-related crimes in countries that adopt the death
penalty.
Respect for sovereign national decisions is a key
principle for Brazil’s foreign policy. That is why we
would like to propose that countries, with due regard

A/S-30/PV.1

to their national realities, consider the possibility of
adopting a moratorium on the application of the death
penalty for drug-related crimes with a view to its final
abolition. We look forward to further consideration
and constructive discussions on this issue as we move
towards the 2019 review of the Political Declaration and
Plan of Action.
Ms. Chacón Echeverría (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation was part of the consensus that
adopted resolution S-30/1 because it believes that the
resolution reflects a step forward in providing new
focus in and a comprehensive approach to dealing with
the world drug problem. However, Costa Rica deeply
regrets that the document does not include any mention
of the death penalty, which is not consistent with the
decision of the International Narcotics Control Board to
call on countries applying the death penalty to consider
its abolition in drug-related cases.
Costa Rica, the third country in the world to abolish
the death penalty, opposes capital punishment on
principle because it considers that it constitutes cruel
and inhuman punishment that degrades the individual,
violating his or her most fundamental rights such as
dignity and the right to life. There is no instance or
offence for which the application of the death penalty
can be considered fair or justified. Moreover, our
experience shows that an effective criminal justice
system is possible without resorting to the death penalty.
There is no evidence whatsoever that the death
penalty has a deterrent effect on crime. Any association
in this regard is fallacious. With the growing support
for the General Assembly resolution on the moratorium
on the application of the penalty of death, and following
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s
clarification that the use of the death penalty will
never be consistent with the letter or spirit of the drug
conventions, Costa Rica urges States that still have the
death penalty in their laws to implement a moratorium
on its application.
Mr. Høie (Norway): In 2012, the General Assembly
decided, by resolution 67/193, to convene a special
session to review the progress in the implemtation
of the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
including an assessment of the achievements and
challenges.

16-1093913/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Norway is satisfied to be a part of the consensus
behind the outcome document of this special session
(resolution S-30/1, annex). In many areas, we see
positive developments, such as a stronger emphasis
on health and the need to recognize different national
approaches.
However, we recognize that the process failed
to gather a consensus on steps that Norway views as
essential for an efficient and human approach to the
current and future challenges for national and global
drug policy. We would have liked to see stronger
language on human rights, especially with regard to
the issue of the death penalty for drug-related offences
and the need for more professional responses for drug
offenders. The concept of harm reduction should have
been recognized. We have evidence showing that those
elements have an essential part in reducing the immense
harm from drugs on both individuals and society.
The will of Government and the participation
of civil society and a wider United Nations role is
necessary to ensure an effective global drug policy
that puts humans first. That requires coherence among
drug control, security, human rights, public health and
development policy. While the special session outcome
document is a step in the right direction, those issues
need to be addressed and worked on in the years
ahead, while we hope for a wider recognition of their
importance in 2019 and beyond. Norway intends to be a
clear voice for a more progressive approach.
Mr. Romani Gerner (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish)
Uruguay wishes to explain its vote and the extent to
which we worked intensively with various States in the
quest for this outcome document (resolution S-30/1,
annex), which is the product of a consensus in which we
seek reflect all voices. Like many representatives who
spoke before us, we deeply regret that the document
does not include a moratorium on the death penalty,
which is a measure that violates the most fundamental
of human right of all — the right to life. It is not a
question of the effectiveness of criminal law but of
respect for the human rights instruments to which
we are all committed under the Charter of the United
Nations.
We also regret that in the debate that produced
this document, there was insufficient discussion on
the necessary decriminalization of the possession
of controlled substances for personal use. It is not a
mandate under the conventions, but rather a human
14/34

19/04/2016

right that must be protected. Furthermore, we regret
that there has not been a serious, responsible balance
of the Plan of Action that we had set ourselves earlier,
which is now in progress.
Finally, we also regret the resistance to submitting
and accepting the harm reduction strategy, which
has shown so many benefits in containing troubling
realities. It is also a means to strengthen cooperation
and addressing the world drug problem.
Ms. Smith (Jamaica): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to take the floor to
explain Jamaica’s position on the outcome document
(resolution S-30/1, annex) that has just been adopted.
Jamaica supports the consensus on the outcome
document, which, we acknowledge, is the result of a
long and difficult negotiation process. That included
multi-State consultations and inputs submitted
by Member States, civil society, international
organizations and United Nations agencies. Despite
the wide divergence of views, we note that important
advances were made, including references to the need
for comprehensive and balanced strategies, alternatives
to incarceration for minor drug offenses, the importance
of scientific evidence in the evaluation of drug policies
and alternative development and demand reduction.
Jamaica is, however, disappointed that the document
does not allow countries sufficient flexibility to design
our domestic policies to fit national circumstances,
including the recognition of traditional uses of
cannabis in our societies and as a religious sacrament.
Additionally, there is no follow-up mechanism to
review the global drug control architecture and make
recommendations for consideration by Member States
on how best to recalibrate the global response.
Although the document does not fully live up to
the aspirations of Jamaica, we remain committed to
continued constructive dialogue. We encourage the
international community to continue to move forward
and to address the world drug problem in a manner that
reflects contemporary and evolving realities.
Mr. Budiman (Indonesia): First, let me welcome
the adoption of the outcome document (resolution
S-30/1, annex), which represents an important milestone
toward 2019.
On another note, we would like to put on record
the following principle positions of our delegation
concerning important issues with regard to the death
16-10939

19/04/2016

penalty. We have to reiterate that there is no international
consensus on the abolition of the death penalty. The
death penalty is not prohibited under international
law. The application of the death penalty is a criminal
justice matter for individual States, to be decided by the
competent authorities. In other words, every State has
the sovereign right to decide on its own justice system,
taking into account its own circumstances. Every State
has the sovereign right to choose its own political,
economic, social and legal system, based on what is in
its own best interest. Yet it is clear that the initiator
of this matter in this forum has decided that only one
view on the issue should be respected. We would like to
clearly reiterate that the death penalty is an important
component of our Administration’s law and system of
justice. It is imposed only for the most serious crimes
and serves as a deterrence.
We are all here today because the world drug
problem continues to pose a threat to the safety and
security of all. Drug production and transportation are
like a major sophisticated multinational cooperation
run by ruthless syndicates that trade the lives of their
victims for profit. We often overlook those victims.
Traffickers enforce immense penalties on their victims,
including the death penalty. We have proper legal
safeguards in place that take into account national
policies that prevent any miscarriage of justice.
The following States wish to place on record their
support for this statement: Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam,
China, Egypt, Iran, Kuwait, Malaysia, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan, United Arab
Emirates and Yemen.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the explanation of vote.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution. I give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Mimica (European Union): I have the honour
to take the floor on behalf of the European Union and its
member States and the following countries, which align
themselves with this statement — Albania, Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Canada, Cabo Verde, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Georgia,
Iceland, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Namibia, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, the Republic
of Moldova, San Marino, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Uzbekistan — in order to speak on the

A/S-30/PV.1

issue of the death penalty in relation to the adoption of
the outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex).
We deeply regret that the outcome document does
not include language on the death penalty. We have a
strong and unequivocal opposition to the death penalty
in all circumstances. We consider that the death penalty
undermines human dignity and that errors made in its
application are irreversible. Moreover, imposing the
death penalty for drug offences is against the norms
of international law, specifically paragraph 2 of article
6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. The unprecedented support generated by
General Assembly resolution 69/186, on a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty, which was adopted in
December 2014, signaled that there is an international
momentum behind efforts to limit the application of
the death penalty, including in terms of the number of
offences for which it is imposed.
We urge all States that have not done so to
implement a moratorium on the use of the death penalty
as a step towards its final abolition. Furthermore, we
welcome the decision of the International Narcotics
Control Board to call on countries still applying the
death penalty to consider its abolition for drug-related
offences and a statement from the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime that the use of the death penalty has
never been in the letter or the spirit of the international
drug control conventions. We also encourage Member
States to adopt safeguards to prevent criminal justice
or other forms of international assistance resulting in a
death sentence being applied and to hold international
agencies to account for compliance with this and all
other human rights obligations.
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 8.
Agenda item 7
General debate
The President: The Assembly will now hear
an address by His Excellency Mr. Jimmy Morales,
President of the Republic of Guatemala.
President Morales (spoke in Spanish): In the socalled war on drugs, countries such as Guatemala have
borne the worst part in enduring the unfair burden of
the loss of human lives.
I can honestly say that Guatemala has complied
with its international obligations, joining the struggle

16-1093915/34

A/S-30/PV.1

despite our extremely limited resources and to the
detriment of our investments in health, education
and development. Therefore, together with Colombia
and Mexico, we proposed this special session of the
General Assembly as an historic opportunity not only
to reflect critically on the effectiveness and challenges
of the global drug policy, but also to redirect, improve
and deepen international cooperation regarding this
problem.
We are aware that the expected outcomes of the
current global policy have not been fully achieved, that
there are undesired effects and that progress has been
limited. We also know that this policy should be adapted
to the new realities that arise in order to address the
challenges in each region and each country. In view of
that, it is worth asking ourselves: If our resources are
extremely limited and our social needs extremely great,
what should we prioritize?
Guatemala has fostered and facilitated an open and
pluralistic dialogue, taking into account the realities
and interests of all countries and seeking agreements
in favour of a more effective and humane drug policy.
Thus we welcome the progress achieved. I wish to
highlight three key points.
First, the reaffirmation that the health and welfare
of humankind are the objective of the international drug
control conventions can lead us to prioritize a humane
approach, focused on public health and not on merely
punitive responses. Second is the acknowledgement that
drug policies should be consistent with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, placing people, not
substances, at the centre of those policies. Third is
the recognition that the international conventions are
sufficiently flexible to allow countries to implement
drug policies according to their priorities and needs,
meaning that each State may sovereignly decide the
policy that best meets its realities, challenges and
specific interests.
One of the most important changes that the current
drug policy needs today is for us to give priority to
the reduction in demand rather than focusing solely
on a reduction in supply. We must ensure drug-policy
comprehensiveness. In that regard, we welcome the
balance that is beginning to emerge in some developed
countries. At the same time, we believe that such an
approach should be a priority for the international
community towards developing countries.
16/34

19/04/2016

I must stress that, in the search for a comprehensive
and balanced policy, our country will also begin to
diversify the international cooperation that we receive
with regard to drug policy towards important areas
such as sustainable human development, including
alternative development, as well as the care, treatment
and rehabilitation of problematic users and the
prevention of consumption in general.
Finally, we are aware that the process is only
beginning, and we have faith that the outcome document
that we have adopted (resolution S-30/1, annex) is a first
step that will lead us to a global policy in which human
beings will be the most important element.
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Enrique Peña Nieto,
President of the United Mexican States.
President Peña Nieto (spoke in Spanish): The
United Nations is the highest forum in which to address
and overcome the global challenges of our times. That
is why, in 2012, Colombia, Guatemala and Mexico
called for the convening of this special session of the
General Assembly on the world drug problem. The
goal is to review the current international strategy and,
above all, define the better solutions from a human
rights perspective and in terms of prevention and public
health, which would put the well-being of individuals at
the centre.
We cannot deny that in recent years the terms of
the debate have changed. A consensus is beginning
to emerge in favour of meaningful reform of the
international drug regime. A new approach is taking
shape that resolutely fights criminals, but rather than
criminalizing the consumers, it gives them opportunities
and alternatives. With firmness we must continue doing
what has worked. With flexibility we must change what
has not produced results. The approach essentially
based on prohibition — the so-called war on drugs that
began in the 1970s — has not succeeded in diminishing
the worldwide production, trafficking or consumption
of drugs.
Drug trafficking continues to be one of the most
lucrative activities of organized crime and a decisive
factor in its transnational growth. Inevitably, the
illegal trade in narcotics has led to death and violence,
mainly in producer and transit countries. For decades,
Mexico has been one of the countries that has been
most committed to dealing with the problem of drugs.
My country is one of the nations that has paid a high
16-10939

19/04/2016

price — too high a price — in terms of the loss of
its peace, suffering and the loss of human lives — of
children, young people, women and adults. Like few
others, we know the limits and the painful implications
of the essentially prohibitionist paradigm.
For that reason, during my Administration, we have
been seeking to deal with the drug phenomenon in a
more integrated way, with a strategy that seeks to avoid
generating violence and in which almost all sectors of
the Government of Mexico take part. To reduce the
supply of drugs, we have faced up to organized crime
through better coordination between our authorities,
the use of intelligence systems and the dismantling of
its operational and financial structures. In that way,
we have managed to arrest the main criminal leaders,
and we have reduced the violence in specific regions
of our country, which has led to reduced crime rates.
Furthermore, through the use of technology and
information, we are finding, identifying and destroying
drug crops and drug laboratories. At the same time, in
order to reduce domestic demand, we have strengthened
prevention efforts among children and youth, as well
as the treatment of addictions. That approach has been
backed up with social prevention of violence and crime
in vulnerable communities.

A/S-30/PV.1

Second, we must strengthen the common front
against transnational organized crime so that it does
not have room to carry out its financial operations
and related crimes. We must strengthen cooperation
among our Governments and expand the exchange of
information and joint actions to dismantle criminal
organizations.
My third point is that better coordination and
collaboration among the United Nations specialized
agencies is necessary in order to address all aspects
of the global drug problem. Through their different
mandates and with a greater cooperation among them,
entities such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the International Narcotics Control Board, the
United Nations Development Programme, UN-Women
and the World Health Organization should support
Member States in implementing the best strategies,
policies and programmes to deal with drugs.
Fourth, the public policies and actions based on
the international drug policy should be aligned with
the sustainable development efforts under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1). The Sustainable Development Goals and efforts
aimed at resolving the global problem of drugs must be
complementary and mutually reinforcing.

Nevertheless, despite the efforts that have been
made and the results that have been achieved, we are
not totally free from the criminal threat while the
international demand for drugs is growing. Within
the current paradigm, consumer countries must do
more, both in reducing their demand and in combating
transnational organized crime. The scale, sophistication
and corrupting power of criminal groups are also
present at and within the borders of the consumer
countries where the final sale takes place. To confront
this situation with global responsibility, Mexico puts
forth the following proposals.

The fifth point is that we should deal with the
social damage associated with the illicit drug market.
For those communities affected by organized crime,
we need an integrated effort for the prevention of
violence, exclusion and the weakening of the social
fabric. We must support the affected communities with
educational, employment and recreational alternatives
that strengthen social inclusion and cohesion. In
particular, we must create productive alternatives in
those areas where narcotics are grown, for example,
crop substitution and international agriculture contract
programmes.

First, the world drug problem requires that the
international community endorse the principle of
common and shared responsibility through more intense
and effective international cooperation. In a globalized
world, drugs are also a global issue that concerns all
nations. No country can address this scourge by itself.
Moreover, the divergence among the public policies of
each country makes it difficult to have cooperation and
achieve results. Therefore, we need global consensus,
or at least consensus at the hemispheric level, to address
the problem of drugs effectively.

Sixth, given the limitations of the prohibitionist
paradigm, we must address the global issue of drugs
from the perspective of human rights. Only in that
way can we offer more comprehensive and balanced
responses that promote development. This fundamental
change involves modifying the eminently punitive
approach so as to put individuals, their rights and their
dignity — not the substances or legal processes — at
the centre of our efforts.
Seventh, drug use should be addressed essentially
as a public health problem, since it constitutes a threat to

16-1093917/34

A/S-30/PV.1

the full development of people, especially our children
and young people. Drug addiction must be addressed
through comprehensive prevention mechanisms and
therapeutic solutions, not penal instruments that
criminalize consumers and damage the development of
their personality.
Eighth, in drug-related offenses, we must have
sentences that are in proportion to the crime and
alternatives to imprisonment that also incorporate a
gender perspective. Disproportionate sanctions that
punish women and children in vulnerable situations,
far from solving the problem, generate vicious cycles
of exclusion and criminality. Furthermore, treatment,
education, rehabilitation and social reintegration
services should be provided to the prison population.
Ninth, we need international efforts to prevent drug
use through a campaign directed at children and young
people at a global level. We must protect the most
vulnerable members of our societies, ensuring that
they know the negative effects associated with drug
consumption and the use of psychotropic substances.
The tenth point is that we should ensure the
availability of and better access to controlled substances
for medical and scientific purposes, at the same time
avoiding their diversion, misuse, and trafficking. That
proposal stems from the broad national debate on the
use of marijuana, which the Government of Mexico
convened, with experts, academics and representatives
of civil society.
As President of Mexico, at this special session I
want to give a voice to those who expressed the need
to update the regulatory framework to authorize
the use of marijuana for medical and scientific
purposes. Participants in those forums also expressed
the importance of increasing, in accordance with
international standards, the amount of marijuana
that can be considered for personal use in order to
not criminalize consumers. In the coming days,
the Government of Mexico will outline the specific
actions to be taken to that end, in accordance with the
principles of public health and human rights that we
have proposed in this special session. Therefore, from
this rostrum, from the highest forum of the international
community, I acknowledge the experts, academics and
representatives of civil society who have contributed
ideas and guidance towards a new consensus.
The world drug problem is a phenomenon that
knows no borders and harms societies throughout the
18/34

19/04/2016

world. So far, the responses that have been implemented
by the international community have, frankly, been
inadequate. I trust that this special session will provide
a new international understanding on this matter. It
is my hope that this dialogue will enable us to begin
generating the vision, tools and new consensus that we
need to counter the drug phenomenon in the twentyfirst century. Together, we can find solutions. We must
move beyond prohibition to effective prevention and
regulation. Thousands of lives depend on it.
The President: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by Her Excellency Ms. Ana Helena Chacón,
Vice-President of the Republic of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chacón (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to convey the solidarity of the people of
Costa Rica with the brotherly countries of Ecuador and
Japan in the tragedies that they are facing. We also wish
to express our deepest condolences to Afghanistan on
the new terrorist attack that has just taken place there.
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Minister of State of the Dominican Republic
on behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
My delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President,
as well as the Board tasked with organizing this special
session.
Similarly, my country wishes to thank Mexico for
its leadership, as, along with Colombia and Guatemala,
it pushed for the convening of this event. Costa Rica
supported this initiative from the outset, because it
believes that in the light of the new shared challenges
and the meagre results of the current strategy, an open
and inclusive debate is needed, one based on the best
interdisciplinary evidence available that would enable
us to focus our efforts on designing and implementing
plans, policies and actions to address the world drug
problem with a comprehensive and multidisciplinary
approach centred centred on the human being. Without
doubt, the convening of this session represents a genuine
turning point towards a more socially oriented policy
with a human face in addressing the drug phenomenon.
We reiterate that there is plenty of evidence to show
that the past 50 years of repressive policies and the war
on drugs have still not provided the solution.
Although Costa Rica is pleased to see the consensus
achieved in the recommendations negotiated in Vienna,
and although we are pleased that the document embodies
16-10939

19/04/2016

the commitment of States to tackle a phenomenon
that is far from being under control, we must bear in
mind that for the sake of consensus, elements crucial
to a truly comprehensive approach were left out of the
document. In that connection, Costa Rica wishes to
emphasize that if we really wish to reduce the adverse
effects of this scourge, it is essential to deal with
issues that were not mentioned in the document, such
as new approaches, harm reduction, proportionality
in sentencing, the non-use of the death penalty, the
effectiveness of policies and the formation of a panel
of experts to study and guide our strategies. Similarly,
the document should not be considered an end in itself,
but rather as a point of departure for developing and
fostering more comprehensive and effective policies.
Costa Rica has never punished consumption as
a crime. Our approach has always been from the
perspective of prevention and health. We use 60 per cent
of the funds seized from drug trafficking to finance
projects in the fields of prevention and treatment. More
recently, we have reformed our criminal laws to include
a focus on gender and proportionality, which allows us
to reduce prison sentences for vulnerable women.
However, no country can effectively deal with
drug trafficking alone, given its transnational nature.
From the perspective of cooperation, the inclusion of
reciprocal legal assistance is essential for our region,
which also requires cooperation to implement the social
and public-health measures needed to deal with this
problem comprehensively. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the interregional work being carried out
under the Coordination and Cooperation Mechanism
on Drugs between the European Union and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Cooperation Programme on Drugs Policies,
between Latin America and the European Union, which
provide an opportunity to place human beings at the
centre of our drug policies.
Although the outcome document that we have
adopted (resolution S-30/1, annex) comes as a welcome
step and reflects some of the new pathways that we
should take in the international debate on the world
drug problem, we still have more work to do. That
must be reflected in actions that enable us to place
our countries on the path of egalitarian, inclusive
and sustainable development, in accordance with
the commitments adopted in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). Costa Rica
will therefore promote such cooperation and is already

A/S-30/PV.1

committed to working actively and constructively in
this special session, as well as in the follow-up. I hope
we can meet again on this subject after having achieved
more results than what we have achieved together so far
as a region and as a hemisphere.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Isabel de Saint Malo de Alvarado,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Panama.
Mrs. De Saint Malo de Alvarado (Panama) (spoke
in Spanish): Given its geographical position, Panama
has historically been a unique crossroads and a point
of convergence on the planet. The connectivity that our
country provides benefits countries in our hemisphere
and serves as a bridge to other countries. Nevertheless,
and sadly, those same advantages have made Panama
an attractive route for those who plan, develop and
commit unlawful acts, especially those related to drug
trafficking. That has meant that our country has had
to expend extraordinary efforts to combat the evergrowing shipments of illicit substances and the money
derived from that trade and related activities.
The Republic of Panama, aware of its responsibilities
to the international community, has implemented
a series of strategies to combat the scourges of drug
trafficking and organized crime. Our commitment to
mitigating those scourges, which limit the development
of our peoples, is very strong. Another threat that we
face comes from the groups that work outside the law,
a phenomenon that has emerged as a result of domestic
conflicts in neighbouring countries. The steps that we
are taking as a region to put a definitive end to those
conflicts have, unfortunately, also led to the appearance
of criminal gangs.
Despite the vigorous efforts that Panama is
expending to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime, it is suffering the consequences of the substantial
increase in drug production in countries in the region
and the transfer of drugs from where they are produced
to where they are sold and consumed throughout our
territories. As a result of our efforts in that area, we can
point out that, over the past 10 years, we have been able
to confiscate more than 400 tons of illicit substances,
including 57 tons seized in 2015. That is a world record
in terms of confiscation and has made the Republic of
Panama the country with the third largest volume of
seizures in the world.

16-1093919/34

A/S-30/PV.1

This fight against the transfer of drugs from
producing countries to countries that are large
consumers, and against the border groups and their
consequent configuration as criminal gangs, has
meant that the Panamanian nation has to allocate a
considerable part of its national budget to dealing
with rhose crimes, rather than being able to use them
for its other needs in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). In doing
so, the Government of Panama has demonstrated its
commitment to transparency and its commitment to
combating illegal and criminal activities, even when
they do not originate in its territory.
That is why we would like to reiterate that,
motivated by the multilateral instruments that deal with
combating those scourges, we have been modifying our
legislation in accordance with the standards promoted
by international agencies, such as the Financial Action
Task Force, which has led Panama to develop modern and
effective standards that allow us to prevent and combat
money-laundering in our international financial centre.
Panama, with a strong economy based on services, is
implementing various measures to avoid and prevent our
financial system from being used for illegal purposes.
As we do this, we have been implementing due diligence
and have enforced the know-your-client principle so as
to prevent money-laundering, the funding of terrorism
and many other criminal activities, in accordance with
the legislation and international agreements ratified by
the Panamanian State.
From this rostrum, I wish to assure the world of
Panama’a commitment to the highest international
standards of transparency. We will do everything we
can to ensure that the world is aware of our efforts,
which are currently being unfairly deprecated through
the release of documents that wrongly carry the name
of my country.
Among the other efforts we are making, I would
like to share with delegations the fact that we have
organized a regional inter-agency security centre,
whose main purpose will be to serve as a centre for
merging international intelligence, which will facilitate
the exchange of information and the production of
strategic knowledge on security issues.
With regard to health policies, the Panamanian
State has maintained an upright position with regard
to the importance of the use of controlled substances
for medical purposes. Dealing with the issue of drugs
20/34

19/04/2016

is a fundamental part of public management, and we
are tackling it through a focus on people rather than on
substances, with a broad scope from the promotion of
health to social reintegration.
The individual efforts of our countries will be
ineffective unless we deal with the scourge of drugs
in a coordinated manner at the global level. Panama
reiterates its commitment to that end, toward a response
based on solidarity and cooperation.
I would like to close by saying that Panama is a
country that serves the world, a noble country with
strong convictions, and our actions are a testament to
that. We are a safe and trustworthy country. We are
much more than just a source of documents. We are a
country committed to fairness and transparency with
a strong calling to serve. We are a country that, as the
motto of our official seal says, is always at the service
of humankind.
The President: Before we proceed, I want to
inform the General Assembly that I was just informed
by the Afghan Ambassador that an explosion in Kabul
involving a truck filled with explosives has killed as
many as 28 people and wounded 327. On behalf of the
General Assembly I want to convey our condolences to
the Government and people of Afghanistan and to those
who lost their loved ones in this terrible terror attack in
Afghanistan.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Guo
Shengkun, State Counselor and Minister for Public
Security of China.
Mr. Guo Shengkun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We gather here to discuss strategies and actions to
counter the drug problem. This meeting demonstrates
the international community’s determination to rectify
the problem and deepen cooperation. China applauds
the extraordinary work done by the Board for the
special session and will work with other countries for
the successful conclusion of the session and will fully
implement the outcome document (resolution S-30/1,
annex).
For many years, the international community has
been making unremitting efforts to control drugs, with
encouraging results. A full-fledged international drug
control system has been established, a global framework
with the three international conventions as the
centerpiece has taken shape, and a Political Declaration
and Plan of Action have been formulated. On the other
16-10939

19/04/2016

hand, global drug control still faces formidable and
complex challenges; the fight remains an uphill battle.
China will remain committed to the principle of broad
participation and shared responsibility and will fully
implement the comprehensive, integrated and balanced
international counter-narcotics strategy.
In view of recent developments, China would like
to call for greater international efforts in the following
five areas.
The first is to forge partnerships based on equality
and mutual benefit. It is important that countries honour
the principle of sovereign equality, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, and avoid injecting
political factors into anti-narcotics efforts or using
drug control as a pretext to interfere in the internal
affairs of other countries. The international community
should embrace a mindset of win-win cooperation,
forge global partnerships and build a community based
on a shared destiny for humankind in combating the
drug problem.
Secondly, the drug control system must be improved
through shared responsibility and common efforts.
While international drug control agencies need to
play a leading role, the producer, transit and consumer
countries, as well as those affected by the drug menace,
should share the responsibility for narcotics control. It
is important to mobilize and involve international and
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
countering the drug problem so as to create a situation
where drug control agencies play a leading role, national
Governments share responsibilities and society as a
whole becomes actively involved.
Thirdly, an integrated and balanced drug control
strategy must be pursued in the light of national
conditions. The fundamental role of the three
conventions in the international drug control system
needs to be solidified and brought into full play. Any
form of legalization of narcotics should be resolutely
opposed. We need to respect and support countries in
introducing laws, policies and strategic measures in the
light of their respective conditions. We must continue
to implement a drug control strategy that is integrated,
balanced and based on scientific evidence and must
uphold the authority, consistency and inclusiveness of
our drug policies.
Fourthly, we must form mechanisms for
standardized, practical and efficient operations.
Countries should carry out joint actions in combating

A/S-30/PV.1

drug-related crimes, step up international and
regional law enforcement cooperation and establish
standardized, practical and efficient mechanisms
for intelligence-sharing, case-based cooperation,
anti-money laundering and mutual legal assistance.
International control measures and verification systems
should be strictly enforced and strengthened to tighten
the control of precursors at the source and prevent the
spread of new psychoactive substances.
Fifthly, we must pursue shared development
and progress through joint efforts. Countries must
uphold the spirit of cooperation and trust and advance
anti-narcotic endeavours through mutual assistance.
Developed countries should provide funding and
technical assistance to developing countries and
vigorously pursue alternative development strategies
to improve the lives of people in areas where narcotics
plants are cultivated. All countries should be guided by
the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem,
live up to their commitments and duly contribute to the
global fight against drugs.
The Chinese Government attaches great
importance to the fight against narcotics. For years we
have carried out people’s campaigns against drugs, and
we have achieved notable progress. In the past decade
we cracked down on more than 1 million drug crime
cases and seized 751 tons of drugs. There has been a
total of 950,000 cases of community-level treatment
and rehabilitation and 1.21 million cases of compulsory
isolation for rehabilitation, and more than 1.2 million
ex-users have avoided relapse within a three-year
period. The Chinese Government has spent ¥1.6 billion
on alternative cultivation in Myanmar and the northern
part of Laos, which now covers an area of 3.5 million
Chinese mu, equaling more than 233,000 hectares.
The Chinese Government is firmly committed
to fighting drugs. China will act on President Xi
Jingping’s instructions, actively implement anti-drug
policies and strive to win the people’s campaigns.
China will continue to support the work of the United
Nations counter-narcotic agencies, take an active part
in international and regional cooperation and jointly
combat relevant transnational crimes. We will continue
to promote sustainable alternative development and
provide as much assistance as we can to help relevant
countries. We stand ready to work with the international
community to build partnerships for mutual benefit, to

16-1093921/34

A/S-30/PV.1

19/04/2016

advance the cause of drug control and to work tirelessly
for the health, safety and well-being of mankind.

have a significant database that has been submitted to
the relevant United Nations bodies.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ali Hasanov, Deputy Prime Minister of
Azerbaijan.

Essentially, combating the drug problem is based
on respect for national sovereignty and territorial
integrity. In that connection, the Republic of Azerbaijan
calls upon the international community to put pressure
on Armenia in order to ensure that it fulfils the four
relevant Security Council resolutions that have been
adopted since 1993, demanding the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Armenian armed forces
from the occupied territory in Azerbaijan. The Republic
of Azerbaijan will continue to closely cooperate with
neighbouring and other States in the exchange of
experience and information in the fight against drugs.

Mr. Hasanov (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian):
Since it became independent, Azerbaijan has signed all
United Nations conventions, and we have established
a modern legal framework in our country. Azerbaijan
cooperates closely with the United Nations and its
structures; the Council of Europe; the Georgia,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Moldova Group; and the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre.
I wish to point out that the current methods in the
fight against drug addiction and narcotics need to be
reviewed. Given that organized criminal groups are
finding new ways to secure their profits, markets and
consumers, drug prevention efforts should also be
modernized. The outcome document adopted at this
special session of the General Assembly (resolution
S-30/1, annex) should play a substantive role in moving
forward our joint efforts to combat this evil.
In recent years we have been implementing
large-scale international construction projects in our
country. We have seen growth in international transit
and have attracted foreign citizens to our country. That
in turn has generated interest among international
drug gangs to bring in drugs and to use Azerbaijan
as a transit country. Analysis shows that more than
95 per cent of the drugs found by our law enforcement
agencies arrive in our country from the south. The most
recent such cases were in March and April of this year,
when we found and confiscated about one ton of heroin
from trucks transiting through Azerbaijan.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
As is known, for 24 years about 20 per cent of
Azerbaijan’s territory has been occupied by the armed
forces of Armenia. As a result, our country, which has
a population of 10 million, has about 1 million refugees
and internally displaced persons. Furthermore, as a
result of that aggression 132 kilometres of our southern
State borders are controlled by Armenia. Drugs
are being grown in the territories occupied by the
Armenian forces, and there are special laboratories to
process these drugs. They are then sent off to various
countries. The law enforcement agencies of our country
22/34

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Fidias Aristy, Minister of State
and President of the National Council on Drugs of the
Dominican Republic, who will speak on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Aristy (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the high honour to speak on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC).
Recently, during the third Ministerial Meeting
of CELAC on the world drug problem, held in Santo
Domingo, we stated that addressing the world drug
problem is a common and shared responsibility that
requires effective international cooperation, as well as
comprehensive, multidisciplinary and balanced policies
and strategies to reduce both supply and demand. Those
should be in line with national legislation and the three
United Nations conventions on drugs, as well as other
relevant international instruments, in full respect
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and with particular regard to respect
for national sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States.
We emphasize that all drug policies must
incorporate in an integral manner the principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in accordance
with the spirit and purpose of safeguarding the health
and welfare of humankind. We express concern about
the impact of the world drug problem on the health of
people and on democratic institutions, and its serious
economic effect and the social damages it causes. For that
reason, we deem it necessary to continue to strengthen
international cooperation and the exchange of good
16-10939

19/04/2016

practices, promoting and boosting comprehensive and
balanced policies on this issue.
We reaffirm before the Assembly that it is necessary
to adopt effective and practical drug prevention
measures, in particular measures to prevent illegal drug
use among children and adolescents. That includes
developing appropriate prevention programmes based
on scientific evidence, fundamentally in the education
system at all levels, as well as promoting opportunities
to enable a healthy life within the family and social
circles.
CELAC emphasizes that it is necessary to strengthen
international cooperation as the central axis of efforts
to address the world drug problem, including the
provision of greater financial and logistical resources
to the countries that require them, especially transit
countries, in order to increase their capacity to counter
drug trafficking. We recognize the need to improve the
capacity of States to incorporate into their strategies
the prevention, detection and sanctioning of organized
crime devoted to activities of illegal drug trafficking
and related crimes.
CELAC reaffirms that public policies aimed at
addressing the word drug problem should be designed
and implemented with a gender focus. Those policies
should also recognize the situation of exclusion
experienced by the most vulnerable groups in our
societies, in particular people of African descent,
indigenous peoples and other minorities, and the
sexually diverse population. We express the need to
address the situation of drug users comprehensively,
through measures that take into account their full
development, in accordance with national legislation,
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant
international instruments.
CELAC reiterates the importance of strengthening
alternative, comprehensive and sustainable development
programmes, including prevention programmes, in
the framework of national policies and based on the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development. Along with other solutions, they
represent an effective strategy and basic tool offering a
significant and feasible way of reducing illicit drug crop
cultivation and guiding sustainable urban development
policies in line with specific national requirements for
those affected by illegal drug-related activities.

A/S-30/PV.1

We reaffirm our commitment to promoting bilateral,
triangular and regional cooperation among CELAC
States. We reiterate our decision to reinforce criminal
prosecution of those involved in drug-trafficking
activities and transnational organized crime, sharing
experiences and best practices on new trends and
modalities in drug trafficking and money-laundering
and comprehensively addressing the challenges posed
by new substances, methamphetamines and other
synthetic drugs that are not yet under international
control and scrutiny.
CELAC emphasizes that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) calls for
aligning international efforts and policies, including
those related to drugs, with a view to promoting
development, inclusion, a mainstreamed approach
to gender, and people’s well-being in every area.
We reiterate our rejection of unilateral lists and
certifications issued by developed countries that affect
Latin American and Caribbean countries, particularly
those relating to drug trafficking and similar measures.
We recognize the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
with its subsidiary bodies, as the main United Nations
regulatory body with regard to drug-related matters,
together with the International Narcotics Control
Board. We also acknowledge the role of the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS, among other entities, within their
respective mandates and in the context of the process
of the General Assembly’s special session.
The members of CELAC reaffirm their commitment
to continuing these discussions and following up in
order to expand and continue the dialogue and regional
consensus with a view to 2019, in accordance with
the Political Declaration and the Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Neven Mimica, Commissioner for International
Cooperation and Development of the European
Commission, who will speak on behalf of the European
Union.
Mr. Mimica (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Albania;

16-1093923/34

A/S-30/PV.1

the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States
welcome the opportunity that this much-needed debate
affords to address the world drug problem. We welcome
the rebalancing of global drug policies in the direction
of a sound, multidisciplinary public health and human
rights approach. Effective drug policies must be based
on evidence and reliable monitoring systems. The role
of civil society and the scientific community must be
recognized. It is important that the different needs of
men, women, children and young and vulnerable people
are adequately treated. The European Union has a longstanding commitment on all these issues.
We reiterate our strong commitment to the United
Nations drug control conventions, which form the
cornerstones of the global response to the world drug
problem. They provide sufficient scope and flexibility to
accommodate a wide range of approaches in accordance
with national and regional specificities. The European
Union strongly supports the anchoring of drug policy
in a wider socioeconomic context, in line with the
Sustainable Development Agenda (see resolution 70/1),
so as to promote health, democracy, the rule of law
and sustainable livelihoods. In order to tackle the root
causes of the illicit cultivation of drug crops, alternative
development should be actively promoted to provide
alternative and sustainable livelihoods and to reduce
the dependence of affected communities on illicit drug
economies.
The European Union fully supports the call for
enhanced coordination between the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime — the agency with
principal responsibility in this area — and other United
Nations entities and specialized agencies, notably the
World Health Organization, the International Narcotics
Control Board, the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS and the Human Rights Council. We
welcome strengthened international cooperation
aimed at countering drug trafficking and its links
with corruption, organized crime and, in some cases,
terrorism. We are firmly committed to addressing the
growing threats posed by new psychoactive substances
and the use of the Internet for drug trafficking. The
European Union will also continue to participate fully
in preventing the diversion of precursors.
24/34

19/04/2016

Human rights are an integral part of any response
to the drug problem. Consequently, we fully support
proportionate sentencing for drug-related offences
and the promotion of alternatives to incarceration and
coercive sanctions. We deeply regret, however, that the
outcome document we have just adopted (resolution
S-30/1, annex) does not address the abolition of the
death penalty for drug offences. The European Union
is strongly and unequivocally opposed to the death
penalty in all circumstances, since it undermines
human dignity and fails to act as a deterrent to criminal
behaviour.
The ultimate objective of the international drug
control system is the protection of public health. Policies
to reduce the demand for drugs must include the full
range of measures, from prevention and treatment
to social reintegration and recovery. Measures to
reduce risks and harm should be further promoted and
implemented, since they have proven to be effective
in many countries all over the world in preventing
overdose deaths and the transmission of HIV, viral
hepatitis and other blood-borne diseases,
All of those elements are of defining importance
ahead of the high-level meeting to be held in 2019 to
review the implementation of the Political Declaration
and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter
the World Drug Problem. We need a firm commitment
from all parties if we are to effectively implement the
renewed approach of the United Nations to the world
drug problem and put into practice our operational
recommendations. That is what our citizens expect
from all of us.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Bent Høie, Minister of Health and Care
Services of Norway, who will speak on behalf of the
Pompidou Group.
Mr. Høie (Norway): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 37 States members of
the Pompidou Group. The Pompidou Group is the entity
within the Council of Europe that works to uphold its
core values of human rights, democracy and the rule
of law.
The Pompidou Group deems it extremely
important and relevant to remind the Assembly that
a drug policy — like all other policy fields — must
be developed, implemented and evaluated in a manner
that takes into account and fully respects fundamental
16-10939

19/04/2016

human rights. The Pompidou Group notes that human
rights have been highlighted in the outcome document of
this special session on the world drug problem, entitled
“Our joint commitment to effectively addressing and
countering the world drug problem” (resolution S-30/1,
annex). The Group expects that the follow-up process
will take human rights concerns fully into account and
contribute to the task of defining the impact of human
rights on drug policies where that is unclear. The
Pompidou Group welcomes the fact that the outcome
document is based on the concept of a balanced
approach to drug policies.
In the follow-up process, at both the international
and the national levels, the relevant authorities need
to perform objective and continuous monitoring and
evaluation of the efforts to reduce drug problems
in order to assess whether there are imbalances to
be rectified. The Pompidou Group expects that the
follow-up process will include scientific work and
evidence-based practical tools aimed at enabling
Member States to evaluate the cost-benefit ratio of the
various measures they implement at the national level.
The Pompidou Group takes this opportunity to
highlight a few areas where human rights need to
shape and impact the drug policies of the international
community. It is evident that drug users should enjoy
the same rights under the existing international human
rights instruments as all other persons.
First and foremost, the application of the death
penalty for drug-related offences does not accord with
human rights obligations. Secondly, the application
of inhumane punishment and torture for drug-related
offences does not accord with human rights obligations.
Thirdly, drug-users have an uncontested right to
equitable access to health-care services for their drug
addiction and other drug- or non-drug-related health
problems.
The Pompidou Group expects the follow-up
process to the special session to take those concerns
fully into account. The Group expects relevant actors
to work dedicatedly towards abolishing the use of
the death penalty for drug-related offences and the
use of inhumane punishment and torture and towards
ensuring access to treatment and rehabilitation, as well
as measures to reduce risks and harmful measures for
the benefit of all, including those incarcerated, in order
to minimize the health and social consequences of drug
use.

A/S-30/PV.1

The Pompidou Group welcomes the follow-up
process to this special session. The Group underscores
its expectation that there will be an open debate where
human rights would be recognized as a fundamental
element for a coherent and balanced drug policy. Such
a policy should promote awareness of both the positive
and the unintended effects of the various measures that
are implemented to address the world drug problem.
I should now like to make the following statement
in my national capacity.
The preparations for this event have been long and
intense. My thanks go to all those involved. The draft
of the special session’s outcome document agreed to in
Vienna last month was an important step. Norway had,
however, hoped for a more forward-looking outcome.
The special session process has attracted enormous
attention and interest. It provides an excellent basis
for our preparations for the next special session, in
2019. We are pleased that the international debate
has increasingly placed a focus on health and wellbeing. Human rights must inspire all our work. We are
pleased to note that human rights have been reflected
in the outcome document, although Norway would have
liked to see stronger language. We regret that it was
not possible to agree on language on the death penalty.
Norway is strongly opposed to the death penalty and
will continue to work for its abolition.
Moreover, we have seen positive developments
regarding access to controlled medicines. The
problem relating to lack of availability, acceptabiliy
and affordability needs to be acknowledged as a first
step. We need to fully ensure the availability of such
controlled medicines for those in need. The outcome
document welcomes, as do we, the Sustainable
Development Goals as complementary measures that
reinforce drug control, and recommends the use of
relevant human-development indicators.
While there have been positive developments, some
issues are still not being dealt with adequately.
First, we had expected that the reduction of
risks would be recognized, accepted and included
in the document. However, we do recognize that the
outcome document includes references to programmes
compatible with that approach: nalaxone and overdose
prevention, medication-assisted therapy programmes
and injecting-equipment programmes.

16-1093925/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Eighteen years have passed since the previous
General Assembly special session on drugs in 1998.
We still face huge challenges on almost all measurable
indicators. Have we sufficiently understood why our
approach has failed to meet our stated goals and what it
is that we need in order to readdress the drug challenge?
The world drug problem is a multifaceted
phenomenon. A successful approach requires
coordinated contributions from several sectors at
the local, national and international levels. We must
think health in all policies. Real development and the
participation of the wider United Nations are necessary
in order to ensure an effective global drug policy that
puts humans first. That requires coherence among drug
control and security, human rights and public health, as
well as a development policy. The Secretary-General
should lead the necessary work, which should be
implemented at the most senior level in the Secretariat.
Continued and strengthened civil society involvement
will also be a key factor.
As we head towards the 2019 special session, we
need to be more ambitious. Some elements of our
approach have worked well but need to be strengthened.
Other aspects must be questioned. New elements must
be submitted to an open-minded debate. Our ultimate
goal — to promote health in every policy — must
inform our debate to a larger extent than it has so far.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Geoffrey Onyeama, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Mr. Onyeama (Nigeria): At the outset, I would like
to state for the record, in the spirit of collaboration,
cooperation and consensus-building, that Nigeria
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
Sudan on behalf of the African Group.
The nature and character of the contemporary world
drug problem are becoming increasingly complex and
severe. It is therefore pertinent to discuss the factors that
have impacted both the illicit drug supply and demand
reduction. The latter, we believe, remains the most
effective way of tackling the world drug problem. That
is why we consider the holding of this special session
a significant milestone. Nigeria therefore stands ready
to join forces with all stakeholders in order to achieve
those objectives.
Nigeria recognizes that the challenges will
require an integrated, multidimensional, balanced
26/34

19/04/2016

and comprehensive approach by the international
community, because no single methodology can
provide solutions for addressing the different aspects of
the world drug problem.
The consequences of drug abuse continue to ravage
families, communities and the society at large in our
region. The abuse of drugs also continues to undermine
efforts aimed at promoting and achieving sustainable
development. That is accentuated by the increasing
use of Africa as a transit channel for illicit drugs and
psychotropic substances, which is worrisome. Those
activities have created security challenges, especially
that of posed by transnational organized crime in
transit countries. Nigeria therefore welcomes the
adoption of the revised African Union Plan of Action
on Drug Control (2013-2017). We look forward to
complementary efforts by the international community
for the actualization of its laudable objectives.
Nigeria notes that at the subregional level, the
member States of the Economic Community of West
African States are collaborating actively in the fight
against the menace of illicit drugs. In that regard,
Nigeria welcomes the comprehensive assessment of the
situation in West Africa, which identified the gaps and
the needs to effectively combat illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse.
Nigeria reiterates its full commitment to supporting
subregional, regional and international mechanisms
established to fight the world drug problem. My
delegation calls for enhanced cooperation and
collaboration among regional police chiefs, drug-law
enforcement agencies and border security, as well as
regional and international organizations, in the fight
against illicit drug use. Our experience shows that
such international cooperation has resulted in better
exchange of information and intelligence-sharing
and has had a positive impact on addressing the drug
problem.
Nigeria has taken necessary steps with the launch
of the National Drug Control Master Plan. The Plan
provides an integrated and comprehensive solution to a
range of drug-related issues, in line with international
drug control conventions. It consists of four pillars:
law enforcement, drug-demand reduction, access to
and control of narcotics and psychotropic substances,
and monitoring and evaluation as the coordination
mechanism for effective implementation of the Master
Plan.
16-10939

19/04/2016

As a test case for the Master Plan, Nigeria has
embraced the sustainable alternative development
programme as one of the key strategies for addressing
cannabis cultivation, which is the single largest local
home-grown concern for us. In that connection,
Nigeria is resolved to continue to support the effective
implementation of the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Alternative Development.
In line with the second pillar of the Master
Plan — drug-demand reduction — Nigeria is
implementing a pilot treatment project that uses the
modified West African Epidemiological Network
on Drug Use for the Nigerian network. Eleven
tertiary hospital treatment centres have been linked
to that project. The final analysis of the data reveals
important policy-making information, which serves as
a model for other countries in West Africa. I take this
opportunity to express my appreciation for the support
of the European Union and for the technical assistance
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for the accelerated implementation of Nigeria’s
Drug Control Master Plan.
Nigeria is of the conviction that the outcome
document of this special session, entitled “Our joint
commitment to effectively addressing and countering
the world drug problem” (resolution S-30/1, annex),
can now be used to forge global action needed to
assist millions of women, children and men around the
world. My delegation wishes to reiterate Nigeria’s firm
commitment to the fight against illicit drugs. While
much has been achieved by the Government of Nigeria,
challenges still remain. We are, however, confident
that with the support of the United Nations, Member
States and development partners, those challenges can
be adequately addressed. Our goal is to support the
building of an inclusive and safer society that is free of
drug abuse for present and future generations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Igor Lukšić, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and European Integration
of Montenegro
Mr. Lukšić (Montenegro): Montenegro aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer
of the European Union. Allow me, however, to stress
certain points of particular relevance for my country.
In addition to having major security implications,
the enormous profits generated through drug
trafficking and its linkage with other forms of

A/S-30/PV.1

organized crime — corruption, money laundering
and terrorism — constitute a threat to State authority,
impede the economic development of societies and
undermine the rule of law. Overdose, addiction and the
spread of HIV and hepatitis also demonstrate why the
drug problem presents a risk to the health and wellbeing of people worldwide. It is therefore evident that
a more effective response to this phenomenon calls for
a holistic and integrated approach that encompasses
the entire nexus of human rights, safety, security
and sustainable development. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) — more
specifically its Goals 3 and 16 — provides an opportunity
to reinvigorate our efforts in orderto come closer to a
healthier, safer and more prosperous future for all.
In our common quest to reduce the demand for
and supply of drugs, criminalization and punishment
measures are simply not enough, although one has to
recognize their importance in protecting health and
safety. We have to strive for more balanced policies,
rooted in health, and also human rights, that prioritize
access to prevention, treatment and care services. My
country is fully cognizant of that and as a result is
heavily invested in that approach. As part of our longterm orientation, we have worked diligently to develop
prevention and treatment programmes with a view to
preventing people, especially youth, from starting to
use drugs and to developing capacities and increasing
coverage to treat addiction, as well as facilitating
social reintegration. In that regard, let me stress that
mainstreaming gender and age perspectives in drugrelated policies and programmes is essential for the
overall results of our work.
Successfully addressing and countering the world
drug problem is a shared responsibility and as such
requires close cooperation and coordination at all levels,
with the involvement and participation of civil society
and academia in all aspects of drug policy. The work of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, other
organizations and United Nations entities in supporting
Member States, especially those most in need, to tackle
illicit drugs and organized crime is indispensable. The
outcome document (resolution S-30/1, annex) is a good
basis for more concerted efforts in the future.
It is clear that only by joint, coherent actions and
close collaboration among all stakeholders can we make
the difference in eradicating this scourge. We need to
extend partnerships, engage young people in particular

16-1093927/34

A/S-30/PV.1

and work out better coordination to be more efficient
and effective in delivering on our agenda
The Acting President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Salamat Azimi, Minister for CounterNarcotics of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Ms. Azimi (Afghanistan) (spoke in Dari; English
text provided by the delegation): It is my great pleasure
and honour to address this historic special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem.
Afghanistan has been the prime victim of the
challenges arising from the ever-expanding production
and trafficking of narcotics. We are strongly committed
to joining the international community in combating
this global menace, which has undermined our efforts
to achieve a better future. Afghanistan has done its
part at the national, regional and international levels
in the fight against narcotics and illegal drugs, which
have become the main source of income for terrorist
activities in the country.
Unfortunately today, once again, the Taliban
carried out a terrorist attack in Kabul, committing a
serious crime against innocent Afghan people whereby
at least 28 people were killed and more than 329 injured.
We strongly condemn that terrorist attack and express
our gratitude to all who have extended condolences and
support to Afghanistan in such a difficult moment. By
committing that terrorist attack, the Taliban once again
demonstrated their absolute disregard for the Afghan
people and rejected the ongoing peace process. The
Government of Afghanistan is committed to fighting
the Taliban, Da’esh and all other terrorist groups that
remain a serious threat to the security and stability of
our nation.
It is obvious that the fight against drugs and
narcotics is beyond the limit of any single Government.
Therefore, extensive help is needed from the
international community. In Afghanistan we have just
adopted the national action plan, which I presented
yesterday to the international community at the side
event, here in New York. That strategic plan translates
the commitment of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
to pursuing a balanced and sustainable strategy through
an integrated plan involving alternative development,
poppy eradication, public information, arrests of drug
traffickers and smugglers and treatment of addicts. The
implementation of the plan will require the sustained
and effective support of our donors in the international
community. Without such support, narcotics can create
28/34

19/04/2016

massive problems not only for Afghanistan but also for
all countries worldwide. We believe that one big cause
of insecurity in Afghanistan is narcotic drugs and the
existing precursors within the country.
Due to the importance Afghanistan attaches to this
special session, His Excellency Abdul Rashid Dostum,
First Vice President of Afghanistan, was scheduled to
address the General Assembly at this special session.
However, he was unable to attend due to unforeseen
internal engagements. I would like to deliver a portion
of his personal message to the Assembly.
“Mr. President, today’s historic special session
of the General Assembly to address the challenges
of the world drug problem is very important and
a welcome event in Afghanistan. The Government
of Afghanistan is committed to doing its part by
joining in the efforts of the international community
in the fight against this global challenge.
“I wish each Member every success in carrying
out the important task of achieving a desirable
outcome, which is to address the challenges of the
world drug problem. That is urgent and important for
our security, stability and economic development.
Let me express my deep gratitude and appreciation
to our partners in the international community for
the continued support provided to Afghanistan, as
well as to our partners who, sadly, have sacrificed
their lives in order to provide a better future for
the war-stricken people of Afghanistan. The
people of Afghanistan will truly never forget those
sacrifices.”
Due to time constraints, I will not read out the First
Vice-President’s full statement. It has been distributed
in this Hall as Afghanistan’s official statement and I
request that the Secretariat isue the full statement as an
official document of the special session.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Luis Rojas, Minister for CounterNarcotics of the Republic of Paraguay.
Mr. Rojas (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Paraguay
joins others in extending solidarity with and expressing
condolences to the brotherly countries of Ecuador,
Japan and Afghanistan.
Paraguay aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the Minister of State of the Dominican
Republic on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States.
16-10939

19/04/2016

The world drug problem, due to its multidimensional
and changing nature, is one of the most complex
challenges facing us at present. It makes no distinction
among borders or countries, yet its terrible consequences
strike developing countries with greater force. We
recognize that the world drug problem is a serious
threat to democracy, the rule of law, health and justice
and that it affects the dignity, security and well-being
of the individual, especially children, young people and
women, and ultimately of families and communities.
The Government of my country has initiated a
process of frank and open dialogue to address the
real situation in the country. The process is raw, long
and painful yet necessary, indispensable in creating
honest change in public policies. In that context,
we are developing a new approach in dealing with
the problem of drugs through a policy that is our
own, not an imported one. It includes a new way of
understanding and confronting this global scourge
without lies that obscure realities, however crude
they may be and motivated by political convenience.
Lying and improvising on the issue of drugs carry dire
consequences. We have learned that painful lesson
well in my country. Today, thanks to that new focus, a
public debate has been launched at all levels of society,
from common citizens to university forums, a debate
on the reality of public corruption, on the phenomenon
of narco-politics, violence and money-laundering. That
has opened a new direction, acting as social pressure
in Paraguay and is taking the form of a brave publicprivate alliance against the crime of drug trafficking.
We recognize that there are currently different
realities and positions on how to confront the problem,
and we are respectful of the various measures promoted
by States within the framework of their respective
sovereignty. But we are convinced that the diversity of
responses to the global drug problem must not get in
the way of finding shared mechanisms for solutions at
the regional and international levels. On the contrary,
such a diversity of measures must enrich our global
joint action.
In that regard, Paraguay reaffirms its commitment
to the three international conventions on drugs, which
it considers to be the cornerstone of the international
drug control system. We are convinced that human
beings must be the focus of the fight against the problem
and that the ultimate purpose of the conventions is to
preserve the health and welfare of people. Paraguay
accordingly reiterates that the world drug problem must

A/S-30/PV.1

be addressed under the principle of common and shared
responsibility, in accordance with national laws and
applicable international law, in particular international
human rights law, while respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States and the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
In Paraguay, international, regional and subregional
cooperation is a central component of support for efforts
to respond to the drug problem effectively, adequately
and in a balanced manner. We therefore believe that it
is essential to continue promoting such cooperation.
We believe that progress in meeting international
commitments and actions undertaken by States must
be based on a comprehensive, multidisciplinary and
balanced approach to all the components of the world
drug problem, thereby ensuring a reduction in both
supply and demand. Let us not focus on strategies that
have proved to be ineffectual.
In that regard, the focus should be on the structural
and socioeconomic factors underpinning the problem
of drugs within our societies, and we must implement
comprehensive, inclusive and appropriate responses and
encouraging alternative and sustainable development.
Furthermore, we must strengthen public health
systems and implement a solid approach to health in
the fight against drugs, in order to ensure respect for
the human rights of consumers, while at the same time
ensuring the provision of care with dignity and without
discrimination. Similarly, States must strengthen their
strategies to prevent, detect and punish the corruption
linked to drug-trafficking activities and related crimes,
and improve the tools used to investigate moneylaundering. On the other hand, we believe that scientific
research on cannabis must be encouraged in the medical
and industrial areas, and we are open to accepting the
results and working in accordance with that research in
a responsible manner.
Paraguay calls upon States to analyse the possibility
of implementing alternatives to incarceration for those
who have committed minor offenses related to drug use
and possession, where appropriate and consistent with
their national legislation. In Paraguay, the consumer is
not a criminal for simply having used drugs; users are
citizens who need specialized health care. We reiterate
our firm support for the effort to suppress the use of
the death penalty in all of its forms, and especially for
drug-related crimes.

16-1093929/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Finally, Paraguay reiterates its firm commitment
to the fight against the global scourge of drugs, under
existing international conventions, based on the
principle of the common and shared responsibility of
all States, while respecting the sovereignty and the
particular characteristics of each country.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, Federal
Minister for Interior and Narcotics Control of Pakistan.
Mr. Ali Khan (Pakistan): It is indeed a pleasure for
me to address this high-level gathering in its discussion
on the world drug problem. We share, appreciate and
support the global concern about the devastating effects
of illicit drugs.
Pakistan’s geographical location has confronted
it with multifaceted challenges and has exposed it as
the prime victim and transit country for the majority of
global opiates and cannabis. We believe that the drug
dynamics in the production, transit and target countries
are diverse. No two countries and no two regions
have a similar environment. There are therefore no
one-size-fit-all solutions.
Pakistan has put in place a robust and comprehensive
legal policy and administrative framework to counter
the menace of illicit drugs. We take pride in having
saved the world from over 1.86 billion doses of narcotics
over the past three years. Last year, we seized over 342
tons of illicit drugs. As the one of the top contributors to
international seizures beyond our territorial borders, we
contributed to seizures of almost 25 tons of illicit drug
around the world. Drug demand reduction, treatment
and rehabilitation are high on our list of priorities.
With due respect for the sovereignty and rights of
Member States, we are concerned about the emerging
trends in some parts of the world to legalize the use
of illicit drugs. That would give an unnecessary fillip
to drug demand, thereby igniting the supply chain and
having a direct fallout on our region and the world.
Furthermore, the concepts involved that lack consensus,
such as harm reduction and the so-called human rightsbased approach, are likely to further complicate the
issue. Over the years, we have all endeavoured to build
a drug-free society, not a drug-tolerant society.
I urge that the existing United Nations drug control
conventions be treated as a repository of core guiding
principles for developing an international approach to
combating drugs. We would expect greater focus on the
30/34

19/04/2016

prime target and transit countries in terms of mustering
resources for capacity-building in the front-line States
in the war against drugs. That should be commensurate
to the threat with which they are confronted and
proportionate to their core contributions to the cause.
The international community needs to do more to
counter the menace of narcotics in all its forms. I
believe that that is possible through better coordination
and cooperation among Member States.
In conclusion, let me say that what we decide to
adopt in the coming days will help to determine the
future of the global efforts to save our succeeding
generations from the scourge of narcotic drugs.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Nkosinathi Nhleko, Minister of Police
of the Republic of South Africa.
Mr. Nhleko (South Africa): The delegation of South
Africa commends the President for his leadership and
the manner in which he is conducting the proceedings
of this special session. We pledge our support for
the successful conclusion of the session. We equally
commend both the Chair of the fifty-ninth session of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) and the Chair of
the Board tasked by the CND with the preparations for
the special session for their unflinching determination
in the preparations for this occasion.
The thirtieth special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem has been
convened at a critical juncture, when Member States
are grappling with the challenge of how to effectively
address and counter the world drug problem. South
Africa recalls that it was the General Assembly that
laid the foundation for the international fight against
drug trafficking and its associated problems with the
adoption of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
in 1961. Our overarching objective since the beginning
of the war on drugs has been to promote the health and
welfare of humankind. At the same time, we have all
undertaken measures to restrict the use of drugs to
medical and scientific purposes.
Today, we have gathered to review the
implementation of the 2009 Political Declaration and
Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards
an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the
World Drug Problem, which provided Member States
with a balanced and integrated approach to continuing
the international fight against the world drug problem.
The three international drug control conventions
16-10939

19/04/2016

should serve as our basis going forward. On that note,
South Africa takes this opportunity to reaffirm its
commitment to those instruments.
South Africa realizes that drug trafficking and
drug abuse remain an issue of concern to many
countries, especially developing countries. While
progress has been made in addressing that scourge, we
are cognizant that drug trafficking and its associated
challenges remain a major threat to the security, health
and socioeconomic architecture and development of
many countries.

A/S-30/PV.1

cooperation efforts. It will assist us in accomplishing
the goals and objectives set forth in the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action. My delegation therefore
calls for effective and decisive measures to address
illicit drug production and trafficking. That is purely
because drug trafficking and its associated challenges
undermine national safety and security and threaten to
reverse the socioeconomic gains we have achieved as a
young democracy. It is in that context that South Africa
remains confident that we can all achieve a society free
of substance abuse.

Like other countries, South Africa has implemented
an integrated and balanced approach, modelled on the
three major pillars of the 2009 Political Declaration
and Plan of Action, namely, a reduction in demand, a
reduction in supply, and international cooperation. In
that regard, South Africa has adopted law-enforcement,
health, judicial and social policies and measures to deal
with the negative impact of illicit drugs. Those policies
are aimed at reducing drug addiction and abuse among
the young, the rise in the burden of disease and the
rise in violence and criminal activities associated with
drugs.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Nkaissery, Cabinet Secretary
for Interior and Coordination of National Government
of Kenya.

Cautious in confronting the challenges at hand,
South Africa adopted its national drug master plan for
the period 2013-2017 to help the Government realize
its vision of a society free of substance abuse, so that
attention could be focused on raising the quality of
life of all South Africans. At the continental level,
we continue to make concerted efforts to implement
existing regional instruments to counter the world drug
problem.

Kenya aligns itself with the position of the African
Group, to be delivered by the representative of the
Sudan.

In addition, South Africa welcomes the twenty-fifth
meeting of the Heads of National Drug Law Enforcement
Agencies, held in Algeria in September 2015, which
culminated in the second Russia-Africa Anti-Drug
Dialogue, which took place in Durban in March 2016.
The Dialogue stressed the need to address the world
drug problem by implementing a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary and balanced approach to a reduction
in drug supply and demand and its impact, as well as
the rehabilitation and social integration of drug users
and the implementation of alternative development
programmes.
As the target date approaches for the 2009
Political Declaration and Plan of Action, South Africa
believes that financial and technical assistance should
be an integral part of our regional and international

Mr. Nkaissery (Kenya): The Government of Kenya
welcomes the convening of this special session of the
General Assembly on the world drug problem. We
commend the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND),
the Board tasked by the CND with the preparations for
the special session and the Secretariat for their work in
preparing this special session.

My delegation notes that illicit drug cultivation,
trafficking and abuse continue to cause adverse
health and socioeconomic effects on people, thereby
undermining the security and development of nations.
As a result, the Government of Kenya reaffirms its
commitment to implementing the provisions of the
three international drug control conventions that form
the basis of the world drug control strategy. In doing
so, Kenya has enacted national policies and legislation
to incorporate and implement the provisions of those
treaties at the national level.
My delegation is convinced that the overall objective
of drug control should be to eliminate the availability
and use of illicit narcotic and psychotropic substances
through evidence-based interventions on drugdemand reduction, drug-supply reduction, countering
money-laundering and promoting international
judicial cooperation among States to address other
cross-cutting issues, including drugs and human
rights, alternative development and the protection of
vulnerable populations.

16-1093931/34

A/S-30/PV.1

Kenya has made strides in the control and mitigation
of drug abuse and has ratified the international drug
control conventions. Kenya revised its Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act in 2015, which sets
the legal framework for drug control. In its effort to
counter money-laundering, Kenya has set up a financial
reporting centre that identifies the proceeds of crime,
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
In addition, Kenya has set up a national agency to
coordinate the country’s drug control strategy, which
integrates the efforts of all stakeholders through the
implementation of the country’s national drug policy.
Furthermore, the war on drugs has received
political support, with His Excellency the President
of Kenya leading at the front. In 2015, the President
ordered the destruction of ships laden with illicit drugs
that were captured on the Kenyan coast. That has not
only deterred illicit drug trafficking in the country but
also sends a strong message to the world that Kenya is
determined to be a drug-free nation.
The war on drugs comes at a great cost, and Kenya
faces serious challenges owing to its porous borders,
which are used for the flow of illicit small arms and
human trafficking, as well as drug trafficking. Those
crimes go hand in hand with money-laundering, which
is used, so it is believed, to finance terrorist groups
such as Al-Shabaab and Al-Qaida. In the recent past,
Kenya has suffered major terrorist attacks, which has
made the curtailment of drug trafficking and moneylaundering a priority concern for our country.
We call on the United Nations and its agencies
and programmes to enhance assistance for developing
countries such as Kenya with capacity-building and
training. We also call on developed countries and donor
agencies to increase their funding, especially for transit
countries, so that we can close the drug routes. We
can achieve that goal if we do it together; regional and
international cooperation is the key.
My delegation is convinced that this special session
represents a critical step in the global drug control
strategy, as it presents an opportunity to address
successes, challenges and opportunities in the endeavour
to attain a world free of drug abuse. It is therefore our
desire that this session bring out the commitment of
Member States to addressing the world drug problem,
strengthening international cooperation and support for
developing countries and, most important, providing
hope to the thousands of people across the globe who
32/34

19/04/2016

are victims of drug abuse, illicit cultivation, illicit drug
trafficking and money-laundering.
In conclusion, I assure the General Assembly of the
support and participation of my delegation and of the
Republic of Kenya in the fight against drugs.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Sirodjidin Aslov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan): It is my honour to speak
today at the thirtieth special session of the General
Assembly on the world drug problem, which provides
an opportunity not only to review the implementation
of the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action, but
also to develop new and effective measures to combat
that evil.
Drug distribution and trafficking problems have
acquired great importance at the national level in almost
all regions of the world and have gone far beyond the
social and criminal spheres. Combating drug trafficking
and drug abuse is part of the fight against organized
crime, international terrorism and extremism, and
is being carried out through the implementation of
various foreign policy, economic, legal, organizational,
technical, operational, preventive and other measures.
In the sphere of shared interests, the Central
Asian States are carrying out coordinated activities
through their specialized drug-control coordinating
agencies. The Republic of Tajikistan, like other States
in the region that share a border with Afghanistan, is
shouldering a significant burden in combating drug
trafficking. Tajikistan therefore pays special attention
to the strengthening and development of international
cooperation. It seeks to advance initiatives aimed at
joint and coordinated actions by all interested countries
and international organizations.
It is necessary to continue strengthening
socioeconomic assistance to the people of Afghanistan
in order to address issues of employment and economic
recovery. Security issues in our region are inextricably
linked with issues of combating terrorism and
extremism, which are also fuelled by income from drug
production.
From 1996 to 2012, the Government of Tajikistan
implemented four national drug control programmes.
An important step in Tajikistan’s implementation of its
anti-drug policy was the approval of the presidential
decree entitled “National strategy to fight against
16-10939

19/04/2016

illicit drug-trafficking in the Republic of Tajikistan for
2013-2020”, the main goal of which is to significantly
reduce the illicit distribution of narcotic drugs and
their non-medical use and the degree of impact of illicit
trafficking on health, safety, society and State security,
and to expand international cooperation.
From 1996 to 2015, in the territory of Tajikistan,
more than 113 tons of drugs were seized, including
34 tons of heroin and 38 tons of opium. In 2015 alone,
around five tons of drugs were seized by Tajikistan
law-enforcement agencies. Measures taken by the
Government of the Republic of Tajikistan have made it
possible to reduce the recorded number of drug-related
crimes in the country.
As a result of the measures adopted by the
Government of Tajikistan, and with the support of donor
countries and international organizations, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, our
country has achieved certain successes in the field of
drug control and has established close cooperation with
such interested countries as the Russian Federation, the
United States, China, Afghanistan and other countries.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm that
international cooperation in the field of drug control
issues will remain one of the priority tasks for the
Government of Tajikistan.
The Acting President: I give the floor to Mr. Rui
Jorge Carneiro Mangueira, Minister of Justice and
Human Rights of Angola.
Mr. Mangueira (Angola): On this occasion, Angola
expresses its support and appreciation for the efforts
of the United Nations, in particular the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) as the leading
United Nations entity for addressing and combating the
world drug problem.
Angola welcomes the adoption of this special
session’s final outcome document, entitled “Our joint
commitment to effectively addressing and countering
the world drug problem” (resolution S-30/1, annex).
That instrument provides a new impetus for cooperation
aimed at tackling the drug problem. In order to achieve
the resolution’s implementation throughout the world,
it will be necessary to establish and strengthen
targeted cooperation among countries and regional and
international organizations.
In today’s world, the drug situation remains
difficult and complex, making it imperative for Member

A/S-30/PV.1

States to reach consensus on implementing a robust and
effective system aimed at addressing the threats posed
by new psychotropic substances at the global level. It
would be appropriate to simultaneously develop efforts
to strengthen the ability to put hazardous substances on
the international agenda in cooperation with the World
Health Organization.
Another problem is the emergence of the Internet
as an online market for drugs. The international
community needs to proactively address that aspect
of the drug problem in collaboration with enforcement
agencies, industries, civil society and other partners
in order to find effective ways to prevent online drug
trafficking.
With regard to international security, the drug
market is the most dynamic of criminal markets. Drug
trafficking and drug production are still among the
most profitable criminal activities for organized crime
groups globally and are closely related to terrorism. In
that regard, the Angolan delegation would like to make
the following observations.
First, we must safeguard the overall authority of
the existing drug control system. Since the elimination
of the scourge of drugs is a common responsibility of
humankind, the three international conventions on drug
control and the 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of
Action should continue to serve as our main guidelines.
In particular, the potential of the three conventions can
be used better, with full respect for their purposes. We
should do a better job of implementing the principles of
common and shared responsibility and a comprehensive,
integrated and balanced approach, as identified in the
Political Declaration and Plan of Action, in order to
reach the maximum degree of international consensus.
Secondly, in recent years there have been voices
calling for the legalization of drugs and raising questions
about the three United Nations conventions and other
existing international drug control mechanisms. That is
not conducive to the sound development of international
drug control mechanisms. We must fully recognize the
seriously harmful effects of drugs on human physical
and mental health, and we must resist the legalization
of drugs, while taking into account a focused approach
to health, education, counselling and reintegration.
Thirdly, this year we began the important work
of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1). That will require a
collective partnership and solid commitment. We

16-1093933/34

A/S-30/PV.1

cannot achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
without a bold and courageous collaboration between
Member States and the United Nations.
With regard to the implementation of the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action approved in 2009, as
well as the implementation of the three conventions
on drugs, Angola has adopted domestic legislation to
control the drug problem and has created institutions
that can run the overall policy to counter that
phenomenon. The fight against illicit drug trafficking
and drug abuse are part of the Government’s priorities
and its programme for the period of 2012 to 2017. An
anti-drug programme was developed by the Angolan
Government in partnership with the inter-ministerial
committee on drug abuse control.
The document that was adopted as result of that
collaboration represented a step towards implementing
the 2009 Plan of Action. It includes the following
measures, among others: the reduction of supply, which

34/34

19/04/2016

consists of implementing a faster and more effective
system to combat threats in that regard; reduction
in demand, which consists of re-relaunching drug
prevention policies; and international cooperation,
as an objective embodied in the national anti-drug
strategy, through the adoption of a strong position
in international forums and with partner countries.
Angola reaffirms its ongoing commitment to adopting
legislative, administrative and policy measures in line
with the international instruments to combat drugs, so
that together we can fight this global scourge.
Finally, Angola believes that this General Assembly
special session on the world drug problem represents an
important milestone for the implementation of policies
aimed at combating a phenomenon that affects the
lives of millions of people worldwide. We call for an
international anti-drug policy that is more focused on
the human aspects of the problem and on public health.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

16-10939
