290

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

4. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee to take into account
the suggestions and proposals of Member States submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subject and the views and
comments expressed at the thirty-ninth session of the
General Assembly during the debate in the Sixth Commit­
tee devoted to the consideration of the report of the Ad
Hoe Committee;28
5. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working groups;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Ad Hoe Committee at its fifth session a topical sum­
mary of the discussions which took place in the Sixth
Committee during the thirty-ninth session of the General
Assembly and any up-to-date and relevant documentation
on the subject;
1. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with any assistance and facilities it
may require for the performance of its work;
8. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee shall hold its
fifth session for four weeks, from 8 April to 3 May 1985;
9. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to make every
effort to complete its mandate at its fifth session and to
submit a draft convention to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Report of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Conven­
tion against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/85. Report of the International Law Commission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session,29
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to make it
a more effective means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations30 and to give increasing importance to its role in
relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and draft­
ing questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
which might be submitted to the International Law Com­
mission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contributions to the
progressive development of international law and its
codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of
international law which, given their new or renewed inter­
est for the contemporary international community, may be
suitable for progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the
future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
28 fbid., Thirty-ninth Session, Sixth Commillee. 49th-57th and 64th
meetings.
29 Ibid., Thiny-ninth Session, Supplement No. JO (A/39/10).
30 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International Law
Commission for the work accomplished at that session;
3. Recommends that, taking into account the com­
ments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the Interna­
tional Law Commission should continue its work on all
the topics in its current programme;
4. Expresses its satisfaction with the conclusions and
intentions of the International Law Commission con­
cerning its procedures and methods of work, as reflected in
paragraphs 385 to 397 of its report; 29
5. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
documentation of the International Law Commission;
6. Appeals to Governments and, as appropriate, to
international organizations to respond as fully and expedi­
tiously as possible to the requests of the International Law
Commission for comments, observations and replies to
questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work:
7. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Com­
mission continue to enhance its co-operation with inter­
governmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants
from developing countries will be given the opportunity to
attend those seminars;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly31 and to
prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/86. United Nations Conference on the Law of
Treaties between States and International
Organizations or between International
Organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/112 of 16 December 1982,
by which it decided that an international convention
should be concluded on the basis of the draft articles on
the law of treaties between States and international organi­
zations or between international organizations, adopted by
the International Law Commission at its thirty-fourth
session,32
Recalling also its resolution 38/ I 39 of 19 December
1983, by which it decided that the appropriate forum for
the final consideration of the draft articles should be a con­
ference of plenipotentiaries to be convened not earlier than
1985 and agreed to decide at its thirty-ninth session upon
the question of the date and place for the r.onvening of the
United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties
between States and International Organizations or
JI See Official Records ofthe General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session. Sixth
Commillee, 33rd-47th and 55th meetings.
32 Jhid.. Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. JO (A/37/10), chap. II,
sect. D.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

between International Organizations, as well as upon the
question of participation in the Conference,
Having received the report of the Secretary-General, 33
which contains comments and observations submitted by
States and principal international intergovernmental
organizations, in accordance with General Assembly reso­
lution 38/139,
Recognizing the importance of achieving a successful
conclusion of the work of the Conference through the pro­
motion of general agreement,
Bearing in mind the relationship between the law of
treaties between States and the subject-matter to be dealt
with by the Conference,
Noting with appreciation that an invitation has been
extended by the Government of Austria to hold the Con­
ference at Vienna,
l. Decides that the United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties between States and International Organi­
zations or between International Organizations shall be
held at Vienna from 18 February to 21 March I986;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
(b) Namibia, represented by the United Nations Coun­
cil for Namibia, to participate in the Conference, in
accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolu­
tion 37/233 C of 20 December 1982;
(c) Representatives of organizations that have received
a standing invitation from the General Assembly to parti­
cipate in the sessions and the work of all international con­
ferences convened under its auspices in the capacity of
observers to participate in the Conference in that capacity,
in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 3 1/152 of 20 Decem­
ber 1976;
(d) Representatives of the national liberation move­
ments recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference as observ­
ers, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(e) Representatives of international intergovernmental
organizations that have traditionally been invited to parti­
cipate as observers at legal codification conferences con­
vened under the auspices of the United Nations to partici­
pate in the Conference in a capacity to be considered
during the consultations referred to in paragraph 8 below
and to be decided upon by the General Assembly at its for­
tieth session;
3. Invites the participants referred to in paragraph 2
above to include as far as possible among their representa­
tives experts competent in the field to be considered;
4. Decides that the languages of the Conference shall be
the official and working languages of the General Assem­
bly, its committees and its sub-committees;
5. Refers to the Conference, as the basic proposal for
its consideration, the draft articles on the law of treaties
between States and international organizations or between
international organizations adopted by the International
Law Commission at its thirty-fourth session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Conference all relevant documentation and recommenda­
tions relating to the rules of procedure and methods of
work, taking into account the importance of promoting
general agreement on the final results of the work of the
33 A/39/491.
34 Official Records of the General A.uemhh'. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 26 (A/39/26 and Corr.!)

291

Conference, and to arrange for the necessary staff, facilities
and services which it will require, including the provision
of summary records;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the presence at the Conference, as an expert, of the Inter­
national Law Commission's Special Rapporteur on the
question of treaties concluded between States and interna­
tional organizations or between two or more international
organizations;
8. Appeals to participants in the Conference to organ­
ize consultations, primarily on the organization and
methods of work of the Conference, including rules of pro­
cedure, and on major issues of substance, including final
clauses and settlement of disputes, prior to the convening
of the Conference in order to facilitate a successful conclu­
sion of its work through the promotion of general
agreement;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Preparation for the
United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties
between States and International Organizations or
between International Organizations.
99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984
39/87. Report of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country
The General Assemhly.
Having considered the report of the Committee on Rela­
tions with the Host Country, 34
Recalling Article I 05 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations 35 and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regard­
ing the Headquarters of the United Nations,36
Recalling further that the problems related to the privi­
leges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those mis­
sions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in para­
graph 58 of its report; 34
2. Strongly condemns any terrorist and criminal acts
violating the security of missions accredited to the United
Nations and the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to continue to take all neces..
sary measures to ensure effectively the protection, security
and safety of the missions accredited to the United
Nations and their personnel, including practicable meas­
ures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage
in the perpetration of acts and activities against the secu­
rity and safety of surh missions and representatives;
JS Resolut1on 22 A (I)
16 Resolution 169 (II).
