A/S-23/PV.8

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-third special session

8

th meeting
Thursday, 8 June 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly
(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee
(A/S-23/7)

The President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution recommended by the
Credentials Committee in paragraph 15 of its report
(A/S-23/7). The Credentials Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S23/1).
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 3.
Agenda items 8 and 9 (continued)
Review and appraisal of progress made in the
implementation of the twelve critical areas of
concern in the Beijing Platform for Action
Further actions and initiatives for overcoming
obstacles to the implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action

The President: The Assembly will first hear a
statement by Her Excellency Mrs. Tembé Ashira AssihAïssah, Minister for Social Affairs and Advancement
of Women of Togo.
Mrs. Assih-Aïssah (Togo) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to convey the warm greetings of
the President of the Togolese Republic, General
Gnassingbé Eyadema, and of the Government and
people of Togo.
On behalf of the delegation that is accompanying
me and on my own behalf, I also wish to express our
satisfaction with the outstanding manner in which you,
Mr. President, our guiding our work.
This special session of the General Assembly
assumes special importance for the Government of
Togo because it constitutes an additional milestone in
continuing action by the international community to
improve the situation of women and girls at the
opening of the third millennium. In accordance with
the commitments endorsed at Beijing, as well as with
those undertaken through relevant international
instruments, relentless efforts are being carried out to
ensure harmonious and integrated development for
women and girls through the creation of a more
adequate environment which is favourable to luck and
opportunity.
Ensuring for women full citizenship and
fundamental rights on an equal footing with men has
become one of the major concerns of our development
policy. The commitments made have been reflected not
only in the establishment of a National Committee for

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-47018 (E)
`````````

A/S-23/PV.8

the follow-up of the Beijing Platform for Action, but
also in the drafting of a national plan for action spread
out over five years, which has seven priority areas that
include education, health, women’s rights and
employment.

determined clear and precise guidelines. Recourse to
positive discrimination regarding education has thus
become necessary in order to encourage the education
of girls, particularly in rural areas. Another advantage
of this measure is that it aims to fight early marriage.

However, it must be emphasized that the
promotion of the status of women necessarily requires
the cooperation of men, partnership between the State
and civil society and cooperation between the bilateral
and multilateral development partners, particularly the
United Nations agencies.

Thus the Government of Togo has reduced the
cost of girls’ education at the primary level and at the
same time has favoured granting educational
scholarships to those who reach the university level.
One can highlight here the complementary action of
several development partners which, through special
programmes, contribute to the improvement of the
quality of scholastic infrastructure, teacher-training and
the sponsorship of poor students in rural areas by
granting them teaching materials, school supplies and
uniforms.

From this perspective, we have given priority to
interdisciplinarity and interaction within the National
Committee by integrating representatives of State
structures, non-governmental organizations, women’s
association and United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Population Fund and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF). This strategic choice has
also strengthened solidarity and coordination and has
allowed for a better vision of women’s problems and
related synergy of action.
Within that context, and parallel to the
decentralization process under way in my country for
many years, the National Committee to follow-up
Beijing is linked on the prefectural and subprefectural
levels to local committees made up of men and women
of varying social and professional profiles. This
national coverage has allowed for a real assumption of
responsibility and effective community participation at
the grass-roots level.
Allow me to report briefly on some of the
progress accomplished in the implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action through our plan for
action. This progress is undoubtedly insufficient, but it
is tangible. I remain optimistic regarding its positive
effects on the status of women and girls, in view of the
political will of the Government of Togo to fight all
inequality and injustice, and bearing in mind the firm
and growing determination of women to free
themselves from sexual discrimination and poverty.
Considering that illiteracy among women is one
of the main obstacles to equality, development and
peace, the Government of Togo has made the education
of girls, functional literacy and professional training of
women the spearhead of its plan for action. It is
encouraging to stress that from the start the
Government, in adopting specific measures, has

2

Violence against women is a reality which no one
can deny and must be fought at all costs, if we wish to
establish a climate of peace and prosperity. This is why
in our strategies we use innovative approaches to make
the various social groups aware of the pressing urgency
to end harmful practices against women’s health, which
constitute serious human rights violations.
In that regard, the Government of Togo took a
courageous step in promulgating the law of 17
November 1998 banning female mutilation, of which
roughly 12 per cent of Togolese girls and women are
victims. Therefore, the Ministry of Social Affairs and
the Advancement of Women, together with the
ministries of health, justice, the interior and security, in
association with non-governmental organizations, has
launched a broad information campaign to publicize
this law.
Recently, we organized two days of study on
violence against women for the traditional chiefs and
regional directors and police headquarters.
At the same time, a vast awareness campaign is
being carried out throughout the country to fight the
traffic in and exploitation of children. Togo is pleased
to have hosted, from 2 to 5 May 2000, the regional
meeting of ministers from West and Central Africa on
the rights of women and children, organized by
UNICEF. This meeting, which launched the Global
Movement for Children, put together a series of
recommendations contained in the so-called Lomé
platform.

A/S-23/PV.8

Regarding strengthening women’s economic
power, the question of women’s access to the means of
production, such as credit, land, appropriate technology
and in agriculture, is increasingly being addressed
through the availability of microcredit to women. It is
important to note that the Government of Togo has
established a support programme for savings and loans
and other cooperatives. In 1998, there were already 51
decentralized finance structures.
In the rural environment women’s groups have a
technical framework provided for through State
structures and non-governmental organizations. Thus,
here and there we are seeing mutual savings and loans
cooperatives emerge that offer rural women
opportunities to improve productivity and enhance
their income.
With regard to women’s dynamism, their sharp
business sense and promptness in repaying their loans,
the prospect of developing female entrepreneurship by
creating small- and medium-sized businesses and a
bank is attracting public attention. Studies are under
way and will soon lead to concrete decisions.
At the political level women are aware that their
effective participation in the management of public
affairs is henceforth imperative, and thus so is the
reinforcement of the fabric of women’s associations
through the establishment of networks.
The effective promotion of equality between men
and women and the contribution to human development
and lasting peace must take place through the
implementation of sustained national policies favouring
the access of young girls to education and training,
strengthening the economic power of women, rigorous
application of measures to eradicate violence imposed
upon women and adoption of strategies involving the
full participation of women in civic management.
However, it is important to recognize that as
laudable as the efforts made by a number of countries
may be, those efforts will certainly not achieve the
goals set at Beijing without international solidarity. Let
us all — Governments, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society —
make a commitment at the end of this special session to
do everything possible so that the beginning of the
third millennium will see women recognized at all
levels. Let us ensure that, more than ever before, the
status of women will improve and that, throughout the
world, from the most remote hamlets to the largest

metropolitan regions, women will no longer suffer
from violence, the consequences of armed conflict,
disease, illiteracy, ignorance and poverty.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency, Mrs. Tadelech Michael, Minister of
Women’s Affairs Sub-sector, Office of the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia.
Mrs. Michael (Ethiopia): It is indeed a great
honour for me, as head of the Ethiopian delegation, to
address this body at the eagerly awaited Beijing + 5
special session, entitled “Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”.
I would also like to extend my delegation’s
sincere appreciation for all the preparations for this
conference, in the context of which Ethiopia also had
the opportunity to host the sixth African Regional
Conference on Beijing + 5, held in Addis Ababa, from
22 to 26 November 1999.
Let me also convey the warm greetings of the
women of Ethiopia, who exercised their election rights,
as a result of which the whole month of May was
marked by democracy and victory, thereby allowing the
Government and the people of Ethiopia to refocus on
development activities.
My Government reaffirms its commitment to
advance the status of women by implementing all
human rights instruments and relevant treaties,
including the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, which
Ethiopia signed in 1981, as well as the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action.
Though Government institutions play a crucial
role in the implementation of the national women’s
policy and the Beijing Platform for Action, it is
recognized that non-governmental organizations and
women’s organizations also have a significant role in
the successful implementation of the Platform.
Strategies have also been developed for joint
cooperation between the Government and nongovernmental organizations through the Women’s
Affairs Office and non-governmental organizations.
The strategies developed are focused on the areas of
gender mainstreaming, advocacy, capacity-building,
supporting grass-roots women’s organizations and
networking.

3

A/S-23/PV.8

At the stage where we are now, mainstreaming
gender in other sectoral development endeavours and
promoting gender-specific activities are equally
important, if it is really intended to bring change to the
lives of the majority of women. Thus, attention and
support must be given to gender-specific programmes
as well.
In accordance with the commitment it entered
into, the Government of Ethiopia has been making
efforts for the realization of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which spelled out 12 critical
areas of concern to be addressed by Member countries
of the United Nations. Most of the issues raised and
adopted as critical areas of concern have been
considered and placed on the Ethiopian Government’s
agenda of top priorities, in keeping with our country’s
reconstruction and development programmes for
matters such as poverty alleviation, food security,
education, health and road sector development
programmes.
With regard to poverty, in order to do away with
the legacies of the past and improve the socioeconomic situation of the people, my Government has
issued sound policies and designed workable
programmes. The first economic recovery programme,
launched at the beginning of 1992 and, later, the fiveyear programme on development, peace and democracy
have been implemented in the last five years.
Another form of a poverty-reduction adopted by
the Government was the intensification of agricultural
extension programmes by subsidizing appropriate
agricultural inputs to small farmers. In addition, the
disbursement of credits to the urban and rural poor was
another step taken. Fifty per cent of the beneficiaries
targeted were female heads of households and girls
who had dropped out of school.
The Ethiopian Social Rehabilitation and
Development Fund, which is funded mostly by bilateral
and multilateral organizations, including the World
Bank, mainly targets poor rural communities and has a
special focus on women. The overall objectives of this
programme are poverty alleviation through the
provision of assets and services and capacity-building
that includes managerial and technical skills. As a
result of the actions taken from July 1996 to September
1999, a total of 9,915,643 people have benefited from
the programme, out of which 4,922,087 were women.

4

Similarly, non-governmental organizations are
playing a critical role in poverty-reduction
development programmes, with the aim of improving
the quality of life of rural people through incomegenerating activities, by promoting the contribution of
women and by providing the necessary support to
enhance
their
economic
empowerment.
Nongovernmental organizations, organized under 10
microfinance institutions, are disbursing credit to the
poor, with more focus being given to women. Out of
the total number of beneficiaries of microfinance
institutions, between 55 and 60 per cent are women.
With regard to education and training, the
education and training policy and the designing of the
education sector development programme are aimed
primarily at distributing opportunities evenly,
improving quality, increasing the enrolment rate and
bridging the gap between male and female participation
and male and female achievement in schools. So far,
the results registered in the increase in female
enrolment at all levels of education, in particular the
rise in the gross enrolment ratio in primary schools
from 20.4 per cent in 1994–1995 to 35.3 per cent in
1998–1999, have been very encouraging. Likewise, the
total gross enrolment ratio has increased from 26.2 per
cent to 45.8 per cent during the period under
consideration. It was indicated that although the
enrolment of girls increased at the primary, secondary
and higher institution levels, the gender gap still exists
and needs to be bridged further.
Similarly, the increase in the enrolment rate of
girls in technical and vocational schools and in skills
development centres, the increase in the literacy rate
from 23 per cent in 1994 to 26.6 per cent in 1998, and
the prevalence of high illiteracy among a large section
of the population have been stressed. Moreover, there
has been an increase in the number of schools, through
the participation of the private sector and nongovernmental organizations, and affirmative action for
female candidates who wish to join teachers’ training
institutes has been implemented.
At the same time, factors constraining the
increase in the participation rate of female students
were pinpointed, and were found to include: the
attitude of parents towards girls’ education;
inaccessibility of schools, particularly in rural areas;
inadequate funds for expansion of opportunities; lack
of adequate teaching materials; and low quality of

A/S-23/PV.8

education due to inadequate qualifications of teaching
staff.
The dangers posed to the socio-economic
situation of the country by the status of health —
particularly the inadequacy of services, mainly in rural
areas; major health problems of females, both directly
and indirectly related to obstetric issues; effects of
harmful traditional practices; and vulnerability to the
HIV/AIDS pandemic — were highlighted. A survey
has been conducted on harmful traditional practices,
and an intensive campaign has been waged towards
their eradication, with particular reference to female
genital mutilation. The health sector development
programme mainly emphasizes developing an
equitable, affordable and acceptable standard for the
health service system, with priority given to women
and children.
The
achievements
resulting
from
the
implementation of the health sector policy and the
health sector development programme should be
underlined. These include an increase in facilities
through the participation of the private sector and nongovernmental organizations, and a broadening of the
coverage of services. Consequently, mother and child
health services and vaccinations have increased, while
potential health service coverage rose from 45 per cent
in 1994–1995 to 52 per cent in 1997–1998.
In view of the increased danger of HIV/AIDS, the
Government,
non-governmental
organizations,
religious organizations, women’s groups and society at
large are actively campaigning against the pandemic.
The National Council on AIDS, under the
chairmanship of the President of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, is tasked primarily
with providing the necessary support to women and
children so that they can protect themselves, and with
giving assistance to those already infected, orphaned or
widowed.
With respect to legislation, Ethiopia, as one of the
founding Members of the United Nations, has ratified
numerous conventions and declarations adopted at
various times. These include the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. In its
unwavering commitment to the protection of women’s
rights, as fully reflected in its constitution, the
Government of Ethiopia has been making efforts to

amend and eliminate discriminatory laws and practices
imposed on the female population. The main areas of
focus during the process of the revision and eventual
amendment of family law have been discriminatory
provisions in relation to marriage and family relations,
such as marriageable age, conditions for concluding a
marriage, the relationship of spouses and their roles in
home management, as well as provisions with regard to
choosing the place of residence, ownership of property,
upbringing of children, divorce, family arbitration and
the like. The measures taken so far to revise laws and
prepare the ground for their enactment have been a step
forward in improving the status of women in Ethiopia,
although much more remains to be done.
With regard to women in decision-making, the
guarantee of women’s rights through the promulgation
of the electoral law and the provisions contained in the
constitution has created positive ground for the
empowerment of women. It has been noted that the
participation of women in casting votes during the
previous election was high but that their representation
in the respective offices and parliamentary seats was
insignificant. The results of the 1995 elections showed
that women’s participation as candidates for
parliamentary seats was very low. Based on the need
for more empowerment of women, the creation of
awareness and education on issues such as human and
legal rights and women’s capacity-building has been
given high priority. Simultaneously, there is a need to
further educate the public on the rights of females and
on the role played by women in nation-building, as
equal partners with men.
Taking account of those conditions, efforts to
build the capacity of women in general, and of
potential candidates in the election which took place in
May 2000 in particular, were conducted through
awareness-creation programmes at all levels. The
women’s committee in the House of Peoples
Representatives, the women’s affairs office and
women’s associations made concerted efforts to build
the capacity of women to be elected and to vote in the
election held in May 2000. Concurrently, awarenessraising programmes on gender issues, in particular in
relation to women’s constitutional rights, have also
been conducted in various forums and at different
levels, with a view to making the public more aware.
The results have been viewed as positive.
A great deal has been achieved thus far, but much
more remains to be done. We strongly believe that

5

A/S-23/PV.8

peace is a prerequisite for development and equality. At
a time when Ethiopia was fully engaged in
development endeavours to bring to life a national
economy that has been exhibiting a continuously
declining trend for decades, my country became a
victim of naked aggression two years ago. For more
than two years, for the sake of peace, Ethiopia has
persistently worked hard and has pledged to all peaceloving countries and organs that it would reverse this
aggression and refocus its efforts on development. And
again, for more than two years, Ethiopia has lived with
humiliation, permitting almost half a million of its
citizens, three quarters of them women and children, to
live in deplorable conditions, simply because it wanted
to give peace a chance.
Ethiopia has always fully respected the Charter of
the United Nations, from the day it was signed 54 years
ago. There are international rules and laws, and they
are there to be followed by citizens of the world,
whether they live in poor countries or rich. It is that
equity before the law which big and small nations alike
guarantee to respect when they join the world body, the
United Nations, as Members. The United Nations
should be an organization of principle and a genuine
union which looks after and guarantees full respect for
its Charter.
Nonetheless, Ethiopia, though betrayed by the
implementers of international law today, as it was
before, has managed to defend its sovereign territory
through the sacrifices of the Ethiopian people, who
have always stood in unison when such challenges
arise, by forcing the aggressor to go back where it
belongs.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency the Honourable Thebe David Mogami,
Minister for Labour and Home Affairs of Botswana.
Mr. Mogami (Botswana): Botswana would like
to thank the United Nations system and all Member
States for their commitment to the advancement of
women. We applaud all those who have made
concerted efforts to bring about the convening of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
on the theme of “Women 2000: gender equality
development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
During the last three days, Member States and
United Nations agencies have engaged in reflections on
the progress, constraints and challenges experienced in
the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action.

6

I would therefore like to add Botswana’s contribution
to what has been said.
The preparation for the United Nations Fourth
World Conference on Women provided an important
opportunity to consolidate ongoing efforts to advance
the cause of women in Botswana. The preparatory
activities undertaken by the Botswana Government and
women’s non-governmental organizations led to a new
collaboration between Government and civil society,
which made it possible to identify six of the 12 critical
areas of concern documented in the Beijing Platform
for Action as priority issues. The six critical areas as
adopted by Botswana women, in order of priority, are
women and poverty, including women’s economic
empowerment; women in power and decision-making;
education and training for women; women and health;
violence against women and human rights; and the girl
child, which cuts across the above five critical areas.
Women and poverty, including women’s
economic empowerment, is Botswana’s first-priority
national area of concern. Women in Botswana tend to
suffer poverty and economic marginalization more
acutely than men. A number of factors contribute to the
differential in the experience of poverty and economic
disadvantage between the two groups. These factors
include legal and cultural norms that restrict women’s
access to, and control of, productive resources. Gender
inequalities also exist in the education system, and this
has a negative impact on poverty alleviation strategies.
The Government has put in place poverty eradication
policies and programmes in order to increase women’s
access to productive resources, such as credit, training
and other resources. Non-governmental organizations
also provide support to women’s economic activities so
as to improve their economic status.
On the issue of women in power and decisionmaking, Botswana recognizes that the participation of
women in decision-making at all levels of public and
private life is an important issue of human rights, as
well as of the strengthening of the democratic process.
In an effort to address the existing disparities, my
Government has embarked on political education,
social mobilization, lobbying and advocacy. Other
partners,
particularly
the
non-governmental
organizations, network with political parties and their
women’s wings, so as to encourage political parties to
endorse women’s demands, which are included in their
manifestos. As a result of these efforts, the
representation of women in the Botswana Parliament

A/S-23/PV.8

increased from 9 per cent in 1994 to a little over 18 per
cent in 1999, while in the Cabinet it increased from
12.5 per cent in 1994 to a little over 23 per cent in
1999. The representation of women at the permanent
secretary level in Government is presently 25 per cent.
The Botswana Public Service and the country’s
Central Bank are led by women. There are programmes
in place to build women’s leadership and management
capacity, as well as affirmative action in the selection
of specially nominated counsellors and members of
Parliament. The major challenges in this area are the
limited resources for campaigns and political
education, prevailing gender stereotypes and the
absence of a comprehensive affirmative action plan
focusing on promoting gender equality at all levels.
Regarding the issue of education and training for
women, Botswana is committed to the ideal of
education as a basic human right. A free 10-year
programme of basic education is in place. Our national
policy on education has been revised, and vocational
and technical education has been expanded to attract
more women. The special education needs of young
mothers are addressed by women’s non-governmental
organizations that provide young mothers an
opportunity to complete their studies through
secondary and tertiary levels. Major challenges in this
area include limited day-care facilities, teenage
pregnancy, low enrolment of females in science and
technical education programmes and the unavailability
of teachers who are sufficiently trained and sensitized
to deliver the new curriculum.
In the area of women and health, it is important to
note that one’s health and well-being are an outcome of
the economic, social, political and cultural context. In
Botswana’s case, for example, negative cultural norms
and practices still restrict women’s capacity to make
informed choices regarding their sexual and
reproductive health, as well as regarding available
health-care services. Nevertheless, Botswana has made
some strides in this area of women and health. Since
1995, Botswana has revised the family planning
guidelines, with the aim of removing impediments to
health services for women and girls. There is also an
integration of sexually transmitted disease and
HIV/AIDS prevention with family planning services
and a reduction of mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
There has been increased attention on adolescent
sexual and reproductive health, as well as an

improvement in health information, which has resulted
in a reduction of teenage pregnancy.
Violence against women is one of the pervasive
and escalating social problems in Botswana. In trying
to overcome the problem, the Government recently
carried out a study on the socio-economic implications
of violence against women on the basis of which a
multi-sectoral approach will be taken to confront and
overcome this evil. Among the several measures
undertaken by Botswana with regard to violence
against women are the ratification of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women in 1996; the amendment of the Penal
Code Act, which has improved laws relating to rape;
the establishment of a shelter for battered women; and
the establishment of the Botswana police and nongovernmental organization task force on domestic
violence.
In
1997,
the
Botswana
Government
commissioned a review of all the laws that discriminate
against women with a view to amending them. In order
to enhance the implementation of the six critical areas,
Botswana had to put in place institutional mechanisms,
and these include the elevation of the National Gender
Machinery to the status of a full-fledged Department,
the promulgation of a National Policy on Women in
Development, the formulation of the National Gender
Programme Framework, the strengthening of the
Women’s Non-Governmental Organization Coalition
and other civil society organizations dealing with
gender issues and the formation of the National
Council on Women and its subcommittees focusing on
the six critical areas of concern.
The general perception of the advancement of
women has changed significantly in the last five years.
This is a result of gender-awareness-building efforts,
which include international bodies.
In conclusion, Botswana remains committed to
the Beijing Platform for Action. We will do everything
possible to pursue the implementation of the Platform
to its logical conclusion. We hope that this session,
which is very important to all of us, will produce an
outcome document that will further strengthen our
resolve to implement the Platform for Action.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Jerzy Kropiwnicki, Minister, Head of
the Government Centre for Strategic Studies of Poland.

7

A/S-23/PV.8

Mr. Kropiwnicki (Poland): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your election to the high
office of President of the twenty-third special session
of the General Assembly. I would also like to express
my delegation’s respect and appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan.
In the opinion of the Government of the Republic
of Poland, this session constitutes a significant step in
promoting the development of nations and States, as
foreseen by resolutions adopted in Beijing in 1995.
Having emerged from a long and difficult
process, the agreement reached five years ago in the
shape of the Platform for Action was a product not
only of our common commitment and imagination, but
also of our willingness to make necessary
compromises. Today we are participating in the Beijing
review conference, which has been convened to learn
how successful we have been in our efforts to meet the
standards agreed upon five years ago and to reconfirm
our pledge to make further progress in carrying out
decisions taken in Beijing. The eventual success of this
endeavour of ours is contingent upon universal respect
for every human being. This in turn entails, first and
foremost, acknowledgement of the dignity and equal
rights of men and women in all spheres of life. The
Constitution of the Republic of Poland creates the
framework in which these equal rights in social life are
fully respected.
It is in the family that a human being finds his or
her natural environment. It is into the family that
successive generations are born and in the family
where they grow in wisdom and learn how to reconcile
individual rights with social obligations. The right of
parents to raise their children in the family, as well as
their right and primary obligation to educate them,
should therefore be respected. Consequently, increased
support should be offered to mothers and fathers who
struggle to balance the demands of work and family
responsibilities.
The Constitution of the Republic of Poland is
rooted in the strong conviction that the law must
protect human life from the moment of conception to
the moment of natural death. Hence, Polish law ensures
medical, social and legal care for pregnant women. In
its concern for the appropriate development of the
family, the Government of the Republic of Poland has
created the National Pro-family Policy Programme,
which strives to strengthen the foundations of family

8

life and provide health care at every stage of life, as
well as education for young people that emphasizes
respect for natural and social human rights. Family
assistance centres — part of the national social
services — have been established at the local level.
Taking on violence against women, which, though
marginal, has an enormously destructive moral impact,
figures among the tasks of these centres.
The National Health Programme that has been
implemented in Poland is aimed at holistic health
promotion, including the prevention of diseases and
disability, as well as effective treatment for lifethreatening diseases, particularly cancer and those
diseases that affect the cardiovascular system.
Moreover, health programmes have been introduced to
improve the effectiveness of women’s sexual and
reproductive health care. Positive effects of these
actions have already been observed. For instance, there
has been a decrease in mortality caused by
cardiovascular diseases, a drop in the number of infants
born with low birth weight and a reduction in the
number of HIV/AIDS infections.
The right to education is regarded as one of the
fundamental human rights. The laws concerning the
Polish education system ensure equal access to schools
for all citizens. Gender equality is strictly observed at
all educational levels. In fact, at the moment, more
women than men are being educated at university level.
The reform of the education system, as currently
implemented in Poland, has resulted in important
changes being introduced into curricula. In the
reformed system, schools will provide students with
the opportunity for the comprehensive development of
their personalities, including the development of their
physical, emotional, intellectual, moral and spiritual
potential.
The Polish labour code is founded on the
principle of equal rights for men and women in the
field of professional activity. Similarly, the civil code
guarantees equal rights for both genders in its area of
application. Positive changes are being manifested in
the increasing number of women who occupy
managerial positions in economic and public life.
However, there are some indications that equality
between women and men in the labour market has not
yet been achieved. This relates both to opportunities
for finding a job and to the level of earnings. Efforts
are being undertaken to reduce unemployment and to

A/S-23/PV.8

improve attitudes vis-à-vis women in the labour
market.
With regard to the legislative sphere, the right of
women and men to equal working conditions and to
equal remuneration is being gradually adjusted to the
standards of the European Union.
The principle of solidarity has borne much fruit in
Poland. The citizens have regained their freedom, and
the country has won back its sovereignty and
independence. Democratic institutions and mechanisms
are constantly being developed. These profound
changes, coupled with the rising standard of citizens’
education, are contributing decisively to the
development of political activity and other forms of
social life. Against this background, one can expect the
vital role of women in society to continue to grow.
I am pleased to inform this body that Poland has
ratified all fundamental international legal instruments
pertaining to human rights and fundamental freedoms,
many of which refer specifically to the rights of
women. In undertaking all the efforts that I have just
outlined, Poland continues to believe that a pure and
unbiased concept of the dignity of the human person
constitutes the very foundation of culture, serves as the
main source of the well-being of individuals and
societies and is a prerequisite for the development of
nations.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. María Fernanda Flores de Alemán, Coordinator of
the Social Cabinet of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Flores de Alemán (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a great honour for me to be able to stand
in this Hall, which represents the commitment of the
nations of the world, united in the most noble cause of
humankind.
From the Headquarters of this union, which began
more than half a century ago, we declared collectively,
for the first time, the recognition of the fundamental
rights and dignity of the human being and the value of
the person, as well as the equality of those rights for
men and women and for nations large and small.
Within this magnificent tradition, we are meeting
once again in this important forum with the purpose of
continuing to work to make that equality a reality for
half of humankind: women.

Since the Fourth World Conference on Women,
Nicaragua has joined other nations in undertaking a
new course, making greater efforts to advance the
cause of women. It is in this spirit that, today, we are
meeting the challenge of gender equality, development
and peace for the twenty-first century by undertaking
this five-year review of the Platform for Action.
Gender equality is the logical consequence of the
recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family,
in the fine words of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and constitutes the true basis of
freedom, justice and peace. Equal dignity and rights
must result in equal opportunity for all and clearly
constitute a parameter of human freedom, without
which there can be no rule of law or true democracy,
which requires the participation of all.
We understand and desire the full participation of
women as the freedom that every woman should enjoy
in order to play a role in all professions, activities and
spheres, without prejudice; to achieve personal
progress; and to contribute to social, economic and
political development.
Aware of all this, and recognizing that the
Platform for Action is considered to be an instrument
for the advancement and empowerment of women, the
State of Nicaragua, given its limited resources, has
prioritized six of its twelve areas of critical concern.
Our priorities are poverty, education, health, violence,
institutional mechanisms and the girl child.
We are working hard against the feminization of
poverty. We have developed mechanisms, plans and
programmes to ensure the effective access of women,
on an equal footing, to consumer goods. Nicaragua
recognizes the right of women to own property and,
under its Constitution, protects their right to receive
equal pay for equal work.
By strengthening the institutions that govern and
promote small and medium-sized enterprises, we have
supported women throughout the country in obtaining
credit and the training they need for empowerment. In
this effort, priority has been given to rural women.
We have made a special commitment to education
because we recognize that all deep changes in a
country’s social structure begin with education.
Education is the sine qua non of sustainable
development. Through its educational policy,

9

A/S-23/PV.8

Nicaragua ensures access to education and training
within its means to ensure the full participation of
women in the process of social, economic and political
development. Women have been given priority in the
process of eliminating illiteracy, while the gender
perspective is the main axis of the academic curriculum
in public education.
The issue of health, which affects women in
particular, is addressed systematically through what is
known in Nicaragua as the Fourth Health Policy. The
Policy caters to the different needs of the sexes at every
stage of life. One result of comprehensive health care
for women is that primary out-patient care now reaches
82 per cent of the female population.
The promotion of breastfeeding and the
prolonged efforts of government policy contributed to
the recent approval of a law on breastfeeding, which
protects mother and child during the lactation period,
guaranteeing the conditions and time necessary, even
during working hours. Moreover, infants and lactating
mothers are protected by a policy on nutrition.
We have a network of basic centres run by
women, where care for sexual and reproductive health
is available and information on and access to family
planning are offered. There is also a hospital for elderly
women.
With regard to violence, Nicaragua has advocated
the formulation of a policy aimed at the gradual
eradication of domestic violence, with special priority
for women, adolescent and child victims of this painful
problem. We are drafting a national plan against
violence that will guide intersectoral action, with the
participation of civil society and the State.
The Government of Nicaragua, represented by the
Minister of the Family as a governing body through the
Nicaraguan Institute for Women, is working for the
advancement of women and has developed measures
aimed, inter alia, at mobilizing and training women
leaders in the various political parties; training
personnel to run workshops on leadership and personal
efficiency in the area of violence; implementing
legislation on children and adolescents; finding
alternative sources of credit; and promoting the gender
perspective.
Children, our promise for the future, are today the
most vulnerable members of the population. Nicaragua
protects the life of girls and boys from the moment of

10

conception, without any discrimination whatsoever and
with a view to a more just world of equal opportunity
from the earliest age.
Nicaragua has taken decisive steps to define and
protect the rights of girls and boys. It has signed and
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which is written into our Constitution. In 1998, we
adopted the Law on Children and Adolescents; since
then, we have developed many policies, actions and
mechanisms to follow up this important legal
instrument.
The attitudes promoting equality, development
and peace begin with the values that are learned in the
family. The Vienna World Conference on Human
Rights effectively emphasized this fact, referring to the
rights of children and stating that the full and
harmonious development of children’s personalities
requires them to be reared in a family context, which
therefore deserves greater protection.
We cannot disassociate women from the family.
Nicaragua has a Ministry of the Family to coordinate
action to protect and strengthen that fundamental
nucleus of society. Thus, we have tried to implement
the guidelines of the 1995 Platform for Action on
recognizing the contribution of women to family wellbeing, the social significance of motherhood and the
role played by parents in raising their children. The
Nicaraguan State wishes to strengthen family ties for
the good of all society.
We are pursuing all these efforts optimistically
and enthusiastically. The Government of President
Arnoldo Alemán intends to keep on working for
women with a comprehensive approach to their welfare
that covers all aspects of their being and all their public
and private relationships.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Jytte Andersen, Minister for Gender
Equality of Denmark.
Ms. Andersen (Denmark): Let me first of all
express my Government’s full association with the
statement made by Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.
We can be proud of the results of the United
Nations world conferences on women. Mexico,
Copenhagen, Nairobi and Beijing have made a
difference. The Beijing Platform for Action is a strong
forward-looking document, but we must keep moving

A/S-23/PV.8

forward. No setbacks can be allowed. Only then shall
we provide hope for women — hope for those women
who experience a lack of respect for their human
rights; violence outside or inside their homes; a lack of
influence over their lives and bodies; a lack of
decision-making power; a lack of access to education;
and a lack of coherence between working life and
family life.
Gender equality is still not a reality. Progress is
too slow. We must focus on action. The political will to
push the process forward is not strong enough. We
must try harder. We must fight poverty and we must
focus on women, including the disabled. Poverty will
remain if women are kept from credit, land, property,
education or decision-making processes.
Women’s contributions and opportunities must be
fully realized. At Beijing we committed ourselves to
mainstreaming gender perspective into all policies and
activities. Mainstreaming is not about integrating
women into existing structures. It is about changing
those structures. Such changes are necessary if both
women and men are to participate on an equal footing
in the development of their society.
For too long men have been side-tracked in the
process. Partnership or a new social contract between
women and men is necessary. Such a contract should
clarify women’s contribution to the economy, as well
as men’s contribution to family life. Professional and
family responsibilities must go hand in hand.
Let me highlight an area where progress is most
important. Trafficking in women is one of the most
degrading violations of women’s human rights. A root
cause of trafficking is almost always poverty. Women
are looking for better lives, not least for their families.
At a recent trial in a Danish court a witness, a young
Latin American woman was asked why she had ended
up as a prostitute in Denmark. She answered, “You
have no idea of the level of poverty my family and I
were facing.”
Long-term development is needed to fight such
trafficking. But other tools must also be utilized.
International cooperation is vital to identify those
behind the crimes. Traffickers must be punished and
victims must be protected. Negotiations on a United
Nations protocol on trafficking are taking place in
Vienna. Let us make them a success.

Human rights instruments are imperative in the
fight for women’s human rights. All human rights must
be respected, and human rights include reproductive
and sexual rights.
I am pleased to announce that Denmark was the
third United Nations Member to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. It is my hope
that other countries will soon follow. Women need the
Protocol. The Protocol is a political signal that
women’s rights are human rights and that human rights
are women’s rights. Only by keeping women’s issues
on the agenda will we be able to make progress.
Gender equality has not yet been fully achieved.
Tomorrow we shall recommit ourselves to the
Platform for Action. We have come to New York to
agree on further actions to strengthen and speed up the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action.
Let us demonstrate our political will in action.
Let us take important decisions tomorrow. Let us
dedicate ourselves to the implementation of these
decisions. Let us meet again in five years at the fifth
United Nations World Conference on Women. Women
around the world are waiting for us. We cannot let
them down.
The President: I call on Ms. Zohra Guliyeva,
Minister of the State Committee for Women’s Issues of
Azerbaijan.
Ms. Guliyeva (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me, on behalf of the Government and the
delegation of the Republic of Azerbaijan, to welcome
all participants in this session and to wish us all a
productive endeavour. I am confident that the decisions
adopted at this session will be crucial for all women of
the world at the turn of the century and of the
millennium.
The Fourth World Conference on Women, held at
Beijing in 1995, continuing the Nairobi strategies,
defined the problems and challenges facing women at
the national, regional and global levels. The National
Plan of Action of Azerbaijan was elaborated and
adopted on the basis of the Beijing Platform for Action
and is being implemented successfully in our country.
Today the region of the Caucasus is the focus of
attention of the entire world, unfortunately, primarily
as a flashpoint of conflicts and disputes. For those of us
who faced the consequences of the armed conflict in

11

A/S-23/PV.8

and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, the magic word “peace” in the
triad “equality, development and peace” determines
everything else.
From this high rostrum, I wish to extend my
sincere gratitude to the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Development Fund
for Women for their assistance in organizing the Baku
Regional Conference entitled “Women and armed
conflict”. In the first such visit since the outbreak of
the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, women’s
delegations from Armenia arrived in Baku to
participate in the Conference. The women participants
unanimously accepted the Baku Declaration, reflecting
their belief that despite all the loss, pain and suffering
that affected thousands of families, and the great
number of refugees, we women should make
compromises for the sake of our common future and
for the achievement of a stable and just peace in the
region.
This peace-building activity was followed by
meetings of women’s non-governmental organizations
under the auspices of the American Academy for
Education Development and Harvard University, in the
framework of the “Women waging peace” initiative,
the global network of women peacemakers.
At present, Azerbaijan is living in a state of
neither peace nor war. After peace was achieved in the
region, the women of Azerbaijan believed that one of
the most important directions for developing the
country and the region as a whole was the
implementation of various programmes for regional
cooperation. Among those programmes, the EuropeCaucasus-Asia transportation corridor project is of
special importance. It is virtually the plan for
restoration of the Great Silk Road. For us, the Silk
Road is a significant part of our past, which is
characterized by a high level of ethnic and religious
tolerance and cultural and economic cooperation. At
the same time, the Silk Road is a substantial part of our
future, a path towards further development using the
unique geopolitical opportunities of the Caucasus to
create an economic, transportation and communication
bridge between Asia and Europe.
However, all these plans have not yet been
sufficiently reflected in the real lives of women of
Azerbaijan. We are facing numerous problems common
to all countries with economies in transition. The heavy

12

burden of economic problems lies primarily on the
shoulders of women. The situation is aggravated by the
fact that there are almost 1 million refugees and
displaced persons in our country, the majority of whom
are women and children deprived of shelter, work and a
means of subsistence.
The measures to alleviate this situation could
include a microcredit programme, the establishment of
women’s banks, and special plans for women’s
economic empowerment with the cooperation of the
relevant international agencies.
While underscoring the significance of the
programmes for economic development, we also highly
appreciate the fact that women are the majority in the
workforce of the country’s education system, in the
public health sector and in culture. Women make up 9.2
per cent of the management of the municipal executive
authorities. Women hold 6.2 per cent of positions in
Government and constitute 30 per cent of the public
administration. I would particularly like to point out
that today the chairpersons of the country’s Supreme
Court and the Court of Appeals are women. We women
occupy ministerial and sub-ministerial positions. We
are at the head of departments in the Cabinet of
Ministers and the Office of the President. As a result of
the increased activity by women, the parliamentary
elections held in Azerbaijan after the Beijing
Conference secured 12 per cent of the membership of
the supreme legislative body for women.
The national report that Azerbaijan submitted to
the session of the Committee on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women in January
1998 was a distinctive illustration of the country’s
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action. As
the report pointed out, Azerbaijan promotes an equal
rights policy for women at all levels. It is also worth
noting that, constitutionally and legislatively, women in
Azerbaijan are totally equal to men in rights. Moreover,
draft legislation is being studied with gender expertise.
At the same time, it is obvious that the transition from
the policy of equal rights to the policy of equal
opportunities indubitably requires additional efforts.
In that connection I would like to mention that
the State policy on the advancement of women in
society has been worked out and is being implemented
throughout the country. This policy is yielding results.
Among its accomplishments we can mention the
institutionalizing of agencies that are directly

A/S-23/PV.8

responsible for the advancement of women. The State
Committee for Women’s Issues was established.
Meanwhile, a widespread network of women’s nongovernmental organizations is operating throughout the
country. Generally, all this creates opportunities for the
successful implementation of the Beijing Platform at
the national level. The Fifth Congress of the Women of
Azerbaijan, held in 1998, demonstrated the increased
interest and potential of women to participate more
actively in all spheres of life.

Remarkable achievements have been made with
respect to the human rights of women, especially in the
way they have been reconceptualized, in the
acknowledgement that women’s rights are human
rights, and in terms of the recognition of sexual and
reproductive rights as an integral part of human rights.
In the Dominican Republic, the Beijing Platform for
Action has been a key framework for improving
women’s lives and for broadening their prospects for
growth.

The great twelfth century poet, Mehseti Ganjevi,
wrote sadly that it is a rare thing for women’s dreams
to come true. However, it is my strong belief that our
dreams of real equality, development and just peace
will eventually come true.

Over these five years, we have pooled our wills
and have achieved important changes, such as
consolidating
progress
through
the
adoption,
promulgation and application of laws and the
establishment in 1999 of the office of Secretary of
State for Women’s Affairs, which is a high-level
department responsible for State policy on women and
for coordinating the implementation of policies for
gender equality in all sectors. Those achievements are
the result of joint work by the three branches of the
State, women members of political parties, and nongovernmental organizations. The growing participation
of non-governmental organizations in many areas of
Dominican public life has had a positive effect on basic
issues, such as health and education, which have been
the focus of special attention, especially in recent
years.

The President: I now give the floor to Mrs.
Gladys Gutiérrez, Minister for Women’s Affairs of the
Dominican Republic.
Mrs. Gutiérrez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to
convey to you very warm greetings on behalf of the
delegation of the Dominican Republic present here,
which is comprised of both governmental and nongovernmental members.
It is a fact that the Beijing Platform for Action
has opened doors towards establishing modes of
communication between societies and States that have
begun to yield auspicious results. In that context, we
are making strides in the long race to overcome the
obstacles that prevent the development of women and
their equal presence in the public life.
Changes have taken place in Latin America and
the Caribbean, such as the adoption in most States of
laws against domestic violence and the significant
work carried out by the Special Rapporteur on this
matter, the participation of women in elections for
offices at the congressional, municipal and public
administration levels, and the important changes in the
civil and employment sectors.
In the international arena, it is also important to
highlight the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and its signing by many
States, and the adoption, signing and ratification by a
significant number of States of the International
Criminal Court Statute that has a clear perspective on
gender.

Another fundamental advance has been the
formulation of a national plan for gender equality,
which includes the establishment of indicators and the
identification of concrete results that will serve as a
basis for the implementation and follow-up of the plan.
Among our other important achievements are the
decrease in maternal mortality, greater accessibility of
services for mothers and children, the implementation
of reforms, and the development of a new model for
health care. In the Dominican Republic, we have also
increased awareness about violence against women and
about domestic violence in general, and have created
specific mechanisms for combating such violence.
In the economic field, Dominican women have
made tangible progress with our significant presence in
areas such as food production, animal husbandry, the
financial sector and micro-enterprises, and by working
in the duty-free and industrial zones. Nevertheless, we
still have varied challenges confronting us. A review of
the accomplishments and the obstacles of the past five
years shows that the accomplishments have often been
legislative while most of the obstacles have involved

13

A/S-23/PV.8

problems of implementation. Such difficulties
constitute a major challenge in terms of optimizing
coordination and follow-up of the application of laws
and standards, especially regarding labour law and the
services provided for women in various areas.
Most women continue to work at lower-paid jobs,
in spite of the fact that women are a dominant presence
at all levels of education. Moreover, most political
parties are reluctant to adopt gender equality. Still,
women’s issues dominate debate by political
organizations, a trend that has continued through three
election cycles. In the last presidential election, a
woman, Mrs. Milagros Ortiz Bosch, was recently
elected Vice-President of the Dominican Republic,
which is an encouraging sign that the political field is
opening up to participation by Dominican women. We
are pleased that legislation exists allocating 33 per cent
of congressional and municipal positions to women.
This victory was achieved thanks to the determination
of women members of political parties and of nongovernmental organizations.
Despite such victories, major problems still have
to be addressed as a priority matter through ongoing
training and consciousness-raising programmes for
officials in all State departments, and through
responsible State management of the implementation of
all these processes. If we are to overcome our
difficulties, we shall need continued, firm political will
and a high level of commitment to change on the part
of the relevant authorities. That is a key factor for
sustained focus on implementation and coordination of
policies to promote the advancement of women.
An imperative objective of the Dominican
Republic must be to continue to strive for goals based
on the Beijing Platform for Action. Thanks to the broad
gender vision of our current Government, our country
has become increasingly integrated into this globalized
world and is taking positive measures for human
development and for gender equality.
At the international level, it is important to make
progress towards the universal ratification of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, towards the lifting of
reservations concerning the Convention, towards the
ratification of the Optional Protocol, towards the
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and towards the strengthening and empowerment
of national and international forums for women,

14

notably the United Nations International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
(INSTRAW).
It is also important to maintain the link between
the Platform for Action and the plans of action of other
world conferences which made major contributions to
the advancement of women, such as the Cairo
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development, the Vienna World Conference on Human
Rights and the Copenhagen World Summit for Social
Development, to name but a few.
Moreover, political will must be pooled to
address the issue of world poverty. Poverty must be
eliminated if women are equally to enjoy the benefits
of development.
The difficulties and obstacles which we have had
to face in this five-year appraisal of Beijing constitute
an important barometer for defining forward-looking
strategies for women in the new millennium. Women of
the entire world, here present, we must not retreat; we
must not turn back, now that we have made such great
progress towards the objectives of Beijing.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency The Honourable Janet Bostwick, Member
of Parliament, Attorney General and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Bahamas.
Ms. Bostwick (Bahamas): My country, and
particularly its women, enthusiastically welcomes the
opportunity presented by this twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly to join the global
community in a comprehensive review of the action we
have taken for gender equality pursuant to the
commitments we made at Beijing. Equally as important
is the opportunity the session affords us to take the
action that would enable us to build on our
accomplishments, to chart a course that would ensure
gender equality, development and peace in this twentyfirst century. May I say, therefore, how honoured I am
to participate in this critical post-Beijing review. Why
critical? It is critical because for many, if not for most
of us, men and women — but especially women — the
road that has challenged us to convene this session was
traversed over one or more obstacles of discrimination,
prejudice, violence, abuse, exploitation, repression and
poverty. Therefore, we all must be recognized as
survivors of these obstacles to gender equality and as
soldiers who still have a war to win, even though some
major battles have been won. We continue to hold fast

A/S-23/PV.8

and to respond to the call to arms that commands us to
take decisive action to address the manifold problems
set out in the 12 critical areas of the Beijing Platform
for Action.
Yes, there has been obvious progress in the
advancement of women through actions taken by
Governments, United Nations system agencies and
civil society. The United Nations Secretariat has
documented such advances.
Fortunately, the Bahamas is among those
countries that have demonstrated improvements in the
status of women. This was affirmed in the 1999 United
Nations Human Development Report. The report’s
gender empowerment measure, which surveyed the
relative empowerment of women and men in economic
and political spheres, ranked the Bahamas number 13
out of 174 countries. It ranked the Bahamas as number
one in Latin America and the Caribbean, and as the
leading country in the developing world for this
indicator, surpassing even many developed countries.
To bring even greater perspective to this achievement,
in 1996, the gender empowerment measure ranked the
Bahamas twenty-sixth but, in 1999, thirteenth.
The Bahamas is particularly proud of the enabling
environment it has provided for its female citizens of
all ages, at all levels of development and at all levels of
society. The Bahamas has placed special emphasis on
health, poverty eradication, education and training,
violence against women and the greater enjoyment of
civil and political rights. Of special note are increased
polyclinics with free pre-natal, neo-natal and post-natal
care; total Government funding of AZT treatment for
HIV-infected pregnant women, which has reduced
transmission rates from mothers to infants from 30 per
cent to 10 per cent and significantly reduced infant
mortality rates from HIV/ AIDS infection; the
provision of on-site day-care facilities, inclusive of
trained nurses, for the Government’s upgraded
Bahamas Technical and Vocational Institute, which
now offers over 20 disciplines, all open to women; the
establishment of a state-of-the-art 24-hour Early Child
Care Centre and the expansion of kindergarten
facilities to almost all primary schools; the extension of
free lunch programmes to all Government schools;
partnership arrangements with non-governmental
organizations dedicated to the well-being of female
victims of violence, as well as the construction of safe
houses in confidential locations for battered women
and their children; media campaigns and public

relations activities to prevent violence against women;
and a full-time domestic Court for child maintenance,
in addition to another Court dedicated to the trial of
cases of domestic violence and cases involving juvenile
offenders. Also worthy of note, the Government of the
Bahamas has established a constitutional commission,
as a result of which expected changes to the
Constitution will, inter alia, abolish discriminatory
qualifications for the granting of citizenship to the
spouses of Bahamian women and will also provide for
the conferral of citizenship on the children of
Bahamian women, irrespective of their place of birth.
Already, legislative reform has resulted in the granting
of permanent resident status to the spouses of
Bahamian nationals on an equal footing.
There is also the imminent introduction of the
Inheritance Legislation, which will remove the
primogeniture rule and allow women to inherit equally
with men. Further, the Employment Act of 2000,
introduced during this legislative period, addresses,
among other measures, equal pay for equal work,
parental leave, minimum wages and minimum
standards of work. The Act also increases maternity
leave from 8 to 12 weeks. These initiatives will result
in the removal from Bahamian law of all vestiges of
gender discrimination.
The Government of the Bahamas has also
announced its planned introduction of flexible working
hours in the public sector so as to permit parents,
especially women who are heads of household, to
spend quality time with their families and to reduce the
need for children to be left unsupervised after school,
thereby running the risk of falling prey to social ills.
I reiterate that there have been achievements in
many countries. Nevertheless, I submit that we must
take an even closer look at these achievements. Who
have, indeed, been the primary beneficiaries? Are these
achievements broadly distributed throughout our
Organization’s membership, or are they generally
confined to the countries which already had been
making strides towards the advancement of women
prior to Beijing? Those of us who are faring slightly
better than others should not lose sight of the grim
circumstances that millions of women continue to face
worldwide. It is a sad and sobering reality that, because
of measures imposed or conditions existing in certain
countries, women continue to be deprived of basic and
fundamental human rights, such as the right to
education or the right to gainful employment.

15

A/S-23/PV.8

Systematic rape, torture and abuse continue to be
weapons of choice in armed conflict. The nefarious
traffic in women and children continues to grow at an
alarming pace, thus subjecting them to horrendous
forms of sexual and economic exploitation. We cannot
stand by in silence while women continue to be
violated in this manner. At every opportunity we must
denounce these ills and demand that there be universal
respect for the rights of women.
Therefore, we must be very clear in the message
that we are now sending to these women and children
who continue to be victims of sexually motivated
and/or gender-based violence, slavery, exploitation,
abuse, harassment and discrimination. What are we
saying to them, when our negotiations to forge
consensus in this special session lead us backwards,
even if to previously agreed texts? The current
challenges are far more stark and acute, as the local
and international news media document daily. Whether,
five years after Beijing, our perspective is coloured by
lenses which see predominantly more progress for, or
more prejudice against, the advancement and improved
quality of life of women, the concerns which have
arisen since Beijing point to the fact that there are now
new commitments which we must address, over and
above our continuing obligation under the Beijing
Platform for Action.
I wish, finally, to turn to another aspect of our
challenge for gender equality, which goes to the heart
of the objective to which we all aspire. I am referring
to the misconception that, by definition, the
advancement of women means the marginalization of
men. We are not in a zero-sum game of either/or, in
which women can advance only at the expense of men,
and vice versa. There can be genuine and progressive
development only with honest partnership between the
two genders. Both religion and science imply this.
The message of this special session must be that
equality with men applies not to a particular category
of women, but to all women. In all our efforts, we must
send a clear message, to supporters and opponents
alike, that gender equality is a win-win situation which
elevates both genders and our societies and countries.
The equality of men and women is not an ideal, it
is a realistic goal. Therefore, we should all leave this
special session with an unswerving resolve to set and
implement effectively a collective agenda that, with
genuine commitment, will keep us on the Beijing path.

16

The Government of the Bahamas remains committed to
this goal.
The President: I give the floor to Her Excellency
Mrs. Cristina Muñoz, Minister for Women’s Affairs of
Paraguay.
Mrs. Muñoz (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for me to preside over the delegation of the
Republic of Paraguay — a pluralistic and integrated
delegation,
including
representatives
of
the
Government and of non-governmental organizations —
at this special session for the five-year follow-up and
review of the Beijing Conference. I had the same
privileged opportunity to head my delegation at that
important Conference.
It would be useful to take this opportunity to
reaffirm on behalf of the Government of National
Unity, presided over by Mr. Luis Ángel González
Macchi, and of the women of Paraguay, our
commitment to democracy. Paraguay is fighting
tenaciously to preserve, consolidate and strengthen its
institutional democracy, with the effective participation
of women — the guarantors of the process, which in
turn, is enriching the democratic development of the
international community.
With regard to gender equality, the efforts that we
are making to abide by our commitments made in
Beijing in implementing the Platform for Action have
resulted in the National Plan for equality of
opportunity for women, which is a key tool for
incorporating gender perspectives in public policies.
We are also committed to reforming the State,
with the objective of seeking greater efficiency in
public administration.
While opening up marketing opportunities for
many countries, the globalization of the economy has
had different and negative effects on women. The
reform and modernization of the State have become
necessary for many of our countries, and it is therefore
important to design effective policies to curb the
increase in social and gender inequality. These are
some of the issues that, in the light of the review of the
Platform for Action, have of necessity emerged in our
discussions, since poverty continues to be an
unresolved issue on our common agenda.
After the Fourth World Conference, the women of
Paraguay defined national priorities with a view to the
implementation of the Platform for Action, sharing

A/S-23/PV.8

responsibilities between the State and civil society. The
result of this initiative was the establishment of the
Tripartite Commission, made up of the presidency’s
Ministry for Women’s Affairs, the Paraguayan
women’s network — a group of women’s nongovernmental organizations — and the United Nations
Development Programme. Its goal is to fulfil the
commitments that Paraguay entered into at Beijing and
to follow up on achievements and obstacles.
Since the regional preparatory meeting, our
delegation has been working to support the Lima
Consensus in the firm belief that this special session of
the General Assembly will ratify all of the
commitments undertaken in Beijing and contribute new
initiatives that will enable us to continue building a
more equitable society.
Paraguay recognizes as fundamental the right to
life, as well as the protection of the human rights of
women, including sexual and reproductive rights.
We have made progress in legal reforms and in
ensuring greater equality of opportunity in education.
We are implementing the National Plan for equality of
opportunity, which covers most of the areas for action
in the Platform for Action. In December 1999,
Paraguay signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, which is currently
awaiting ratification by our National Congress.
The Ministry for Women’s Affairs, the governing
body for gender equality, participates as an active
member in the Council of Ministers, as well as in the
Economic and Financial Policy Council and the
Council responsible for social policy and for combating
poverty. It thus operates at the highest level of
government and brings a gender perspective to these
decision-making bodies.
The Government has established a Council with
responsibility for social policy and combating poverty,
in which the social cabinet, trade unions, rural
organizations and non-governmental organizations
participate. Here, policies and activities aimed at
creating a new model for development are developed in
order to reduce existing social gaps, the rural sector
being accorded priority.
An important step was the re-establishment of the
National Council for reproductive health, which
coordinates the Ministry of Public Health, where

policies in this regard are orchestrated and focused.
Furthermore, a National Commission to monitor health
and maternal mortality has been created, while special
out-patient programmes have been set up to arrange for
mobile buses to reach suburban areas and rural
settlements with the objective of continuing to reduce
maternal and infant mortality, since maternal mortality
is often linked to childbirth.
In the absence of the President, Mr. Ingólfsson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
It is important to note that the Constitution of
Paraguay clearly establishes, in article 61, that the
State recognizes the right of people to decide, freely
and responsibly, how many children to have and when
to have them, as well their right to receive, in
coordination with the relevant bodies, education,
scientific guidance and the relevant services in this
area, and that special programmes for reproductive and
maternal and infant health will be prepared for needy
people.
In the context of the National Plan for the
Prevention and Punishment of Violence against
Women, important measures have been taken to
eradicate this scourge, which is a violation of the
human rights of women. Among the legal reforms, we
would point to the ratification of the Inter-American
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and
Eradication of Violence Against Women, signed in
Belén do Para, Brazil, and the approval of new penal,
trial and labour codes. We recently adopted a law on
domestic violence, which establishes new centres for
victims of violence through public institutions and nongovernmental organizations.
We are implementing educational reform with a
strategic plan known as “Paraguay 2020: Meeting the
Educational Challenge”; a National Programme for
Bilingual Education; and the General Law on
Education, which seeks to establish the effective
equality of the sexes and the elimination of all types of
discrimination. PRIOME, an equal opportunity
programme for women in education, is a joint action of
the Women’s Bureau and the Ministry of Education and
is aimed at eliminating sexual stereotypes in the
educational process by reviewing curriculums, training
teachers and revising texts and supporting materials,
incorporating the gender perspective throughout. The
earliest results reflect an improvement in the rate of

17

A/S-23/PV.8

girls graduating in basic, secondary and higher
education and in school-attendance indicators.
The participation of Paraguayan women in
popular elections has been improved by the application
of a system of quotas in the lists of political parties, but
these remain insufficient. We are completing ambitious
research into women’s leadership in Paraguay that
reflects its quantitative and qualitative aspects. The
Women’s Bureau maintains an ongoing and dynamic
relationship with international bodies and institutions,
coordinating with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs a
permanent presence in international forums. It also
participates in executive commissions of important
regional and international organizations and receives
cooperation in the development of its programmes,
undertaken in transparency and efficiency.
The implementation of the Platform for Action
has been the supporting pillar of many of our actions.
Its launch was an important learning process for all
sectors involved, those of the State and of civil society
alike, and its results have benefited all Paraguayan
women.
In conclusion, we wish to point out that the
qualitative development of our societies requires a
greater investment of national and international
resources. What better investment can the international
community make than in the women of the world?
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency The Honourable Matthew Walter,
Minister for Community Development and Women’s
Affairs of Dominica.
Mr. Walter (Dominica): I bring greetings from
the Government and people of the Commonwealth of
Dominica.
I consider it an honour and privilege to be
permitted to address this special session of the General
Assembly, convened specifically to re-examine the
status of women as it relates to gender equality,
development and peace in the twenty-first century. As
Minister responsible for community development and
gender affairs in the Commonwealth of Dominica, I
take particular pleasure in being able to participate in
the work of this great assembly of persons dedicated to
the goal of achieving equity, justice and respect for
women all over the world.
Our meeting here to assess the progress made
towards the implementation of the 1995 Beijing

18

Declaration and Platform for Action is, in reality,
recognition that the effects of decades of
discrimination against and victimization of women
could not be rectified in five years. Given the very
intractable nature of the problems faced by women in
society and the myriad exacerbating factors, there
needs to be periodic review and constant focus on the
commitment made in Beijing. This meeting also
provides an opportunity to discuss and devise new
strategies to deal with the impact of the new challenges
and obstacles projected by globalization, trade
liberalization, onerous debt burdens and the continuous
decline in official development assistance.
Women and poverty is one of the critical issues
addressed by the Beijing Platform for Action. In the
Commonwealth of Dominica, as elsewhere, past
practices raised barriers to women’s equal participation
in the country’s economic benefits. The net result has
been to relegate women to the lowest rung of the
economic ladder. In an ameliorative effort, the
Government of Dominica, through its Women’s Bureau
and other agencies, has embarked on a programme
aimed at improving women’s access to economic
resources. For example, the Dominica Rural Enterprise
Project, funded by loans from the International Fund
for Agricultural Development and the Caribbean
Development Bank, directs loan funds to women
farmers and poor households headed by women in rural
areas. Further, increasing amounts of loan funds are
being made to women by such agencies as the Special
Project Assistance Team, the National Development
Foundation of Dominica and the Agriculture, Industry
and Development Bank with funds obtained from the
European Union. The Women’s Bureau has also been
addressing the problem of poverty through training for
income
generation,
setting
up
skills-training
programmes in targeted areas.
In the more formal educational setting, boys and
girls continue to have equal access to primary and
secondary education. The latest statistics indicate that
the number of girls attending institutions of secondary
education exceeds the number of boys and the same
holds true at the tertiary level, where our young
women, aggressively seeking available grant and loan
funds, are pursuing studies in a variety of disciplines.
Further, the Amendment to the Title by
Registration Act that became effective on 1 January
1999 is one step in redressing the imbalance in the
enjoyment of equal property rights by spouses, thus

A/S-23/PV.8

providing an incremental measure of economic power
and independence to women.
However, the negative impacts of globalization
and trade liberalization tend to increase poverty in
society, and among women in particular, seriously
hampering our efforts at narrowing the economic
gender gap. For instance, the economic well-being of
women in Dominica is seriously threatened by the
World Trade Organization ruling on bananas, which
has resulted in a loss of income to farming and rural
households, the sections of society least able to sustain
an income loss. The magnitude of the exacerbation of
the problem becomes apparent only when it is realized
that women-owned and operated farms constitute 21
per cent of the banana production base. Women are
further affected as spouses of male banana farmers.
We need to underscore the seriousness of the
problem and we appeal to the international community,
through this Assembly, to be mindful of the harm to
people’s lives and economic prospects that can result
from the actions of international bodies.
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
declares violence against women to be an obstacle to
the achievement of the objectives of equality,
development and peace and a manifestation of the
unequal power relations between men and women.
Accordingly, gender equality cannot be realized unless
and until there is an end to spousal abuse in all its
forms.
In dealing with this problem, the Commonwealth
of Dominica has adopted a two-pronged approach of
education and legislative action. There was a
recognized need to raise society’s consciousness and
awareness of the extent and harmful effects of violence
against women. Beginning in November 1997, the
Women’s Bureau and other women’s organizations
embarked on a one-year campaign denouncing violence
against women through such organized activities as a
march and rally, panel discussions, radio programmes
and a locally produced television drama series entitled
“Wake Up Call”.
In 1998 and 1999, the Women’s Bureau, in
collaboration with the Department of Legal Affairs,
conducted a series of three-month programmes of
community education sessions on women and the law
in eight districts of the country. Those sessions proved
to be learning experiences for all parties involved. The
programme organizers came away with an enhanced

view of the need for legislative action to protect the
rights of women in common-law relationships and for a
legal aid programme designed to assist women in the
enforcement of their rights.
In the area of legislation, the sexual offences act
of 1998 has substantially increased penalties and
sanctions for engaging in conduct proscribed by the
act. The age of consent has been raised from 14 to 16
years. The draft provisions of a domestic violence act
intended to deal with all forms of spousal and intrafamily abuse are currently under consideration and
intensive review.
The National Health Plan of the Commonwealth
of Dominica contains programmes specific to the
health needs of women and children, including a
programme intended to reduce the transmission of
HIV/AIDS from mother to child and an extensive
family planning programme.
For many decades women have participated
freely in the political life of our country. They have
made important contributions to our governmental and
political institutions at the highest levels, and we
expect them to continue to add their unique texture to
the cultural, political and economic fabric of our
country. We recognize that the task of removing the
remaining constraints to gender equality in Dominica is
far from complete, but as a nation we are committed to
ensuring that all citizens enjoy all the rights enshrined
in our Constitution.
We believe, however, that in this national effort
towards gender equality men must become more
engaged and involved in the formulation of policies
and the implementation of programmes geared to that
end. In essence, we believe that such an involvement
by men will help them acquire a more profound sense
of the disabilities under which women are forced to
operate in our society, and thus be better equipped to
champion women’s issues. It is on the basis of that
belief that the Ministry of Community Development
and Gender Affairs has effected a change in the
designation of the responsible agency from the Bureau
of Women’s Affairs to the Bureau of Gender Affairs, to
afford men and women parallel participation and
responsibility in achieving the goals of the agency, and
as a step in creating an enabling environment for the
implementation of gender mainstreaming.
As we strive to acquire a modicum of economic
benefits for our people, we must necessarily accept the

19

A/S-23/PV.8

validity of the proposition that sustainable development
cannot be realized without the full engagement and
complete empowerment of women. Achieving gender
equality and the empowerment of women is not only
the right thing to do; it is in our national socioeconomic interest.
The Acting President: I must appeal to speakers
to respect the seven-minute limit allocated for the
statement of each State.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Bĕla
Hejná, Deputy Minister for Labour and Social Affairs
of the Czech Republic.
Ms. Hejná (Czech Republic): I am very honoured
to take part in and contribute to this special session.
The Czech Republic also ranks among the countries
that have responded to the conclusions of the Beijing
Conference and have endeavoured ever since the
holding of the Conference to fulfil its objectives.
In the Czech Republic we are coming to the end
of a period of essential social and economic change
that has been necessary for the transformation of the
country from a communist regime into a free civil
society based upon democratic principles. Now that the
whole economic and social system has been
reorganized and new mechanisms have been
successfully implemented, we must turn our attention
to how those changes have an impact on the
enhancement of the quality of life. We must also be
mindful of the effect those changes have on the free
formation of structural relationships and institutions of
traditional civil society, the guaranteeing of the rights
of the individual and the implementation of civil
liberties.
Naturally, other related topics have become
public issues, such as observance of the principle of
civil justice, non-discrimination, the creation of new
opportunities and the enhancement of the guarantees
that are currently provided to citizens by their
Government. Those tendencies are being addressed in
governmental policy by means of strengthening the
formal prerequisites for the promotion of civil rights,
specifically through the process of finalizing internal
institutional mechanisms designed to promote human
rights and the process of strengthening of the principle
of civil justice by means of enhancing the quality of the
existing legal system. Both of these processes have a
direct impact upon the equality of men and women, or

20

the requirement to eliminate discrimination against
women.
The existing traditional human rights institutions,
which in the past in fact consisted of only the courts of
justice, have been recently complemented by the
Council of the Government of the Czech Republic on
Human Rights and the post of Governmental Trustee
for Human Rights, who at the same time acts as the
Council’s Chairman. In relation to the Government,
both the Council and the Trustee have an advisory and
initiative-taking status. Apart from governmental
institutions, other stakeholders such as nongovernmental organizations and the professional sector
have permanent representation in the Council.
These already well-functioning bodies have now
been strengthened by the office of the public human
rights protector, the ombudsman, whose task is to
monitor how, or whether, the public authorities observe
the human rights of individuals. The ombudsman also
monitors legislation aimed at ensuring civil protection.
His or her role is to help remedy any wrongdoing in
administrative procedure. The ombudsman usually acts
on the basis of suggestions and complaints received
from citizens, to whom he or she also gives basic
advice.
Increasing public awareness of the gender
equality principle and eliminating rigid ideas on the
roles of women and men in society is a task we face on
an ongoing basis. As we all know, this task is in itself
very difficult. Solving this problem in post-communist
countries became more complicated due to the fact that
the negative impact of forced female emancipation —
which began in the 1950s and resulted in almost 100
per cent female employment — still prevails.
For quite a long time women were compensated
for these conditions by the artificial protection,
artificial relief and benefits related to childcare. The
sudden curtailing of that protection might become a
socially sensitive issue, although it is a very costly
affair which leads employers to prefer male job
applicants. In our opinion, this seemingly deadlocked
situation might be tackled by implementing a
consistent policy of equal opportunities for both men
and women, including the principle of equal treatment.
A relatively new, and for the Czech public unusual,
aspect is the application of the principle of gender
equality, which promotes justice for both genders,

A/S-23/PV.8

unlike the principle of civil neutrality that has been
applied until now.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the key
importance of international cooperation in formulating
and promoting national policy for the sensitive area of
equality for men and women. Thanks to this
cooperation, and with the help of international legal
instruments and valid international commitments, the
Czech Republic has been quite successful in finding
and adopting the fundamental ideas of a policy which,
by its effect, we hope will bring members of both sexes
a solid guarantee of their equal development and the
opportunity to fulfil their vital aspirations.
The Acting President: I call on Ms. Maria
Serkedjieva, Deputy Minister of Justice of Bulgaria.
Ms. Serkedjieva (Bulgaria): It is a great honour
for me to be here today and to share with participants
such a significant moment in our consolidated efforts
towards gender equality and the advancement of
women.
My delegation aligned itself with the statement
presented by the Minister for Equality of Portugal,
made on behalf of the European Union. That is why I
would like to concentrate mainly on the latest
developments in Bulgaria in the areas of gender
equality, development and peace.
It has always been our understanding that the
rights of women should be placed within the broader
socio-economic and political perspective. In the fiveyear period after Beijing, the Republic of Bulgaria has
achieved considerable progress in the development of
civil society and the building of democratic
institutions. In this process the Bulgarian Government
perceives equality between women and men as a sine
qua non of democracy and recognizes that there can be
no genuine democracy without the achievement of
gender equality. Therefore, the Government, in
conjunction with civil society actors, concentrated its
efforts to achieve gender equality on certain parallel
actions in several spheres at the national and
international levels: accession to international legal
instruments concerning women’s rights, legislative
reforms, the adoption of gender-sensitive policies and
the elaboration of special programmes for vulnerable
groups of the population.
Bulgaria is a State party to the major international
instruments on human rights and attaches great

importance to the effective implementation of these
instruments. In this context, we consider the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women a basic instrument, both
in terms of eliminating discrimination against women
worldwide and in terms of promoting and protecting
women’s rights as human rights at the universal level.
We share the view that the Optional Protocol to the
Convention provides women not only with the
necessary legal tool for the protection and promotion of
their human rights, but also with concrete procedures
for translating these rights into reality.
It is my pleasure and honour to inform the
Assembly that two days ago, on Tuesday, 6 June, I
signed, on behalf of the Republic of Bulgaria, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. This is
an expression of our firm conviction that practical and
effective measures should be undertaken in order to
broaden the legal framework for the protection of the
rights set forth in the Convention. Bulgaria attaches
utmost importance to the documents adopted by the
Beijing Conference on Women. On this basis, in 1996,
the Council of Ministers adopted a National Action
Plan, aimed at achieving de facto equality in aspects of
public life.
In implementing the Beijing Platform for Action
the present Government has significantly increased the
participation of women in the decision-making process
and has integrated them into the higher levels of public
administration. Women make up more than 60 per cent
of the executive staff of the ministries and about 60 per
cent of the senior positions in the State administration
in Bulgaria. At the same time, effective ways and
means to also involve men in the process of eliminating
obstacles to equality by changing the prevailing power
structures and stereotypical gender roles are being
explored.
Bulgaria fully supports the basic principle that the
rights of women are, and have always been, an integral
part of human rights. In the Republic of Bulgaria the
principles of equality and non-discrimination are
constitutionally guaranteed, and all provisions of the
Constitution with regard to human rights are directly
applicable. In this context, I would like to stress a
specific provision of the Bulgarian Constitution which
stipulates that the provisions of the international
instruments ratified by the Republic of Bulgaria are an
integral part of the national legislation and shall have

21

A/S-23/PV.8

supremacy over national legislation, unless the latter
stipulates otherwise.
There are no limitations of rights based on
distinction between the sexes. Neither are there spheres
of activity reserved exclusively for either sex. Women
and men enjoy equal civil, political, social, economic
and cultural rights. The Penal, Civil and Family Codes,
as well as the Labour Code, guarantee the equality of
all persons before the law and their equal opportunity
to defend their rights in court in cases of the violation
of those rights.
However, the Government and civil society in our
country have always been sensitive to the specific
needs of women. An intergovernmental working group,
in close collaboration with women’s non-governmental
organizations, is in the process of drafting a law on
gender equality.
Specific provisions are included in national
legislation with respect to women. Let me provide two
examples. The Pension Law sets out a specific
retirement procedure for mothers who have many
children. The second example is that the Labour Code
provides for special rights for women employees
relevant to their potential or actual status as mothers,
including parental paid leave of up to two years and the
possibility for female employees with children up to
six years of age to work at home. In the spirit of
equality of rights and responsibilities in the family and
in raising children, the latter provisions are applicable
to both parents.
Vulnerable groups, particularly those likely to
experience multiple forms of discrimination, have
always been the object of special attention by the
Bulgarian Government. A good example is the
framework programme for the equal integration of
Roma in Bulgarian society, adopted by the Council of
Ministers in 1999, which was formulated with the
active participation of a number of Roma nongovernmental organizations. The programme includes a
special section on the Roma woman. The programme
pays special attention to equal participation by Roma
women in social and economic activities.
We are conscious of the fact that good legislative
solutions and practical measures are insufficient to
resolve the problems of the advancement of women
and gender equality. Those problems are global and
require concerted measures at the regional and
international levels. In this context, a task force

22

meeting was held on 2 June, under the auspices of the
first lady of the Republic of Bulgaria, entitled the
“Southeast European leadership initiative: a dialogue
for action”. That regional initiative was aimed at
outlining strategies to address problems and to
transform ideas into everyday action. Representatives
from Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Greece, Macedonia, Romania, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Bulgaria took part in that regional
meeting. Participants were determined to promote the
fulfilment of regional initiatives in the three working
areas of the Stability Pact for South-eastern Europe:
human rights and democratization, economy and
security. The measures that were outlined will focus on
the efforts of women leaders on the main problems
faced by women in the region: poverty, violence
against women, and participation in the decisionmaking process in all spheres of life. As a follow-up, a
second regional conference on women in the twentyfirst century will be held in November this year in
Macedonia.
The Bulgarian Government is also firmly
committed to participate further in international and
regional cooperation aimed at the prevention and
elimination of trafficking in women and forced
prostitution. Bulgaria is a participant in the nongovernmental La Strada programme for the prevention
of trafficking in women in Central and Eastern Europe.
Currently, a training programme for specialized police
officials dealing with the prevention of violence
against women and a campaign initiated by the
International Organization for Migration for the
prevention of trafficking in women and girls are being
implemented in Bulgaria.
We face the challenge of pursuing the translation
into action of the legal framework on gender equality
and the Beijing Platform for Action, although we are
conscious of the fact that this will be a long and
difficult process. In this connection, I am convinced
that the twenty-third special session will contribute to
our common efforts towards achieving gender equality.
I would like to assure the Assembly once again of
Bulgaria’s commitment to the full implementation of
the Beijing Platform for Action.
The Acting President: I next give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Enrique Candioti, Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs of Argentina.

A/S-23/PV.8

Mr. Candioti (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The issue of women and gender equality is now on the
international agenda and constitutes one of the major
mobilizing forces for the new millennium. This
important session is intended to strengthen and enhance
the advancement of women’s rights — precisely
because they are not yet fully respected. Humanity
owes all-encompassing recognition to women, and this
is obviously the time to provide it.
A priority of the new Argentine Government
under President Fernando de la Rúa is to strengthen the
human rights achievements made by the international
community over the past few decades; the basic treaties
in this sphere were incorporated into the Argentine
constitution in 1994. Among those treaties, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women has been a most
important benchmark for setting the highest standards
in our country, which reflects a genuine State policy for
all sectors of national life. Our signing, in February
2000, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
underscored Argentina’s determination to protect
women’s rights through the use of international
monitoring mechanisms.
In the regional framework of the Southern Cone
Common Market (MERCOSUR), important progress
has been made since 1998 with the establishment of the
Specialized Women’s Meeting, which was created to
formulate recommendations on women’s issues to
member countries, with the collaboration of regional
non-governmental organizations. Five years after
Beijing, we are here, accompanied by many members
of
Argentine
non-governmental
organizations
representing all interests and views within civil society,
to advocate the promotion and protection of women’s
rights.
The position of the Argentine Government, as
consistently stated in international forums, is inspired
by the values that are most precious to all human
beings: life, freedom and dignity. The premises of our
action in this respect include: protecting and defending
human life from conception to its natural end;
protecting the family as the nucleus of society;
recognizing the rights and duties of parents with
respect to the education of their children; and affirming
the basic responsibility of the State to build a society
that is ever more democratic, tolerant, humane and just.

Throughout the world there is violence against
women and girls, and there are those who profit from
it. Countries are now meeting at Vienna to formulate a
protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in
persons,
especially
women
and
children,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime.
Public policies in support of the family, which is
where the basic rights and values of society are
promoted and defended, are a priority for the Argentine
Government.
The promotion of women’s rights requires that
priority be given to education. Argentina’s federal
education law establishes that the State has a principal
responsibility to define the guidelines of educational
policy, including the implementation of real equal
opportunity for all inhabitants and the rejection of all
forms of discrimination, including on the basis of
gender, and the elimination of all kinds of
discriminatory stereotypes in teaching materials.
The dignity of the human person is strengthened
by the struggle against poverty, which affects women
specifically. This makes it necessary to guarantee them
access to credit and production structures, as well as to
ensure the shared responsibility of men in supporting
the family. Here I must note that my country recently
proposed legislation that creates a register of those who
fail to make support payments and establishes penalties
for such failure.
We also wish to mention a topic that is very dear
to the women of the world — adoption. While this
session has not considered it, Argentina deems it timely
to encourage such consideration, so that Governments,
with the participation of the community, can provide
information and facilitate procedures encouraging the
adoption, or the giving up for adoption, of a girl or boy.
Argentina promotes the shared responsibility of
women and men as a guarantee of full gender equality,
proceeding from a concept that ensures women’s
effective participation in society, aware of the
inequalities that still affect them. In this framework, we
have measures for positive action, such as the quota
law, which obliges political parties to include a
minimum of 30 per cent of women candidates in the
electoral lists. In this respect, we note with satisfaction,
as noted in the statistics of the Inter-Parliamentary
Union, that the presence of women in Argentine

23

A/S-23/PV.8

legislative bodies, both at the federal and provincial
levels, has significantly increased.
We also wish to note that the commitment to
guarantee the protection of women’s human rights
includes their sexual and reproductive rights, as is
reflected in the policies implemented by our authorities
in the form of measures to reduce maternal mortality,
to prevent adolescent pregnancy and to protect the
maternity and health of women, while ensuring the
inalienable right to free and responsible choice
regarding when and how many children they wish to
have and respect for life and their personal beliefs. All
of this is consistent with the values and premises that
inspire the position of the Argentine Government.
The National Council of Women, in coordination
with all the authorities and responsible organizations at
the national, provincial and municipal levels, has
drawn up guidelines for the Government action that go
beyond the outdated concepts of “policies for women”
and have made the subject of women an area of State
concern. The National Council will have, in addition to
the measures mentioned above, the following principal
objectives: to guarantee the effective fulfilment of
international treaties on human rights incorporated in
the Constitution; to formulate public policies, from a
gender perspective, that contribute to overcoming the
different forms of discrimination against women, and
that promote proper social conditions to guarantee the
effective exercise of their rights; to ensure full access
for women to comprehensive health care; to intensify
prevention, research and information programmes, and
to take effective initiatives to deal with diseases that
particularly threaten and affect them, such as AIDS,
cancer and malnutrition; to prevent and eradicate the
sexual and commercial exploitation of girls, boys and
adolescents; to train unemployed women to develop
non-traditional activities, under the emergency labour
programme and the technical and professional training
programme for women with low income; and to combat
violence against women and guarantee them access to
justice, in compliance with the Inter-American
Convention of Belem do Para on the punishment,
prevention and eradication of violence against women.
The increasing presence of women in the life of
the community and in political decisions will clearly be
the best reassurance against individual and collective
violence, against intolerance, sectarianism and so many
other abuses that have tarnished the history of
humankind.

24

Argentina decisively supports the Beijing
Platform for Action and pledges its best efforts so that
this special session will result in initiatives and
commitments that will reaffirm and ensure its
fulfilment.
Furthermore,
we
support
proper
coordination of the different organizations of the
United Nations system involved in the topic of gender,
which will lead to great efficiency and effectiveness of
international action.
The slogan of our Assembly, by highlighting the
equation “equality-development-peace”, calls on all of
us to contribute to the building of a world free of the
scourges of backwardness and war, a world that will
ensure a life of freedom, security, solidarity and justice
for women and for all human beings.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Fawzi Bin Abdul Majeed Shobokshi,
Chairman of the delegation of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia)(spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I wish to convey, through you, sir, my
sincere congratulations to the President of this special
session. Saudi Arabia looks forward to a successful
outcome of the session. The international community
aspires to advance the status of women, in keeping
with their positive and pristine nature and the role that
God has created for them, without compromising their
dignity or their rights, in accordance with God’s laws.
Today we are meeting for a comprehensive
review and assessment of the Beijing Platform for
Action in order to gauge and reinforce its strengths and
to measure its shortcomings, taking into account each
society’s own characteristics, values and cultural
legacies, which are embedded in its conscience over
succeeding generations. Nevertheless, we realize that
there are universal values that should prevail in all our
diverse societies, regardless of their cultural heritage.
Because these values are in keeping with God-given
sound judgement, we mean them to be the values of
right, justice and equality, without discrimination on
the basis of race, color or creed.
God the Almighty honoured Holy Mecca, which
was made his age-old abode and the seat of revelation.
The Islamic message was revealed by God to the
Prophet — May Peace be upon Him — who delivered
the message, fulfilled the ambition and taught the
Muslim nation its concepts, values, laws and
principles, foremost of which are the dignity and rights
of man.

A/S-23/PV.8

God blessed Saudi Arabia by making its leaders
custodians of the two holy shrines, trustees of the
Islamic holy sites and advocates of justice and
righteousness, so Saudi Arabia embraced the Holy
Koran as a Constitution, the precepts of the Prophet —
Peace be upon Him — as a way of life and the Islamic
precepts and religious values as a principle. Islam
granted women undiminished rights.
In the Koran, God said: “And women shall have
rights similar to the rights against them,” (The Holy
Koran, II, 228). The prophet — May praise be upon
him — said: Verily women are the sisters of men.
There is balance with regard to women in Islam that
preserves their inheritance, education, ownership rights
and dignity while stressing their duty to demonstrate
their virtue and to protect society, the main
responsibility being to build happy families, which
form the nucleus of society, without depriving them of
their physical and psychological attributes.
We believe that a family based on legal marriage
between a man and a woman is the most important
foundation for society. Men and women are partners in
all fields of life, on the basis of equality and the values
that preserve their dignity. Proceeding from this
premise, Saudi Arabia attaches great importance to
woman because of her essential role in building the
family.
We have developed plans providing women with
the opportunity for advancement, economically,
educationally and socially. My Government attaches
great importance to social, educational and cultural
policies aimed at achieving advanced human
development for women so as to enable them to
participate effectively with men in all areas of life and
to provide them with the opportunity for education in
science and the humanities at all levels.
Ninety-five per cent of girls are educated; the
percentage is the same as that for boys. The
Government provides scholarships and housing for
student girls, in keeping with their essential
requirements. The sums spent on education constitutes
about one quarter of the budget of the State — it is one
of the highest percentages worldwide and represents 9
per cent of our gross national product. Women have the
opportunity to gain access to jobs in keeping with their
aptitudes and the preservation of their dignity. They
work in all sectors of the government and participate in
cultural, educational, medical, nursing and social work,

as well as in administrative and academic leadership.
In order to enable women to assume their
responsibilities in society or within the family and to
increase their opportunities for employment, the State
is seeking to create and open up job opportunities for
women. In this respect, we have introduced part-time
jobs at full salaries for women in certain fields.
Together with these efforts to ensure a decent life
for women, we also attach great importance to medical
and social care for women and girls. Such programmes
take place in both rural and urban areas within the
framework of my country’s plans to implement the
principle of health care for all as a national strategy
and to ensure and support the continuation of our social
development, which exceeds by far that of many other
countries of the world. Social security programmes
also ensure that women can lead decent lives in the
event that they lose the head of the household or
become disabled.
Saudi women have complete freedom to own, sell
and purchase shares and stocks and have access to
credit, through concessional loans, from funds created
by the Government. These interest-free, 25-year soft
loans enable them to start their own businesses or to
own property. This policy is in accordance with the
Islamic shariah, which grants women legal rights from
birth, as well as independent financial status and the
enjoyment of all rights, including the right to inherit
and to obtain a divorce in the event that married life
becomes unbearable, as well as to custody and alimony.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has reaffirmed its
opposition to discrimination by acceding to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination. In Saudi Arabia, we
are eager for women to enjoy all their rights and fulfil
all their duties, including the right to education and
work and protection from poverty. In addition, the
State protects the freedom of all in accordance with the
Islamic shariah and Islamic practices and laws,
provided they do not contravene general order and
decency.
In the context of our interest in women’s issues,
the Consultative Council has recently discussed the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, adopting it on 7 May
2000 during regular session number 71.
We live in a time of interdependent and
interrelated interests and benefits. Humanity is looking

25

A/S-23/PV.8

forward to a century in which constructive cooperation,
human brotherhood and mutual respect and equality
will prevail. It behoves us to take account of and
implement
all
international
conventions
and
instruments while maintaining full respect for national
sovereignty and the national, religious, cultural and
historical characteristics of individual societies. At a
time when crises, conflicts and wars are proliferating
and the number of victims, primarily women and
children, is becoming harder to count, we must adhere
to noble humanitarian and religious values in order to
transcend the domination of man over his brother and
in order to rid ourselves of the wrong concepts that led
to the commercial exploitation of women, which in
turn led to the disintegration of the family and society
as a whole.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Li Hyong Chol, Chairman of the
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
Mr. Li Hyong Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Mr. Gurirab on his election as President of
the twenty-third special session of The General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”.
My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
Secretariat to ensure the success of this special session.
Since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, considerable achievements have
been made through active endeavours to ensure the
advancement of women. In this regard, the report of the
Secretary-General
as
contained
in
document
E/CN.6/2000/PC/2 deserves attention. As the report
states, this special session should give priority to
action-oriented measures to further achieve the goals of
the 12 critical areas of concern which are spelt out in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.
My delegation is proud of the fact that, in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, women’s
issues are given the utmost priority in social progress
and that a satisfactory solution to that effect has been
made through relevant legislation and policy measures.
The enactment of the law on gender equality,
proclaimed in 1947, was a historic event that brought
about fundamental change by eliminating all forms of
discrimination against women, which had been a root
cause of all the misfortunes and sufferings of women in

26

olden times. Having a firm legal basis through the
promulgation of this law, the equal rights of women
have been further guaranteed through the state
measures and social policies that have been taken in
conformity with the benevolent policy introduced by
the great leader President Kim Il Sung and carried on
by the great General Kim Jong Il.
The socialist Constitution and family law of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are also
important legislative measures that lay out in greater
detail the articles of previous laws so that women,
having equal rights with men, can freely participate in
activities in the political, social and economic fields.
Today in my country, there are a significant
number of women deputies to the Supreme People’s
Assembly and female army officers, scientists and
managers of enterprises and farms. They are playing an
important role in politics, the military, the economy
and other spheres and are leading worthwhile lives
with social respect and affection. In addition, women
of my country enjoy full paid maternity leave of more
than 150 days and those who have mothered many
children are provided with additional benefits from the
State. Indeed, it is praiseworthy that the women of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
demonstrating their brilliant skills in state politics,
social life and economic construction at such an
important historical juncture as today, when the army
first policy of the great General Kim Jong Il, Chairman
of the National Defense Commission of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, has been successfully
launched, thereby expediting progress towards building
a powerful nation displaying its national dignity
throughout the world.
My delegation attaches particular importance to
the solution of the issue of violence against women, to
which international attention has been drawn in recent
years. In this regard, we are greatly concerned by the
severe violence against vulnerable women arising from
the negative impact of globalization, armed conflicts,
political pressure and economic sanctions.
In the forums of the United Nations, such as the
Conferences on women, it has been urged that greater
attention be paid to the protection of women’s rights,
and in particular to ending violence against women.
However, violence against women, to our regret, has
not been eliminated and incidents of more serious
concern have sometimes been witnessed. This is, above

A/S-23/PV.8

all, attributable to the political perception that issues
concerning women may be regarded as a means for
achieving unjustifiable objectives.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Jacques Louis Boisson, Chairman
of the delegation of Monaco.

The world is well aware of Japan’s past crime of
forcing many Asian and European women, including
over 200,000 Korean women and girls, into serving the
Japanese army as sex slaves. It was a great crime
against humanity, with the intentional involvement of
the Japanese Government and military authorities and
has thus has aroused the strong condemnation of the
international community.

Mr. Boisson (Monaco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, on behalf of the Government of the Principality,
I congratulate Mr. Gurirab on his election to the
presidency of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly. In its capacity as Vice-President
and as a member of the Bureau, the Principality of
Monaco and its delegation are ready to support him
unreservedly and to help him succeed in his lofty
mission.

Finding the proper solution to the issue of
“comfort women” is one of the major international
issues in the process of seeking a comprehensive
settlement of women’s issues and an apology and
compensation are prerequisites to this end. Stubborn
opposition to apologizing and to providing
compensation for past crimes and a refusal to seek a
solution should be condemned internationally.
Today, in Japan, incidents of violence against and
insults to resident Korean women and girls, for the
simple reason that they are Koreans and wear Korean
national clothes, have been observed time and again.
The skirts of resident Korean women and girls are torn
in broad daylight on the streets. Such violence against
women causes serious concern. Similarly, all forms of
violence against Korean women perpetrated by United
States soldiers in South Korea, including rape, murder,
insults and so on, should be stopped at once. Unless
such issues are fully resolved, international efforts to
denounce and prevent violence against women,
including sexual slavery in armed conflict, can never
be effective.
My delegation is of the view that there should be
no exception in criminalizing any kind of violence
against women and that those responsible should
accordingly be brought to justice. The current special
session should pay particular attention to ensuring
moral and material compensation to the victims of
immeasurable insults and sexual violence in the past.
My delegation reaffirms that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will continue to advance
with a firm policy of promoting the well-being and
privilege of women and that it will fully implement the
commitments of the Fourth World Conference on
Women. In doing so, it will make its contribution to the
efforts of the international community to put an end to
all forms of inequalities and injustices against women.

The picture one might draw of women in the year
2000 is quite different from that drawn five years ago
at Beijing and still more so from anything that might
have been imagined at the first World Conference on
Women held in Mexico City in July 1975.
Does this mean that the objectives set — all the
objectives — have been achieved? Certainly not. While
progress has been remarkable, serious obstacles to
further progress remain. Women too often must still
confront
poverty,
powerful
traditional
and
environmental constraints, difficulties of access to
education and training and thus to the political and
economic power through which societies change and
define their evolution.
The authorities of Monaco, aware of these
difficulties, have taken legislative, economic and social
measures to strengthen the recognition of the rights of
women living and working in Monaco. At the
international level, they have encouraged humanitarian
associations, particularly through financial assistance,
to work to improve the living conditions of
disadvantaged women and girls in the countries of the
South.
Our national report broadly sets forth the
initiatives that have been undertaken. I wish to mention
some that appear to be significant and strongly to
reiterate our commitment to the principles and
recommendations that the international community
adopted five years ago and which it is preparing to
confirm on the basis of its solid and fruitful experience.
A significant date in the political life of Monaco
was certainly 17 December 1962, when the present
Constitution was proclaimed. Article 53 of this
Constitution accorded to women, upon reaching legal
age, the right to vote and to be elected to the

27

A/S-23/PV.8

Communal Council
Monaco’s Parliament.

and

the

National

Council,

The possibility thus offered to women to accede
to political power would bring with it a profound
evolution in attitudes and lifestyles for the entire
population. This evolution continues. Recently, the
National Council proposed a resolution, which was
unanimously adopted by the Parliament, whereby the
Government of the Principality is asked to modify
some of the provisions of the civil code regarding
family law, thus supporting the social movement.
The role of education and professional training
has been and continues to be decisive. They allow
women to participate in greater numbers with
competence and authority at the decision-making level
of Government. The educational policy, free
compulsory primary education, non-discriminatory
access to general and professional secondary education
and professional training and the facilitation of
university education have borne fruit. A fairer
distribution of responsibilities among men and women
exists today at the heart of Monegasque society.
Today many women occupy important political
positions. The Mayor of Monaco is a woman. A quarter
of the members of the Communal Council and the
National Council are women. At the administrative
level, we are happy to say that such important
departments as those of the budget and treasury,
national education, youth and sports, health and social
welfare, economic growth and housing today are
headed very ably by women. Two women are advisers
in the Cabinet of Ministers of State of the head of
Government. Many hold key positions in the three
ministerial departments. They represent 52 per cent of
the overall staff of the civil service, 35 per cent of
whom are directors or heads of services. Therefore,
they are closely linked, on a daily basis, to the drafting
and implementation of governmental policies.
Women also play a preponderant role in the
framework of civil society, and particularly in
charitable institutions. They are also very active in the
private sector. They hold 46 per cent of service-sector
positions. They are also the majority in trade, financial
activities, health and social welfare.
With regard to employment, men and women
have the same rights. They receive identical pay.
Women, nonetheless, benefit from special protective
measures; certain dangerous forms of employment are

28

prohibited for women. Aside from pre- and post-natal
leave, the law allows mothers to suspend their work
contract in order to raise a child, and they are given
priority when it comes to re-employment. Those who
wish to continue working have childcare services
available to them. Financial aid can be given to single
mothers or to those who wish to dedicate themselves
exclusively to caring for their families.
In addition to these measures, we are happy to
note that there is a new mentality in Monaco that
should lead to greater balance between men and
women, based upon real equality, mutual respect and a
recognition of the rights and capacities of each
individual. The Government of Monaco is trying to
contribute regularly and substantially to improving the
conditions of disadvantaged women and girls and those
living in extreme hardship. Besides annual payments in
the form of voluntary contributions to various United
Nations programmes, that assistance also takes the
form of assistance to non-governmental organizations
with headquarters in Monaco, such as the World
Association of Friends of Children (AMADE), Monaco
Aid and Support and Mission Childhood.
Among the most exemplary achievements with
which many women are associated, are shelters to
assist street girls avoid the poverty, delinquency, drugs
and prostitution that threaten them; children’s and
mothers’ protection centres; re-education and
reintegration centres for disabled women; professional
training workshops for girls; primary schooling
exclusively for girls; and maternity hospitals and a sex
education centre.
Medical initiatives also deserve to be highlighted,
such as assistance to women with leprosy or AIDS in
many African regions, training in public health and the
struggle against nutritional blindness in children. In the
latter case, African mothers receive retinol and vitamin
A, or learn to grow the vitamin-rich vegetables vital to
preventing this disease. This international programme,
called Tears Without Eyes, is carried out with AMADE
and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), as
is the “School of the four winds”, an institute from
which many girl children benefit , that is adapted to the
way of life and work of street children.
In conclusion, we must recognize, unfortunately,
that in spite of the efforts made, equality between men
and women is still far from being achieved. By
recalling the limitations that a rapid improvement in a

A/S-23/PV.8

situation often encounters, this session provides the
opportunity to reaffirm goals and made them really
possible.
My country’s authorities and many of my
compatriots are fully convinced that it is vital to pursue
our efforts and to accelerate the transformation of
societies through the ever-more effective collaboration
of women so that the common objectives we set for
ourselves five years ago will be attained as soon as
possible. We hope that greater harmony will come
about within humankind, between men and women,
and will contribute to establishing more harmonious
balance in relations between nations.
The Declaration adopted in Luxembourg by the
International Organization of La Francophonie, which
has been distributed as an official document, represents
a guide and a precious source of inspiration. We look
forward to Minister Alimata Salambéré’s speaking on
Friday on behalf of the Secretary-General of La
Francophonie, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
The Acting President: I call on Ms. Eka
Ebralidze, representative of Georgia.
Ms. Ebralidze (Georgia): It is my great pleasure
to address this session and report on the efforts of the
Government of Georgia to promote gender equality and
the advancement of women since the Fourth World
Conference, in Beijing.
Georgia gained independence in 1991 and has
spent the last decade overcoming internal conflicts and
economic and financial problems. It remains a country
in transition to a democratic society. In 1995 Georgia
adopted a Constitution, desired by the Georgian people
to establish a democratic social order, market economy
and law-based State. From an official point of view, the
prerequisites for women and men are the same in all
essential respects in Georgia.
In addition to passing new, gender-neutral
legislation, the Government of Georgia has taken a
number of steps specifically directed at promoting
gender equality and the advancement of women.
On 22 September 1994, Georgia joined the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. In 1995, the Georgian
delegation participated in the Fourth World Conference
on Women and signed the Beijing Platform for Action.
On 20 February 1998, the President of Georgia
established the State Commission on the elaboration of

State policy for women’s advancement. In June 1998,
the President of Georgia approved a National Plan of
Action for improving the condition of women. A joint
project on women in development sponsored by the
Government of Georgia and the United Nations
Development Programme has been operating in
Georgia since 1997.
With regard to the critical areas of concern of the
Beijing Platform for Action, Georgia’s priorities are the
related problems of poverty and internal conflict. Two
hundred fifty thousand internally displaced persons
from the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are
currently living in temporary accommodation
throughout Georgia. Among them are 150,000 women
and children. The health of those women and children
is at serious risk, and the Government has made health
assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons
a top priority.
Based on recommendations made by the twentyfirst session of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, held in August 1999,
the President of Georgia issued a decree on measures to
strengthen the protection of women’s rights in Georgia.
That decree obliges different ministries to work
towards eliminating direct and indirect discrimination
against women, carry out gender analyses of Georgian
legislation and textbooks, ensure women’s involvement
in negotiating resolutions to the conflicts in South
Ossetia and Abkhazia and develop special programmes
aimed at helping refugees and internally displaced
persons.
The Commission on the advancement of women
has developed, and the President has approved, a
National Plan to combat the various forms of violence
against women, including domestic violence, violence
in the workplace, ethnic violence directed against
women and ecological violence affecting women and
children.
The Government has also considered establishing
a department of women’s issues and creating gender
units within governmental structures. Unfortunately,
progress has not been made on these initiatives due to
current budgetary constraints.
My Government’s overall policy objective is to
develop a society in which women and men have the
same rights and opportunities. As I have just described,
some positive steps have been taken with regard to
dividing and redistributing power between men and

29

A/S-23/PV.8

women, but the reality of women’s low rate of
participation in political and economic life shows that
women’s roles and participation in the decision-making
process is not satisfactory.
In the executive branch of Government there are
currently 2 female ministers out of a total of 19, the
Ministers for ecology and culture. Women hold a small
but growing percentage of other executive branch
positions, such as deputy ministers and diplomats.
In the legislative branch, 1,349 women became
members of local authorities in the 1998 local
elections, the first local elections held in independent
Georgia. That number represents only 12.5 per cent of
the total. Few women hold high positions in local
government.
In the parliamentary elections held in 1999, 17
women were elected out of a total of 235 members of
Parliament, representing 7.2 per cent of the total. Two
women members of Parliament were elected
chairpersons of parliamentary committees, namely, the
committee on foreign affairs and the committee on
human rights.
Serious reform of the judiciary has been carried
out in Georgia only during the past two years. Under
the new qualification system, 40 per cent of newly
appointed judges are women. Twelve new Supreme
Court judges were elected by the Parliament in June
1999, six of whom — 50 per cent — were women.
We believe that it is vital for our society to rectify
these imbalances, in both the public and private
sectors, so as to take advantage of the expertise and
experience of women. This forum provides a valuable
opportunity to coordinate with, and to learn from, the
experiences of other Governments that have faced this
challenge.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Mrs. Teresa Efua Asangono, Minister
for Women’s Integration and Social Affairs of
Equatorial Guinea.
Mrs. Asangono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, allow me at the outset to extend
to the President our warm congratulations on his
illustrious election.
I am grateful for the opportunity that has been
given to me at this forum to express the warm greetings

30

of the nation of Equatorial Guinea and of its President,
Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, to the peoples
of all the countries of the world represented here, and
in particular to the people of the United States of
America, who have received us with such kindness.
I am also grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this special session of the General
Assembly to make our contribution to the consideration
of a topic of vital importance, “Women 2000: gender
equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”. We commend the United Nations on its
initiative to convene almost all of the countries of the
world to reflect upon global policies on gender equality
after the holding of the Fourth World Conference on
Women in Beijing. We would like to express our
appreciation to the Preparatory Committee for the
excellent work it has done on its report.
The history of discrimination against and social
exclusion of women is a long one. The problem is more
structural than situational in nature, more global than
local and more general than specific. That does not
mean that its causes are the same in all of our
countries.
We have listened to the various very interesting
statements made here. In our country we have noticed
that the problem of women in society has a great deal
to do with increased social stratification by gender and
local patrilineal societies. From that perspective we can
say that institutionalized discrimination does not exist
in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. What does exist
is attitudinal discrimination. Consequently, and
independently from the legislative action of the State, a
new form and method of socialization of girls and boys
is currently under way.
Communications media are informing and
forming society. Schools and families, as the main
agents of socialization, have assumed roles and
behaviours to eliminate the obstacles on the path of full
equality. It is indeed worth noting that the enjoyment of
equal human rights by men and women is a principle
that was accepted by 171 countries at the World
Conference on Human Rights held in June 1993.
In this framework, the State policies of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea have as their objectives
equal access for women to basic social services,
including education and health; equal opportunities to
participate in political and economic decision-making;
equal pay for equal work; equal protection under the

A/S-23/PV.8

law; the elimination of discrimination on the basis of
gender; the elimination of violence against women; and
equal rights in every area of public life. Nevertheless,
the efforts that my country’s Government has
undertaken will be insufficient if they are not
accompanied by concrete measures at the national and
international levels.
The lower enrolment of women in secondary
education is the result of a high dropout rate, due in
turn to a high frequency of early marriage. Other
factors that have kept women in poverty are the lack of
an
international
framework
for
development
cooperation and the weakness of the non-profit
volunteer sector.
But with the aim of bringing about structural
reform, equitable social development and fair
economic growth, the Government adopted a mediumterm economic strategy for 1997 to 2001 at a national
economic conference held at Bata from 8 to 13
September 1997. The purpose of that conference was to
enhance good governance and administration and to
allocate resources to improve the quality of life for our
people on a fair and lasting basis.
Similarly, my Government has held a conference
on rural development and food security. The strategic
guidelines adopted at that conference encompass
various recommendations of the 1994 Cairo
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development and of the 1995 Beijing Conference as
they relate to access to and use of high-quality
reproductive health services by all women of
Equatorial Guinea, to greater awareness by policymakers, and to promoting gender issues with a view to
reducing the disparities between men and women.

credit, natural resources and relevant technology. The
access of women to decision-making circles is reflected
by the significant presence of Equatorial Guinea
women in Government, parliament and the supreme
court, as well as in high public-order and foreign
diplomatic posts.
Yet despite these efforts, women continue to face
inequality. My Government recently adopted law
6/1999 of 6 December 1999, which amended some
provisions of law 2/1999 governing national
employment policies, and which set aside for women
15 per cent of overall jobs in businesses in Equatorial
Guinea.
Globalization requires national awareness of the
problems and difficulties faced by all human beings:
men and women, boys and girls, young and old,
African, Asian and European. Globalization must have
no winners or losers. We are convinced that unifying
criteria and coordinating the action of Governments,
international organizations and the non-profit volunteer
sector, including both public and private entities, will
enable us to overcome the problems that affect nearly
all women in the world.
We thank the organizers of this special session for
their kind invitation, and for the help and facilities they
have made available.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

Issues relating to women and development are a
priority for the Government of Equatorial Guinea. To
respond to the needs of women, we have established a
Ministry of Women’s Integration and Social Affairs.
The ministry’s overall focus includes: promoting
human development through participation and the
promotion of equality; organization, administration,
coordination and implementation of policies, plans,
programmes and activities for the advancement of
women and women’s rights; implementation of a
gender strategy including the elimination of all forms
of discrimination against women and full and fair
access to economic resources, including the right to
inheritance, the ownership of land and other property,

31
