S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5736th meeting
Wednesday, 29 August 2007, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Congo)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Christian
Mrs. Adiwoso Asmady
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Al-Qahtani
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-49288 (E)

*0749288*

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.40 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all of the speakers, as I indicated at the
morning session, that they are requested to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to efficiently carry out its work.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber and to circulate the longer
written text.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Norway has persistently
supported President Mahmoud Abbas in his efforts to
foster democracy, stability and peace in the Palestinian
territory. Norway supported his decision to form a
national unity government, which was meant to break a
dangerous impasse and prepare the ground for renewed
negotiations with Israel.
We also supported his decision under extremely
difficult conditions to declare a state of emergency and
appoint a new Government led by Prime Minister
Salaam Fayyad. The new Government is committed to
the political platform of President Abbas, which
reflects the Quartet principles. The platform supports
peaceful negotiations as the only viable means to
achieving a Palestinian State, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel. The new Government
has enabled the resumption of political dialogue with
Israel and normal relations with the international donor
community.
Norway welcomes the willingness of Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas to broach
difficult and substantial issues. We urge both leaders to
demonstrate leadership and courage in order to bring
lasting peace to both their peoples. We — the
international community — must support their efforts.
At the same time, we should also support Prime
Minister Fayyad’s efforts to normalize the situation on
the ground and to improve living conditions for
ordinary Palestinians. This must go hand in hand with
the political dialogue with Israel.
Norway believes that, in the long term,
comprehensive and lasting peace cannot be achieved
through isolating a major popular movement.
Palestinian national reconciliation is essential to
achieving political stability and to healing divisions.

2

Regardless of how such reconciliation efforts develop,
all legitimate structures under President Abbas should
be re-established and strengthened. All parallel and
illegitimate structures should be dissolved.
The Government of Prime Minister Fayyad faces
serious challenges, particularly in the security sector.
We condemn rocket attacks on Israel. We reiterate our
demand that such attacks must be halted. The
Palestinian economy has been crippled by years of
conflict and by the Israeli regime of checkpoints and
closures. The humanitarian situation remains very
difficult, especially for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Isolated and closed off from the outside world, the
Gaza Strip could eventually become entirely dependent
on foreign aid. Such isolation and destitution will only
provide fertile breeding-ground for more extremists.
We welcome the decision of the Government of
Israel to transfer withheld Palestinian taxes and
revenues, and we urge the Government to continue
such transfers on a regular basis. It is also essential that
Israel ease restrictions on the movement of persons and
on the transfer of goods, and that Israel implements the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access. Israel
should also take effective measures to halt settlement
expansion. Such steps are necessary to build
confidence, which, in turn, will facilitate the peace
process.
Norway has long called for a regional approach to
the peace process. We need broad engagement of
countries in the region to follow multiple tracks and to
address all issues. We therefore support the
determination of the Arab League to revitalize its peace
initiative. The Arab-Israeli peace process needs support
and engagement on the part of its Arab neighbours. We
welcome the announcement by the President of the
United States to hold, in November of this year, an
international meeting in support of the two-State
solution. A strong commitment by the United States is
crucial for further progress.
The international community should foster
positive developments on the ground in order to
support the political dialogue. Norway, in its capacity
as Chair of the donor forum — the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee (AHLC) for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestine— has therefore
invited AHLC members to meet at the ministerial level
here, at the United Nations in New York on
24 September. The September meeting should send a

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

strong signal to President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad that the international community is committed
to cooperating with and assisting the Palestinian
Authority. The main purpose of the AHLC meeting is
to prepare and set the stage for a broad-based
international pledging conference in December. The
meeting will also provide an opportunity for close
cooperation and coordination between the Quartet and
the AHLC.
Three major international meetings are planned
this autumn to discuss the Arab-Israeli conflict. There
is a chance for progress and results. Spoilers should not
get the upper hand again, and diminish the chance of
stability and peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Security
Council this month. I would like to thank and
commend your predecessor for his prudent
management of work in the Council last month. I
would also like to thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator, Mr. Michael Williams, for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts.
Jordan aligns itself with the statements by Yemen,
our fraternal country, on behalf of the Arab Group, by
Pakistan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and by Cuba on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
Today’s meeting is special for two reasons. First,
it anticipates the atmosphere of high-level diplomatic
activity on the margins of the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly, and secondly, we view it as part
of the international momentum generated through the
Arab Peace Initiative and the initiative of the President
of the United States, George Bush, for convening an
international conference on peace in the Middle East.
This meeting thus is a unique opportunity to call upon
the international community to intensify its efforts to
reactivate the peace process and put it back on the right
track.
As we try to establish security and peace
worldwide, we should not lose sight of the fact that the
Palestinian question remains at the heart of the Middle
East conflict. Without a just solution of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, the region would inevitably revert

07-49288

to violence and extremism that would have grave
repercussions in the region and elsewhere. Thus, a fair,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region remains
our single option.
That option has to be seen in the context of a
comprehensive conceptual solution that directly tackles
the fundamental final status issues; it should not be
limited to dealing with matters of the daily running of
the occupied territories. It must have a predetermined
and acceptable timetable that can be adhered to,
conforms to resolutions of international legitimacy and
leads to the creation of an independent, viable and
geographically contiguous State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The Arab Peace Initiative is an historic
opportunity to bring about a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of this conflict. It provides a good
basis for the peace we are striving for. This initiative
has established a balanced approach, with concrete
ideas and arguments that can be followed through, and
it proves beyond doubt the total Arab commitment to
reaching a settlement, putting an end to conflict,
providing collective security guarantees for all
countries in the region, including Israel, and to leading
to the establishment of the State of Palestine.
International parties have a pivotal role in
moving the peace process forward, and that entails a
political and moral responsibility to help settle the
conflict in proportion to their international standing
and ability to influence international policy. In Jordan,
we expect these parties to be a strategic driving force
that shapes events, and we expect them to take
advantage of the historic opportunity provided by the
forthcoming international conference.
In this regard, we would like to reiterate our
support for the initiative of United States President
George Bush for the holding an international peace
conference. We consider it a step in the right direction.
We would also like to welcome the positive elements
of this initiative, looking into ways to re-launch the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process in accordance with
the two-State formula and reaching an agreement on
final status issues, including those of Jerusalem and the
refugees. In the meantime, we emphasize the
importance of a work plan and a clear timetable to
guarantee that this meeting can be a success and have
the potential to launch the political process with clearly
defined directions and outcomes.

3

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

We also stress the importance of the role of the
Quartet in the coming stage, and we attach special
importance to the meeting it will hold with the Arab
Group on the margins of the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly. Jordan takes this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair as the
Quartet’s Special Envoy. The Jordanian Government is
pleased to express its readiness to work with him in
close coordination and cooperation.
Jordan is rather optimistic about the outcome of
recent meetings between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert. Meanwhile, assent and complete
support of Palestinian legitimacy as embodied by the
Palestinian Authority and its President, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas. We urge the international community to give all
necessary aid to President Abbas and the Palestinian
people in their efforts to create a democratic political
system, strengthen the Palestinian national institutions
and make them responsible and transparent, including
security institutions, in order to develop good
governance so as to meet the aspirations and needs of
the Palestinian people and maintain their unity. We also
hope that all Palestinian factions will put their house in
order and unite, giving priority to the common interests
of the Palestinian people.
The link between economy and security is
irrefutable; it is an integrated circle. In Jordan, we
harbour some concern about the lack of minimum
social and economic conditions necessary for a
reasonable degree of security, be it in the West Bank or
Gaza. As part of the efforts made by Jordan to help
improve the living conditions of the Palestinian people,
our Government has provided emergency aid, and in
the last few days has sent convoys with medicine to
Gaza and Jerusalem hospitals, where there is a great
shortage of basic drugs and medical supplies.
In particular, we are concerned with the
humanitarian situation of the people in Gaza. We call
upon the international community to participate by
offering support for the Palestinian Authority, giving
humanitarian aid to all Palestinians, helping to improve
their living conditions, reviving their economy, helping
to create an environment favourable for investment,
and promoting a free and flourishing economy.
Evidently, such measures are no alternative to a
political process with real peace negotiations leading to
definite political outcomes.

4

As we approach the convening of an international
conference on peace in the Middle East, with hope
generated by the Arab Initiative, we feel the need to
generate mutual confidence between the parties to the
conflict. We call upon the Israeli Government to lift the
blockade on the Palestinian people, transfer Palestinian
taxes and customs duty, release more Palestinian
prisoners and put an end to all practices violating the
rights of the Palestinian people, putting an end,
furthermore, to all forms of occupation, especially
through restriction of movement, security closures and
all colonization activity.
Moreover, the Jordanian Government reaffirms
its position regarding the illegality of the separation
wall, demolition activities, and excavations threatening
sacred areas.
The Middle East is moving towards a critical
moment. We should all seize this hour of momentum
and build on it in our search for peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to address the Council on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Non-Aligned Movement has been monitoring
recent developments and the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.
The Movement expresses its grave concern about
the dire security, humanitarian, socio-economic and
political situation prevailing the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and the consequent
rise in suffering and hardship that confronts the
Palestinian people.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the
prolonged Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory since 1967 and expresses grave concern over
the recent distressing developments. For four decades,
Israel, the occupying Power, has been unrelentingly
violating international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights
norms, in its actions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. During this time,
the occupying Power has been committing grave
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, reportedly, war crimes.

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

Moreover, for four decades the occupying Power
has carried out deliberate and unlawful policies and
practices aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character and nature of the Palestinian
lands and, in fact, at annexing those lands, particularly
via the implementation of its illegal colonial settlement
policy and, since 2003, the illegal construction of a
wall in the West Bank, including in and around East
Jerusalem.
In addition, Israel continues to impose a
humiliating and discriminatory network of checkpoints
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory to impose
closures, seal off the Gaza Strip and carry out intense
military raids and incursions in Palestinian population
centres, causing extensive loss of life and injury to
Palestinian civilians and widespread destruction of
property.
The Non-Aligned Movement condemns all such
illegal actions by Israel, the occupying Power, and
calls for their immediate cessation. It believes that
these illegal Israeli actions, including ongoing military
attacks, have seriously undermined the functioning of
the Palestinian Authority and have undoubtedly
contributed to the growing polarization of Palestinian
society.
The Movement also condemns the recent criminal
actions in the Gaza Strip and calls for urgent efforts to
avoid the complete disintegration of the foundations of
a future sovereign, viable and independent State and to
rehabilitate and develop Palestinian institutions.
Further, the Movement calls for the restoration of
the situation in the Gaza Strip to that which existed
prior to the recent events and for the adoption of
measures to preserve the territorial unity and integrity
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. It
stresses the necessity for mobilization of Palestinian
capabilities in order to end the occupation and to
achieve the Palestinian national goal.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
Palestinian leadership, the leaders of all factions and
all Palestinians to unite in support of the President of
the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, and his
Government and all democratically elected Palestinian
institutions to resolve their political differences by
peaceful means. The Movement supports national
dialogue among Palestinians to achieve national
reconciliation. In this regard, the Movement reaffirms
its position that the Palestine Liberation Organization

07-49288

remains the sole and legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people and remains an essential party to
any negotiations aimed at resolving the conflict.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon the
parties to resume urgently peace process negotiations
at all levels on the basis of international law, relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to resolve
comprehensively the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. In this regard, the
Movement reaffirms its support to all peaceful efforts
aimed at ending Israel’s 40-year occupation of
Palestinian land, the achievement of a final and
peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine with
the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people in an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and a just solution to
the plight of the Palestinian refugees. The Non-Aligned
Movement expresses its continuing and firm support
for a peaceful settlement and calls upon the
international community to adopt specific positive
steps towards this goal.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
satisfaction with the steps undertaken by the Lebanese
Government to implement Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), particularly through the deployment of
the Lebanese Armed Forces in the region south of the
Litani River and along the Blue Line. The Movement
also welcomes the deployment of the Lebanese Armed
Forces along the northern and eastern borders of
Lebanon in order to ensure security and stability at the
borders.
The Movement remains deeply concerned by the
ongoing Israeli air and land violations of the Blue Line
in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly call
on Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
al-Ghajar, on the northern side of the Blue Line, to
immediately refrain from any violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
refrain from any provocation to the Lebanese Armed
Forces or the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.
The Movement calls for the prompt settlement of
the question of the Shab’a farms with full respect for
Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
stipulated in resolution 1701 (2006). We call upon all
parties to cooperate in protecting Lebanon’s sovereign

5

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

rights in that area and we take note of the important
endeavours of the Secretary-General in that regard.
The Movement is acutely aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon resulting from the
1.2 million cluster bomblets launched by Israel during
its aggression against Lebanon last summer. The
Movement condemns once again the use of such
weaponry by Israel and deplores the death toll resulting
from them. The Non-Aligned Movement strongly calls
upon Israel to provide the exact location of those
deadly weapons and the maps of mines planted during
its occupation of Southern Lebanon.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms once again
that all measures and action taken or to be taken by
Israel that purport to modify the legal, physical and
demographic condition and the institutional structure
of the occupied Syrian Golan and the Israeli measures
to implement its jurisdiction and administration in that
area are null and void and have no legal effect. We also
reaffirm that all of these measures and actions,
including the illegal construction and expansion of the
Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, are
a challenge to the international community and a clear
violation of international law, international agreements,
the Charter and decisions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.
The Movement demands that Israel abide by Security
Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967.
The Non-Aligned Movement will continue to
support and contribute in all possible aspects to
achieving a just, complete and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on all of the United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of territory for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening this
meeting, which we find timely and appropriate.
The serious situation in the Middle East requires
the constant and dedicated attention of the international
community. The events in the occupied Palestinian

6

territories clearly demand renewed efforts by the
United Nations and its Member States to find a lasting
solution. A comprehensive approach is necessary to
simultaneously address the interrelated humanitarian,
socio-economic and political aspects of the problem.
Brazil follows with interest the situation in the
Middle East. We have traditionally supported the
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a free,
cohesive, democratic and economically viable State,
living side by side with Israel, within internationally
recognized borders. The excellent relations that Brazil
maintains with both Israel and the Palestinians have
moved us to encourage a peaceful solution since the
beginning of the conflict, through both multilateral and
bilateral means. The creation of an office in Ramallah,
our observer status in the League of Arab States, the
designation of a Special Envoy to the Middle East and
the visits of our Minister of Foreign Affairs and of
other senior officials to the region express our interest
in raising the level of our dialogue with Palestinian
authorities and all interested parties.
The Palestinian population in the West Bank and
especially in Gaza is daily subjected to unacceptable
deprivation, as too often seen in the reports of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies. Abating the suffering of the civilian
population is not only humane, but also an essential
step to paving the way for a successful rekindling of
the peace process.
In this context, the reopening of Karni crossing
and other access points to Palestinian territories is
essential to improving the living conditions of the
population in Gaza. Unimpeded connections to other
countries and the resumption of international assistance
are also necessary for the Palestinian Authority to
provide assistance, including water, food and medicine,
to the population in distress.
We welcome the release of additional taxes and
customs revenues withheld by Israel, which will enable
the Palestinian Authority to meet humanitarian needs
and other basic expenses. We also welcome the
launching of new projects by international donors.
However, the improvement of people’s daily lives
requires much more.
Brazil welcomes the recent talks between Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas
in Palestinian territory early in August. Those high-

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

level political talks show commitment and constitute a
positive sign towards the resumption of the peace
process. We encourage both parties to revitalize the
cooperative mechanisms and reinforce confidencebuilding measures with the implementation of projects
that improve the economic and social conditions in the
occupied territories.

In line with the proposal put forth by
President Lula in his address to the General Assembly
last year, we welcome President Bush’s initiative to
hold an international conference on the Middle East.
Such an international conference could certainly
benefit from the involvement of countries outside the
region, including developing countries.

Measures such as the release of Palestinian
prisoners, and that of the Israeli soldier held in Gaza,
and the interruption in the construction of settlements
could further foster an appropriate atmosphere at this
juncture. Promoting the economic and social
development of the Palestinian territories is essential to
the efforts of establishing a peaceful solution for the
region. The rehabilitation of degraded infrastructure,
the re-establishment of basic public services and the
restoration of the confidence of investors in the
Palestinian economy are priorities for ensuring the
sustainable development of the Palestinian territories
and the livelihood of its population.

Allow me to say a few words on the Lebanese
situation, which we follow with concern.

For development to be possible, Israel should
take the necessary measures to remove roadblocks and
checkpoints, allowing people their freedom of
movement. Another important step would be the
granting of visas to Palestinian workers to find jobs in
Israel. Brazil is convinced of the need for qualitative
change in the daily lives of the Palestinian people as a
precondition for the sustainability of the political
process.
Brazil believes that sustained peace can only be
achieved with the involvement of all the actors
concerned. The resolution of the conflict hinges on
respect for legitimately constituted authorities and on
refraining from all acts of violence. The conflicts in the
Middle East transcend the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
They are, in many ways, intertwined. The creation of
positive momentum in one area could generate a
virtuous circle leading to favourable results in others.
The Brazilian Government favours an expanded
debate on the Middle East, in order that other actors
can contribute ideas and efforts so as to strengthen the
peace process. We therefore encourage the
establishment of a group of friends of peace in the
Middle East comprised of countries from different
regions interested in promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, which might join those that are already
directly involved in the peace process.

07-49288

I would like to express Brazil’s support for the
Government of Prime Minister Siniora, and to reiterate
the right of the Lebanese people to its sovereignty and
self-determination, free from any foreign influence in
deciding its own future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): It is a great
honour and privilege for me to speak on behalf of the
delegation of Viet Nam at this important meeting of the
Security Council. I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the able leadership that you and your delegation
have demonstrated in the Presidency of the Council
this month. I am also very grateful to
Mr. Michael Williams for his briefing this morning.
First and foremost, my delegation would like to
associate itself fully with the statement delivered
moments ago by the representative of the Republic of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
There is no doubt that the Middle East continues
to be one of the flash points of great concern to the
world community in general, and to the Security
Council in particular. We hope that our meeting today
will help enable the parties concerned to work much
harder to put the peace process in the region back on
track.
My country fully shares the view that the Middle
East conflict, at the core of which is the question of
Palestine, can only be resolved through peaceful
negotiations with a view to achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of the legitimate
interests of all the parties concerned. Furthermore, in
order to reach such a solution, we strongly believe that
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to establish a Palestinian State in
their homeland with the borders as they existed before
June 1967, must be fully respected.

7

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

In line with that consistent position, Viet Nam
supports all regional and international efforts that
contribute to advancing the peace process in the
Middle East. We urge the parties concerned to make
further efforts to revive the Road Map for peace and to
make greater contributions to the stability and
development of the region. For its part, Viet Nam
stands ready to do its utmost to contribute to the
resumption of the negotiations among the parties
involved in the Middle East peace process.
As far as the internal affairs of the Palestinians
are concerned, we wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam
respects the choice taken by the Palestinian people
themselves and earnestly hopes that the Palestinian
parties will make efforts to settle their differences
through peaceful negotiations and continue to work
hard, with the support of the international community,
to further move the peace process in the Middle East
forward.
Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
serious concerns over the recent escalation of tension
and violence in the region. We urge all the parties
concerned to restrain themselves and to support
peaceful negotiations in order to facilitate the return of
normalcy to the region. In that connection, Viet Nam
warmly welcomes the recent high-level meetings
between Israel and Palestine. We sincerely hope that
those meetings will lead to the resumption of peaceful
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
as well as the resumption of the peace process in the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): We deeply appreciate
your having convened this important open debate,
Mr. President.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as
with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. However, given the importance of the
issue, we have asked for the floor in order to
underscore our position.
Before doing so, however, allow me express my
deep appreciation to Special Coordinator Michael
Williams for his detailed report to the Security Council

8

this morning, as well as for his tireless efforts in his
capacity as Special Coordinator. I would like to take
this opportunity to wish him the best in his new role.
Year after year, we have held many debates on
the situation in the Middle East, including the occupied
Palestinian territories. Many important resolutions
have been adopted, some with strict binding mandates,
such as those of the Security Council. Yet the impasse
continues, with an end nowhere in sight. While we wait
in frustration for better times, the escalation of
violence and bloodletting and the continued Israeli
occupation of Arab lands and Israel’s brutal
suppression of innocent men, women and children in
the occupied territories bring further outrage to our
conscience. Sadly, the factional infighting and
divisions among the Palestinians themselves also add
fuel to the fire, negating the prospects for genuine and
lasting peace in the region. Nonetheless, we are
somewhat encouraged by ongoing attempts to
consolidate national unity. We fear that those efforts
might be frustrated unless the parties concerned
demonstrate real and sincere will to move beyond the
status quo.
We remain deeply concerned at the continued
killing, arrest and detention of defenceless Palestinian
civilians by Israeli forces. We are also dismayed at the
worsening humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. It is of particular concern that
the planned Israeli blockade on the Gaza strip has
brought its economy to the verge of irreversible
collapse, thereby triggering a humanitarian disaster of
great proportions.
It is unfortunate that Israel is continuing its
illegal activities, in total disregard for international
sentiments and in contravention of United Nations
resolutions aimed at preserving the sanctity of the Holy
City of Jerusalem — Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The
excavation works below the Holy Al-Aqsa compound
is a specific issue that we spoke against at a previous
meeting of the Security Council. The ongoing
construction of the separation wall, in flagrant
disregard of the International Court of Justice advisory
opinion, is yet another instance of Israel’s deliberate
defiance of international will. Such acts obviously do
not promote the cause of peace; rather, they set the
process back. We would therefore urge determined
efforts by the United Nations to bring those illegal
activities to an immediate end.

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

Although there have been many setbacks, my
delegation is nevertheless encouraged by some
glimmers of hope. We are heartened by the resumption,
albeit on a modest scale, of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. We believe that will have a positive bearing
on the outcome of the Quartet meeting scheduled for
next month and on the United States-led international
conference scheduled for November. The Israeli
President’s proposal to release all Palestinian detainees
in exchange for the cessation of all military operations
against Israeli targets merits attention. The release of
some 250 Palestinian prisoners and of some tax
revenues are steps in the right direction.
We recognize that a number of constructive
diplomatic initiatives and mediation efforts by the
international community are in place to provide fresh
impetus to the peace process. Similarly, we believe that
the recent Japanese-led initiative aimed at achieving
peace through economic development holds good
prospects for the peace process in the Middle East. We
urge the international community, particularly the
developed countries, to come forward with economic
development projects to resuscitate the war-ravaged
Palestinian economy.
My delegation reaffirms its full support for the
legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side with
Israel in peace, security and harmony. We maintain
that, if a just and sustainable peace is to take root,
Israel must withdraw its forces from all the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and meet all its
obligations under the Geneva Conventions, the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and other peace initiatives, including the Road Map
drawn up by the Quartet. We urge all parties concerned
to return to talks and negotiate a breakthrough in the
peace process.
Although there has long been a broad consensus
in the international community that the Middle East
crisis must be resolved, peace in the region has
remained as elusive as ever. Have we lacked the
genuine will and determination to translate our words
into actions? Or have we failed to meet our collective
commitments? Either way, it has been a failure on our
part. Yet we should not wring our hands in utter
resignation; we must seize every opportunity to bring
the peace process back on track. We hope that our
deliberations here today will contribute, even if in a

07-49288

very modest way, to the achievement of our longcherished goal of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the skilful manner
in which you have conducted the work of the Security
Council during the month of August. Permit me also to
congratulate Ambassador Wang and the Chinese
delegation on a successful Council presidency last
month.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) Group, on whose behalf this statement is being
made, fully endorses the practice of having periodic
open debates on the situation in the Middle East so that
the Council has a chance to hear the opinions of the
larger membership of the United Nations and, it is to
be hoped, benefit from the collective wisdom of
Member States when it considers the way forward on
this most important issue.
On 7 June this year, the United Nations marked
40 years of occupation by Israel of the Arab territories,
including the Palestinian territory, East Jerusalem and
the Syrian Golan. On 15 May 2008, the Palestinians
will observe the sixtieth anniversary of the Nakba, or
“catastrophe”. It is indeed very unfortunate that, after
all this time, our quest for peace in the Holy Lands
remains elusive at best.
The OIC remains deeply concerned about the
continuing Israeli occupation of Arab lands and the
aggressions committed against the peoples of the
occupied Arab territories — an occupation that has
gone on far too long and has served only to cause
agony and anguish. The visible and often brutal
suppression of the Palestinian people is also a principal
root cause of the rise of extremism across the Muslim
world. This political reality, however unpalatable, can
no longer be ignored. It is not only the United Nations,
but also the entire international community, that should
denounce this violation of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
This year, like most others, has been one of
change and unrest in the region. While there have been
developments in the region — including the meetings
between leaders of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
and the Quartet’s agreement to meet again in

9

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

September as part of the efforts to provide diplomatic
support for the parties in their bilateral discussions and
negotiations, in order to move forward on a successful
path to a Palestinian State — the continued use of
violence by Israel and inter-Palestinian divisions have
left the already weary Palestinian population insecure
and unsure of the future. It will be our most pressing
task to translate those developments into concrete
actions aimed at the realization of a comprehensive
solution to the many issues of the Middle East, based
on all the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
It is a matter of concern that, despite the
developments of the release of 250 Palestinian
prisoners and of some tax revenues, the larger
problems in the occupied territories remain the same.
Settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories persists; the construction of the wall, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, continues; and
roadblocks and checkpoints make everyday life taxing
for a population that is already living caged in its own
land. We urge the Israeli Government to put an end to
the illegal settlement activity and the work on the wall
and to halt all work near the sacred Al-Aqsa Masjid.
Whatever one’s political perspective, it is clear
that there can be no military solution to the issue of the
Middle East and that peace can be attained only
through a complete and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from all Arab lands, including the
Palestinian territories, East Jerusalem and the occupied
Syrian Golan and Lebanese lands, and through the
creation of an independent and viable Palestinian State.
In the present atmosphere of quiet tension in the
region, it will be the challenge of the United Nations to
maintain the efforts to reach a just, fair and
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Indeed, the United Nations should play a more
active role in promoting a durable and comprehensive
peace.
The most urgent task is to halt the violence in the
occupied territories. While the efforts to secure the
release of the captured Israeli soldiers are still ongoing,
Israel must also release the remaining Palestinian
prisoners and do more to support the Palestinian
Authority and to end the economic and humanitarian
blockade of the Palestinians. Unfortunately, Israeli
actions on key issues such as the outposts, the

10

settlements in the West Bank, the construction of the
wall and the hundreds of checkpoints serve only to
intensify frustration within the Palestinian population.
Simultaneously, the efforts to promote interPalestinian reconciliation should be continued. Policies
of division and isolation may prove counterproductive
to the cause of peace. In that connection, a step
essential to achieving reconciliation is to restore the
situation existing on the ground in Gaza today to that
which existed prior to the events of June 2007.
The OIC Group strongly urges the resumption of
peace talks without prejudice to the positions of either
side. Such talks should lead to an early agreement to
resume the implementation of the agreed peace plan
and the Road Map.
In that regard, we note the initiative to convene
an international conference on the issue in Washington
in November. It is our fervent hope and prayer that the
conference will lead to significant progress in our quest
for peace. We should, however, be mindful that the
conference can succeed only if it reflects a
comprehensive and sincere initiative for peace that
returns all Arab territories occupied since June 1967
and is able to address and show concrete movement on
the final status issues, namely, final boundaries in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the status of Jerusalem — al-Quds al-Sharif —
and the issue of Palestinian refugees and their inherent
right to return.
The structure of a durable peace in the Middle
East is already well known. To realize a just and
durable peace in the Middle East, the United Nations
must secure the non-selective implementation of its
own
resolutions,
including
Security
Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003) and General Assembly resolution 194
(III). A solution will also have to be based on the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet’s Road Map.
To that end, the Islamabad Declaration and
Communiqué issued by the thirty-fourth session of the
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, which was
held in Islamabad from 15 to 17 May 2007,
unambiguously resolved to continue its relentless
efforts for the cause of peace in the Middle East and
welcomed the renewal of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the efforts of the President of Pakistan.

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

Let us hope that next year, when the Palestinians
commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the Nakba, it
will be accompanied by celebrations over the creation
of an independent and viable Palestinian State, at peace
with all its neighbours.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, an
issue of paramount importance to international peace
and security.
It is a great honour for me to address this body
just one day after presenting my credentials to the
Secretary-General. I would like to join other speakers
in thanking Mr. Michael Williams, the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing today and to pay tribute to him
for all that he has accomplished in the course of a long
and distinguished career at the United Nations.
There have been a number of significant events
and developments in the Middle East in recent months.
We welcome in particular the convening of the summit
meetings between the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority that have taken place since July.
These meetings have contributed to the establishment
of a good atmosphere conducive to further dialogue on
the whole range of issues of mutual concern. The
international community should make its best efforts to
maintain this momentum and promote this dialogue.
I would like to affirm that Japan remains fully
committed to engaging actively in the peace process
and to providing the utmost tangible support to
President Abbas, the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian Authority, and to the new Government led
by Prime Minister Fayyad in their endeavours to
achieve peace. We recognize that the only way toward
the achievement of peace in the Middle East is to foster
coexistence and co-prosperity between Israel and
Palestine.
It was to these ends that the Government of Japan
announced, on the occasion of the visit in mid-August
of our Foreign Minister to Jordan, Israel and the
Palestinian territories, its decision to provide a new
package of assistance, valued at over $20 million. It
consists of $11.2 million in direct financial assistance
to the Palestinian Authority and $9.3 million in food

07-49288

aid, medicine and other humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian territories. Japan will consider further
assistance to the Palestinian Authority for the purpose
of building a self-sustaining Palestinian economy.
In this connection, Japan has been advancing the
concept of the corridor for peace and prosperity, to
which the representative of Bangladesh kindly referred
a few minutes ago. It is development plan aimed at
contributing to the creation of a viable Palestinian
economy based on developing the private sector by
establishing an agro-industrial park in the West Bank
and facilitating the transportation of goods from the
West Bank through Jordan, mainly to the Gulf States.
On 15 August, Japan’s Foreign Minister
organized the second ministerial-level meeting of the
Four-Party Consultative Unit in Jericho, in the West
Bank, with the participation of Vice Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister Livni of Israel, Head of the
Negotiations Affairs Department of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, Mr. Erakat, and Foreign
Minister Khatib of Jordan. At the meeting, an
agreement was reached on the building of an agroindustrial park in the southern part of the Jericho
governorate.
The parties welcomed the initiative as a catalyst
to confidence-building between the parties concerned.
For instance, Foreign Minister Livni made a remark to
the effect that the visits to Jericho in quick succession
by the Prime Minister and then the Foreign Minister of
Israel were a symbolic indication of the very beginning
of normalization between Israel and Palestine.
Mr. Erakat said, for his part, that the concept of the
corridor for peace and prosperity could help to give the
Palestinians a future.
Japan believes that in order to promote the peace
process, it is critically important for Palestinians to
maintain hope for the future. It is therefore appropriate
that we should address the problem from both the
political and economic perspective, in parallel.
While there are such encouraging developments,
much remains to be done. Among the subjects that
must be taken up are improving security, problems
associated with the settlements and the security barrier
in the West Bank, easing movement and access,
continuing the transfer of tax and customs revenues,
and releasing the Israeli soldier abducted by Hamas as
well as a greater number of Palestinian prisoners being
held in Israel. It is also essential to restore unity to the

11

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

West Bank and the Gaza Strip in order to realize the
shared goal of a two-State solution. Moreover, the
involvement of the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip in the
peace process is of critical importance. Japan strongly
urges both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to redouble
their efforts toward these ends.
In the view of the series of important
international gatherings scheduled this year, Japan for
its part will continue to play a proactive role in
advancing the peace process in cooperation with its
partners in the international community, taking into full
account all parallel good offices efforts, including
those of the relevant Arab countries, to advance the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Before concluding, Mr. President, let me touch
briefly upon the situation in Lebanon. Japan supports
the efforts of the Lebanese Government, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Siniora, to achieve
stability in Lebanon. We hope the concerned parties
and factions in the country will engage in efforts to
promote stability and reconstruction through dialogue
and without resort to violence.
There remain many challenges in Lebanon that
must be addressed in order to achieve full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
stabilization of the situation. A permanent ceasefire and
long-term solution require that the international
community tackle vigorously tasks including an arms
embargo, the disarming and disbanding of all
remaining militias and the delineation of the borders.
We are deeply concerned that the two Israeli soldiers
abducted by Hizbollah have not been returned and that
in fact no proof of life has been provided.
A comprehensive peace that includes both a
Lebanese and Syrian track is the only way to achieve
permanent peace in the region. From that point of view,
Japan expects Syria to play an active role in the
realization of regional peace and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to thank Mr. Michael Williams for his
briefing on the situation and the latest developments in
the Middle East region in the grip of endless conflicts
and tensions that are sharpening daily.
My delegation associates itself fully with the
statements made by the representatives of Yemen, Cuba

12

and Pakistan on behalf of the countries members of the
Arab Group, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
It is clear from Mr. Williams’ statement that
peace and stability have unfortunately not found their
way in this tormented and torn region, the consequence
of decades of occupation and repression of populations
desperately seeking emancipation, liberty and dignity.
Equally clear to us is the correlation that exists
between the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the other Arab lands occupied by Israel,
and the climate of instability and tension in the region.
The heart of the problem, and its Gordian knot, is
nothing other than the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which, through its regional extension, has disturbed
existing balances by maintaining hotbeds of tension
throughout the Middle East.
Part of the problem can also be found in the
approach that is aimed at delinking purely security
aspects from the incomplete political process, and that
has considerably delayed the resumption of the positive
dynamic that had been sketched out in favour, in
particular, of the reactivation last March of the Arab
peace plan.
Algeria remains in solidarity with the fraternal
Palestinian people in their struggle to regain their
historical, inalienable and fundamental rights, in
particular that of seeing the return of its refugees
scattered far and wide.
We also support unreservedly the objective of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, with the first stone of the global edifice being the
creation of a sovereign, independent and viable
Palestinian State with a territory with a single owner
coexisting with Israel in peace and security.
This labour of peace that we all wholeheartedly
call for is, however, fundamentally threatened at its
roots and throughout its reach because of the repeated
attempts by Israel to cause this march of time to
deviate from its initial trajectory in order to maintain
the status quo. If that is not the case, how else can one
explain Israel’s energetic undermining of even the
slightest attempts at institution-building within a
Palestinian Authority by presenting it as the cause of
the freeze in the peace process, if it is not through its
avowed will to put off indefinitely any configuration of

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

a future agreement on the final status of a future
Palestinian State.
The proposal by the American Government to
reactivate the Israeli-Palestinian peace process by
convening an international conference on peace in the
Middle East in an attempt to consider as a whole the
factors for the freeze seems to us, by itself, to be a wise
approach, as long as it does not become a court judging
whether the Palestinian Authority has the ability to
establish democratic institutions and as long as it lays
out in clear terms the outlines of definitive solution for
this conflict that has lasted too long.
In order to be effective and lasting, this peace
will also have to be found through an in-depth
consideration of the means likely to put an end to the
crisis resulting from the occupation of Iraq, with
respect for its sovereignty, its territorial integrity and
its unity. We also think that the cessation of violence in
that fraternal country should be accompanied by a clear
political timelines, with a clear and respected deadline
for withdrawal.
Moreover, Algeria feels that the initiative would
gain credibility if it involved all the parties directly
concerned and were accompanied by a firm
commitment by the international community to exert
pressure on Israel to induce it to cooperate actively
with the international community. The initiative in
question should not make us forget that similar
attempts in the past have failed when confronted with
Israel’s determination to impose systematically and by
force its vision of peace and its interpretation of the
map of the Middle East. It is instructive to note in this
respect the fate of the various laboriously negotiated
peace plans that received broad support from the
international community but that came up against the
intransigence of Israel and its delay tactics. The
example of the Arab Peace Initiative, which involves a
strict application of international law and of United
Nations resolutions, is indicative of Israel’s lack of
political will to seek peace. Indeed, although this plan
has been described as an essential basis for any future
solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, its positive
momentum has given way, five years after its adoption
in Beirut, to a disturbing pessimism.
Algeria calls on the international community to
display greater coherence, to do everything possible to
put the peace process back on track and to encourage
Israel to abandon its intransigence and its policy of fait

07-49288

accompli by embarking upon serious negotiations with
its Arab neighbours. We must acknowledge that there
cannot be security without peace and that there is no
peace under colonization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin, Mr. President, by thanking you for
having convened this meeting today and congratulating
you for your skilful stewardship of the Council’s work
this month. I would like to avail my delegation of this
chance to thank Mr. Michael Williams for the job that
he has done for our Organization and also for his
briefing to the Council today. I wish him all the best in
his new endeavours.
As the realities on the ground well indicate, and
as reported to the Council today, throughout the period
under review the Israeli war machine has continued its
work brutally and relentlessly, shattering the lives and
livelihoods of the defenseless Palestinian people. Even
in the past several days, as the Palestinian people and
Muslims across the globe were observing the 38th
anniversary of the Israeli arson of Al-Aqsa mosque in
the holy city of Al Quds Al Sharif, the Israeli regime
continued with its carnage against the Palestinian
people, killing many, among them women and children,
in Khan Younis, Beit Hanoun, Nablus and elsewhere in
the occupied Palestinian territories.
The appalling crimes of extrajudicial killings and
targeted assassinations committed by the Israeli regime
have continued unabated, while other Israeli crimes
such as the destruction of homes, infrastructure and
agricultural lands, the illegal expansion of settlements,
the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinians, the construction of the expansionist wall
and the imposition of collective punishment on the
entire Palestinian population have persisted.
Numerous United Nations documents have
reported that, owing to Israeli practices, the whole
Palestinian population has been terrorized, their
properties have been destroyed and a humanitarian
crisis has been imposed on a whole population. United
Nations rapporteurs have rightly described these brutal
Israeli practices and policies as ethnic cleansing.
Moreover, as a result of the Israeli regime’s blockade
of the Gaza Strip, the humanitarian and economic
situation there has deteriorated to a dangerous extent.

13

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

On 9 August 2007, the United Nations warned that
Gaza could face an economic meltdown with
“disastrous consequences” unless its main crossings
were reopened. In this regard, the deputy chief of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East warned that “Gaza risks
becoming a virtually 100 per cent aid-dependent,
closed down and isolated community within a matter of
months or weeks, if the present regime of closure
continues.”
It is therefore high time for the international
community to urgently weigh in, in order to counter the
Israeli regime’s inhumane policies and practice of
imposing humanitarian disaster on the defenseless
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and elsewhere in
the Palestinian territories. It is indeed unfortunate that
while the Israeli regime has grown more brazen at
every turn in committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity, the Security Council, because of the
unqualified support rendered to the Israeli regime by
the United States of America, has remained
incapacitated and unable to take any meaningful action
to counter those atrocities.
A particular reference should also be made to the
Israeli regime’s concealment and unabated pursuit of a
nuclear arsenal during the past several decades. The
Israeli Prime Minister’s acknowledgement of his
regime’s unlawful possession of nuclear weapons in his
interview with a German television channel on
11 December 2006 revealed the real nature of the
regime’s clandestine nuclear activities, which pose a
serious and continuing threat to international and
regional peace and security.
It is undisputable that nuclear weapons in the
hands of a regime marked by their long catalogue of
various crimes, such State terrorism, aggression and
occupation, present a real threat to regional and
international peace and security. This therefore require
urgent and decisive action by the Security Council.
Indeed, this regime should face a united front and must
be kept under continuous pressure to cease its terrorist
acts, relinquish its nuclear programme and place all its
nuclear facilities under international monitoring.
The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon and the occupied Syrian
Golan. A year has passed since the Israeli regime
attacked Lebanon. According to United Nations special
rapporteurs, “serious violations of human rights and

14

humanitarian law had been committed by Israel”
during its aggression against Lebanon. They also
reported that:
“Israel’s Air Force attacked more than 7,000
targets in Lebanon, its Navy conducted 2,500
bombardments, and its Army fired tens of
thousands of shells and rockets. As a result, 1,191
people were killed and more than 4,000 wounded.
One third of the dead and wounded and close to
half of the internally displaced persons were
children. Tens of thousands of homes and much
public infrastructure were damaged or destroyed.
An estimated 1 million persons were displaced
and entire villages were virtually destroyed.”
In addition to these figures, their report indicates
that the Israeli regime attacked medical facilities and
hospitals.
The regime, in yet another show of its contempt
for Security Council resolutions, is now adamantly
violating resolution 1701 (2006) on a daily basis,
including through violations of Lebanese airspace.
The aforementioned examples of persistent Israeli
crimes and atrocities attest to the fact that the regime
has based its policies and practices on occupation,
aggression and bloodshed, and that its mischievous
calls and expressions of readiness for peace with the
Palestinians are but a malicious smokescreen to buy
time and create division among the Palestinians and the
countries in the region, in order to pursue its wicked
expansionist policies and criminal practices against the
Palestinians and other Arabs under its brutal
occupation and oppression.
The Palestinian people, backed by the entire
international community, in particular the Muslim and
Arab world, will indeed continue to be resolute and
unwavering in their efforts towards the attainment of
their inalienable rights. In this context, the Palestinian
factions should put the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people ahead of their political differences
and join hands to end the occupation of their homeland
and restore their nation’s denied and inalienable right.
We have repeatedly rejected the internal clashes
in the Palestinian territories and have invited all
Palestinian groups to work for national reconciliation
and to settle their differences through dialogue on the
basis of inclusion and cooperation, rather than
exclusion and confrontation. If history is any guide,

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

efforts by any faction in Palestine to exclude others are
doomed to fail. Hamas, which came to power through
an election that the whole international community
recognized as fair, free and democratic, and as a party
with a deep popular base among the Palestinian people,
cannot be excluded. Nor can Fatah be neglected, with
its long history of resistance against occupation and its
popularity among the Palestinian people.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has constantly
expressed its concern over the dire consequences of the
sanctions and blockade imposed by certain quarters
against the Palestinian people for exercising their
democratic rights. Sadly, the international community’s
failure to address the Palestinians’ genuine cause, and
the flagrant interference of certain Powers in internal
Palestinian affairs, has led to the recent unfortunate
events.
The Palestinian question indeed lies at the heart
of the Middle East crisis. Undoubtedly, a durable peace
in Palestine and the Middle East will only be possible
through justice, full restoration of the rights of the
Palestinian people, an end to discrimination and to the
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories, the return of all Palestinian refugees and a
democratic mechanism through which all the
inhabitants of Palestine, as well as Palestinians driven
out of their homeland, would have the possibility to
determine their future in a democratic and peaceful
fashion.
Before I conclude, I would like to place on the
record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations raised against my country in the Council
today by the representative of the Israeli regime. Those
are but preposterous — and, indeed, tired — practices
to distract the international community’s attention from
the criminal policies and abhorrent practices and
atrocities of the Israeli regime in Palestine and
elsewhere in the region. It is evident that no amount of
slander, deception of smear campaigns by the Israeli
regime can cloud the obvious fact that that regime
poses the most real, serious and urgent threat faced by
the region and the world today, and should be
countered urgently by the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): On behalf of my
delegation, allow me first to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the able manner in which you have

07-49288

presided over the Security Council during the month of
August. I also wish to thank you for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. This debate allows
countries not represented in the Council to address
critical issues affecting international peace and
security, including the question of Palestine.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Pakistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.
In June of this year, we marked 40 years of
occupation of the Palestinian territories by Israel. The
Palestinian territories have been occupied for too long.
In fact, this is the longest period in history that any
territory has been occupied. It is more than imperative
that a just solution be found to this issue. This very
Council has adopted various resolutions aimed at
addressing this issue, including resolution 242 (1967)
and resolution 338 (1973). Unfortunately, a solution is
far from sight, and even elusive. The situation on the
ground in the occupied territories has deteriorated so
much that major parts of it have literally descended
into darkness. Palestinians continue to live in hardship,
deprived of the amenities of a decent life, both
economically and socially.
In that regard, we support efforts that aim to seek
a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian
question, including the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet process and the United States initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Washington in November of this year. We also
encourage the promotion of inter-Palestinian national
reconciliation.
The question of Palestine remains the main factor
dividing East and West and represents the bulk of the
underlying reasons for the conflict and instability in
the Middle East, including international terrorism. As a
body that is mandated to deal with issues affecting
international peace and security, the Council is dutybound to take the necessary measures to prevent further
deterioration of this issue.
The Council has adopted important resolutions on
the question of Palestine, which should serve as the
logical starting point for the restoration of Palestinian
rights. It is also only right and fitting for the Council to
assume the responsibility to compel Israel to respect

15

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

international law and conventions, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and put an end to Israel’s
occupation and illegitimate practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Council must ensure that
Israel ceases its practices of expanding the illegal
settlements in the West Bank, constructing the
separation wall and maintaining its widespread
network of roadblocks and checkpoints. Israel must
also withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories
to its pre-1967 borders.
Our hope is that a comprehensive and just
solution to the question of Palestine will be found in
the nearest future. We also hope for the realization of a
sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian State,
living side-by-side with Israel, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has requested the floor to make
an additional statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Carmon (Israel): I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their patience. I
would like for a moment to briefly clarify for the
record an important factual matter referred to earlier
today. However, I wish first to underscore that my
delegation values the time and patience of the members
of the Council. As such, we will not respond to the
aggressive and offensive anti-Israel rhetoric used by
the representatives of some Member States, in
particular — and not surprisingly so — that of the
representatives of Syria and Iran. That rhetoric was
offensive not only to Israel, but also to the Security
Council.
The matter I would like to raise is one of facts
and substance. In that connection, I am referring in
particular to the respectable Lebanese Ambassador’s
statement earlier today, where he referred to Israel’s
refusal — in the context of the Secretary-General’s
appointment of a facilitator in the matter of the
abducted Israeli soldiers — to
“solve the long-standing issue of the Lebanese
detainees who have been ageing in Israeli prisons
for decades”. (S/PV.5736, (Resumption 1))
First, those detainees are not innocent bystanders
languishing in Israeli prisons; rather, they are
murderous terrorists with blood on their hands who
have very cruelly and unjustly taken the lives of
innocent Israelis in terror attacks over the years.

16

Indeed, one of those terrorists is Samir Kuntar, who in
1979 landed a rubber boat off the coast of Nahariya, a
city on the northern coast of Israel, and carried out a
vicious terror attack on the Haran family. Samir Kuntar
shot the father, Danny Haran, in the head, and smashed
the daughter’s head with his rifle. The mother of the
family, Smadar Haran, who was hiding under a
crawlspace with her infant daughter, smothered her
baby while trying to keep her quiet and save their lives.
Men like Samir Kuntar are not simple prison
detainees; they are murderous terrorists who, if not in a
prison cell, would continue to intimidate, maim and
murder Israelis. Full-fledged due process of law was
carried out. Samir Kuntar and the others in the group
were lawfully accused and convicted for their crimes.
Secondly, for a good reason, resolution 1701
(2006), as well as the report (S/2007/392) of the
Secretary-General on its implementation, do not make
an equation between the abducted Israeli soldiers and
Hizbollah terrorists. In fact, those terrorists are in good
condition and receive the appropriate care reserved for
detainees as a consequence of war. They have also
been accorded standard due process. That includes
visits by the Red Cross and other agencies, appropriate
medical care, contacts with their families and so on.
Yet, nothing is known of the abducted Israeli soldiers
Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser. It is therefore
baffling that a respected ambassador could even
insinuate a comparison between the terrorist criminals
serving their terms in an Israeli prison and the
abducted Israeli soldiers, whose conditions and
whereabouts are unknown. There can be no equation of
the plight of the Israeli soldiers kidnapped by
Hizbollah with that of the terrorists arrested for and
convicted of acts of terror or that of those detained as a
result of the hostilities.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I regret having to speak again before the
Council at this late hour. However, with his last
statement, the Israeli representative left me with no
choice other than to reply. I will not speak at length,
but will focus on only the following points.
As members are well aware, the Israeli policy of
occupation and aggression since the establishment of
the United Nations has been the focus of great efforts
and energy on the part of the entire international
community, particularly in the Security Council, to put
an end to that policy of occupation and aggression,

07-49288

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

which has lasted too long. I need not recall the various
reports prepared by Special Rapporteurs of the United
Nations on all the aspects of that policy; even the
Special Rapporteur on the right to food has criticized
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. It also goes
without saying that the Human Rights Commission in
Geneva has condemned Israel’s barbaric and bloody
conduct dozens of times and that the Human Rights
Council, successor to the Human Rights Commission,
was convened, only a few hours after it had been
established, in an emergency meeting to investigate
Israel’s barbaric and criminal practices in Gaza and
Lebanon last July.
In addition, I wish to recall that Israel introduced
nuclear weapons to the region decades ago and is
opposed to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East. Moreover, the first hijacking
operation in recent history was committed by Israel in
1954, and it was a Syrian aircraft that was hijacked.
There is only one kind of terrorism in the region: the
State terror of Israel.
No matter how hard Israel’s representatives try,
either in the Security Council or elsewhere, to conceal
the barbaric aspects of their occupation of other
peoples’ lands, they will not succeed in concealing one
fact: the international community has voted more than
1,000 times against Israel and its barbaric policy of
occupying others’ territories — a policy that it carries
out in total disregard for international law and
humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Indonesia has asked for the floor. I
call on him.
Mr. Budiman (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to respond to the statement made by the
representative of Israel this morning.
The war last summer in southern Lebanon
brought agony to both parties, but it caused human
casualties among the Lebanese. Many of those
casualties were among civilians, and their immediate
physical cause was an incomparably appalling series of
Israeli offensives during the war.
The current security and stability in southern
Lebanon has been made possible by the decisive
response of the Security Council through the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006), which, inter alia,
strengthened the United Nations Interim Force in

07-49288

Lebanon. Indonesia underlines the importance of
compliance by all parties with resolution 1701 (2006)
in its entirety. We also stress the urgent need to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Michael Williams to respond to comments
made during the debate.
Mr. Williams: It is late in the afternoon, and I
will not keep my colleagues for long. But I am grateful
to the Council for giving me the opportunity to say a
few more words.
First, let me say how grateful I am for the
comments that have been made about me personally,
particularly with regard to my work on Council
resolution 1701 (2006) and, more recently, as United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. I deeply appreciated those remarks, which
came from very many delegations.
With regard to the first Security Council
resolution, resolution 1701 (2006), I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the commitment of both
Governments — the Government of Israel and the
Government of Lebanon — to that resolution. I think
both have worked extremely hard to avoid any renewal
of hostilities along their common border. And it is only
because of that commitment that the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon has been able to operate in
southern Lebanon and to provide security on Israel’s
northern border — security that has been elusive for
very many years, if not decades.
Last Friday, before I left Israel at the end of
another regional tour, my last conversation was with
Karnit Goldwasser, the wife of one of the two abducted
Israeli soldiers. Members will recall that the cause of
the war last summer was the abduction of those
soldiers, Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. I have to
say with deep personal regret — because I have made
very considerable efforts in this regard — that, more
than 13 months after their abduction, we still cannot
establish proof of life. I do not even say the release and
repatriation of the prisoners; I say proof of life. And I
urge those Member States that have relations with
Hizbollah to urge that group to meet the basic
humanitarian standard that proof of life of prisoners
should always be presented.

17

S/PV.5736 (Resumption 1)

I am sad to be leaving the United Nations. That
sadness is diminished by the fact that, throughout this
long debate, signs of hope were alluded to by
delegations from all corners of the globe: the
appointment of Tony Blair as Quartet Special Envoy;
the meeting called by the United States for November
this year; the Arab Peace Initiative, which stemmed
from the summit held in Riyadh in March; and, perhaps
above all, the dialogue that has been taking place
between Prime Minister and President Abbas, with the
most recent meeting having taken place yesterday. I
think all of these give us hope that, with good will and

18

political courage — and it will require real political
courage — we may be able to move forward on the
Israeli-Palestinian peace track and towards a just and
comprehensive peace throughout the region.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

07-49288
