S/PV.8826

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8826th meeting

Wednesday, 28 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. Kakanur
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/685) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-20868 (E)
*2120868*

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians was held to
align donors’ efforts to help address both the aftermath
of the May escalation and the significant fiscal crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority (PA).

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Lynn Hastings,
Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, United Nations Resident Coordinator and
Humanitarian Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory; and Ms. Yudith Oppenheimer, Executive
Director of Ir Amim.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Hastings.
Ms. Hastings: I brief the Security Council today
as the United Nations and its partners are providing
urgent assistance to Gaza in the wake of the recent
round of hostilities. Beyond the human tragedy for both
Palestinians and Israelis and the physical damage of 11
days of fighting, the economic impact of the escalation in
May has further exacerbated the existing humanitarian
crisis and severely weakened Gaza’s economy.
On 6 July, the United Nations, the World Bank
and the European Union released the rapid damage
and needs assessment. According to the assessment,
damages in Gaza are estimated to be from $290 to
$380 million, while economic losses may reach nearly
$200 million. The social sector was hit the hardest,
significantly weakening the safety net for the most
vulnerable. The immediate and short-term recovery
and reconstruction needs are estimated at $345 to
$485 million. The same day, a technical meeting of the
2/24

28/07/2021

International efforts coordinated by the United
Nations to implement the humanitarian response and
stabilize the situation on the ground in Gaza are well
under way. Thus far, some $45 million of the requested
$95 million dollars has been raised for the consolidated
humanitarian flash appeal published by the United
Nations in May. I thank donors for their generous
support and urge additional contributions so that the
numerous pressing needs can be addressed. The United
Nations and its partners stand ready to implement
urgently needed recovery and reconstruction initiatives
in coordination with the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities, Egypt, Qatar and other regional and
international partners.
On 28 June, fuel deliveries for the Gaza power plant
resumed through the Kerem Shalom crossing under the
existing United Nations framework through the United
Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), with
support from Qatar. Electricity supply is now roughly
14 hours per day, critical for Gaza and its residents.
On 24 June, the Israeli authorities expanded the Gaza
fishing zone from six to nine nautical miles, and then
once again on 12 July to 12 nautical miles. Additional
restrictions on the import and export of certain goods
were also lifted. However, on 25 July the fishing zone
was restricted again to six nautical miles, following the
launch of incendiary balloons from the Gaza Strip.
In that context, further steps are needed. It is
essential that Israel implement additional measures to
allow unhindered entry of all humanitarian assistance,
including materials to implement the 2021 humanitarian
response plan and the flash appeal. Beyond the
immediate humanitarian needs, without regular and
predictable entry of goods into Gaza, the capacity of
the United Nations and our partners to deliver critical
interventions is at risk, as are the provision of basic
services, the livelihoods of people and the wider
Gaza economy.
In that context, the trilateral Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism — with the Government of Israel,
the
Palestinian
Authority
and
the
United
Nations — established in 2014 and operated by
UNOPS, remains best-placed to enable the entry and
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

accountable delivery of a wide range of essential
imports from Israel. Furthermore, for any durable
stability, movement and access in and out of Gaza must
be improved. Taking into consideration its legitimate
security concerns, Israel should ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza,
in line with resolution 1860 (2009), with the goal of
ultimately lifting them. Hamas and other armed groups
must stop the launching of incendiary devices, rockets
and mortars and end the militant build up.
In terms of looking ahead, with additional donor
support, existing United Nations humanitarian cash
assistance or other programmes could quickly be scaled
up to reach tens or hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
in Gaza. While urgent humanitarian interventions can
provide critical relief in the short term, any sustainable
future in Gaza requires political solutions. I once
again reiterate the need for the return of a legitimate
Palestinian Government to the Gaza Strip.
The Palestinian Authority’s fiscal situation
continues to be a source of significant concern. The
budget gap is expected to be well over $1 billion for the
current budget year, and the Palestinian financial sector
is exposed to serious liquidity risks. Compounding the
PA’s financial situation, on 11 July, the Israeli Security
Cabinet approved the freezing of some 600 million
Israeli shekels from the clearance revenues Israel
collects on behalf of the PA.
The funds will be deducted in monthly instalments,
in line with Israeli Knesset legislation from 2018,
which authorizes the withholding of funds equal to the
amount that Israeli authorities determine have been
paid by the PA over the preceding year to security
prisoners and detainees and the families of Palestinians
killed while carrying out attacks. Palestinian Prime
Minister Mohammad Shtayeh called the measures
contrary to signed agreements and unjust. In order
to address those challenges, the PA must implement
much-needed reforms, including the so-called prisonerpayment system, and strengthen the rule of law and
accountability. Enhanced cooperation between Israel
and the PA to address outstanding financial challenges
on key fiscal and economic files will also be critical.
Violence continued across the occupied Palestinian
territory throughout the reporting period.
In Gaza, while the cessation of hostilities reached
between Israel and Hamas in May largely held, militants
launched 13 incendiary balloons towards Israel, with

S/PV. 8826

several causing fires. In retaliation, the Israeli Defense
Forces (IDF) fired 18 missiles against what it said were
Hamas targets in the Strip, resulting in damage but no
injuries.
On 22 July, a Palestinian was killed and some 14
others were injured in an explosion in the Az-Zawiya
marketplace, in Gaza City. The Israeli Security Forces
(ISF) said the incident was an “internal matter” and
that Israel had not been involved. Hamas has reportedly
opened an investigation.
In the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem,
clashes,
attacks,
search-and-arrest
operations and other incidents resulted in the death of
four Palestinians, including a child, and injuries to 638
Palestinians, including 46 children and seven women.
Five Israeli security personnel were injured during
these events.
On 25 June, Israeli forces shot, injured and detained
a Palestinian who they said was planning to carry out
a stabbing attack near the settlement of Yitzhar, in the
northern West Bank.
On 3 July, a Palestinian man was shot and killed by
the ISF in the village of Qusra, near Nablus, following
clashes between Israeli settlers and Palestinians.
According to the ISF, the man was shot after throwing
an object that exploded near Israeli soldiers.
On 14 July, a Palestinian man was shot and injured
by the ISF after reportedly trying to enter the settlement
of Yitzhar with a knife.
On 18 July, clashes broke out between Palestinians
and the ISF in and around the holy sites, ahead of
visits by hundreds of Jewish visitors observing the
commemoration of Tisha B’Av. I reiterate that the status
quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites must be upheld and fully
respected, and call upon community, religious and
political leaders on all sides to refrain from provocative
action and rhetoric in the interest of peace and stability.
On 23 July, the ISF shot and critically injured a
17-year-old Palestinian boy during clashes in the village
of Nabi Saleh, in the West Bank. The boy later died
of his wounds. According to the Palestinian Ministry
of Health, the boy was shot in the stomach by an ISF
foot patrol. The ISF said a soldier had opened fire after
stones had been thrown towards him, threatening his
life, and that it would investigate the incident.

21-208683/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

28/07/2021

Also on 23 July, a Palestinian man was reportedly
shot and killed by Hamas security forces while driving
through a checkpoint in Gaza City.

subsequently made available for building a religious
school and staff residence. Any existing structures
found to be outside “State land” will be demolished.

Meanwhile, settlers and other Israeli civilians in
the occupied West Bank perpetrated some 36 attacks
against Palestinians, resulting in 13 injuries and
damage to property. Palestinians perpetrated 47 attacks
against Israeli settlers and other civilians, resulting in
eight injuries and damage to property.

Following the evacuation, near-daily clashes
continued during the reporting period between
Palestinian residents of the nearby village of Beita
and Israeli settlers and security forces, resulting in the
death of a Palestinian, injury to some 460 others and
damage to structures.

On 26 June, settlers attacked Palestinians in the
village of Al-Mughayyir, near Ramallah. Israeli forces
intervened, resulting in the injury of 18 Palestinians.

I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law. Settlement-related activities must
cease, as they undermine the prospect of achieving a
viable two-State solution in line with United Nations
resolutions, international law and prior agreements.

I underscore that all perpetrators of violence must
be held accountable and swiftly brought to justice.
I also call on Israeli security forces to ensure
the protection of Palestinians, in line with Israel’s
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Following the death of political activist Nizar Banat
on 24 June, Palestinians held demonstrations across
the occupied West Bank. In Ramallah, on 26 June and
5 July, the Palestinian Security Forces beat protestors
and indiscriminately fired tear gas and stun grenades.
On 26 June, the Palestinian Security Forces also
failed to stop violent acts by groups of non-uniformed
persons, reported to be associated with security
personnel, resulting in violence targeting journalists
and human-rights monitors, including a United Nations
staff member. Women present at the demonstrations
reported sexual harassment and gender-based threats
on social media afterwards.
I call on the Palestinian Authority to ensure that
the death of Nizar Banat and all allegations of the
use of disproportionate force against protestors by
the Palestinian Security Forces are investigated in a
thorough, transparent and independent manner and
those responsible held to account. The Palestinian
people must be able to exercise their rights to freedom
of expression, opinion and peaceful assembly. Arbitrary
and politically motivated arrests must cease.
On 2 July, Israeli settlers, comprising some 50
families, left the illegal outpost of Evyatar following
an agreement reached with the Israeli Government
that IDF troops would re-establish a presence at the
site. According to the agreement, the Israeli Civil
Administration will conduct an accelerated land survey
to determine land status. Areas found not to be privately
owned by Palestinians will be declared “State land” and
4/24

Israeli demolitions of Palestinian homes and other
structures continued throughout the reporting period.
Overall, Israeli authorities demolished or seized 113
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C of the occupied
West Bank and 16 in East Jerusalem, displacing 177
Palestinians, including 38 women and 102 children, and
affecting 1,934 others. The demolitions were carried
out due to the lack of Israeli-issued building permits,
which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities
demolished 31 structures in the Bedouin community
of Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in Area C of the occupied
West Bank. Some 18 of the structures demolished
or confiscated were provided by donors following
previous demolitions in February. As a result, seven
Palestinian families, comprising 54 people, including
30 children, were again displaced. Despite repeated
calls by the international community, Israeli authorities
have continued to instruct the residents to move to a
different location, citing the community’s presence in
an Israeli-declared firing zone.
During the reporting period, Israeli forces
confiscated at least 49 structures in another West
Bank herding community, Ras Al-Tin, resulting in the
displacement of 84 Palestinians, including 53 children
and 14 women.
I urge Israel to cease the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian property throughout the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law, and
to allow Palestinians to develop their communities.
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning to the region, in the occupied Golan the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria has been generally
maintained despite the continued violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the parties. On
1 June, the IDF said that it had carried out a retaliatory
attack on a military outpost of the Syrian armed forces
west of the ceasefire line. Early on 17 June, United
Nations personnel observed an IDF tank on the Alpha
side fire 10 rounds towards Al-Qahtaniya in the area
of separation. The United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force continues to liaise with the parties to
remind them of their obligations to respect the terms of
the disengagement agreement and prevent escalation of
the situation across the ceasefire line.
In Lebanon, and ahead of the first anniversary
of the Beirut port explosion on 4 August, the United
Nations reiterates the need for an impartial and
transparent investigation into the explosion to ensure
accountability. The United Nations looks forward to the
swift formation of a new Government able to address
the country’s crises, following the appointment of
Mr. Najib Mikati as Prime Minister-designate on 26 July.
Meanwhile, the situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains tense, as demonstrated by the rocket fire from
Lebanon towards Israel and the artillery response by
Israel on 20 July. UNIFIL continues to liaise with the
parties to de-escalate tensions.
I remain concerned about the financial situation
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). As
of today, the projected shortfall under its programme
budget amounts to $100 million. The Agency also faces
an imminent cash-flow crisis, which risks impacting
the smooth opening of the school year for half a
million girls and boys in Gaza. The absence of a fully
funded programme budget also undermines UNRWA’s
capacity to conduct much needed humanitarian and
early recovery activities in Gaza. I appeal once again
to all donors, including those from the Arab region, to
sustain the funding levels of past years and advance
disbursements of funds as much as possible to avoid a
disruption of essential services and humanitarian aid.
Following the explosive violence across the
occupied Palestinian territory and Israel in May, on
30 June some 200 Israeli and Palestinian women’s
organizations and activists released a joint statement
calling for immediate action, based on the principles of
resolution 1325 (2000), to achieve long-term solutions

S/PV. 8826

to the conflict. Noting the particular importance of
protecting women from all forms of violence and
ensuring women’s representation in decision-making
positions, they urged broader efforts towards a
negotiated long-term solution, and not just a temporary
calm.
We in the international community should heed
those important words. Urgent efforts to improve the
situation in Gaza must move forward swiftly, but let
us not lose sight of the broader goal — resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, ending the occupation and
realizing the two-State solution on the basis of United
Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral
agreements.
The United Nations remains committed to
continuing to support Palestinian and Israeli moves
towards that political horizon. The United Nations
will work with the parties and through the Middle
East Quartet to pave the way forward to meaningful
negotiations on all outstanding issues.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Hastings for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Oppenheimer.
Ms. Oppenheimer: I thank you, Mr. President, and
the members of the Security Council for the opportunity
to address the Council today.
I grew up in Jerusalem and, likewise, raised my
children here. My Orthodox Jewish upbringing deepened
my understanding of the profound role of religion and
tradition in shaping attachment to the city. Jerusalem
is, in every meaning of the word, my home, yet it is
also home for the many Palestinians who live alongside
Israelis like me. When I think of Jerusalem, I cannot
imagine it without the multiplicity of peoples, religions
and historical narratives it contains. It is precisely that
diversity that makes Jerusalem so extraordinary, but
also what transforms it into an arena of acute conflict.
For that reason, I joined Ir Amim — an Israeli
organization that envisions an equitable and sustainable
Jerusalem, with an agreed political future. Ir Amim
means “City of Peoples,” which reflects our vision of
Jerusalem as a shared city — the current home and
future capital of two peoples with equal measures of
attachments and claims to Jerusalem. Yet, the rights
and liberties I enjoy as an Israeli citizen are not afforded
to the city’s 350,000 Palestinian residents, who today
make up nearly 40 per cent of its population.

21-208685/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Since the 1967 occupation and unilateral
annexation of East Jerusalem, in contravention of
international law, Israeli authorities have employed
a system of discriminatory policies to weaken the
Palestinian hold on the city. Those policies have
included land confiscation and settlement-building, the
denial of citizenship and political rights, permanent
residency revocations, insufficient service provision
and severe restrictions on planning and building in East
Jerusalem. That not only violates the individual and
collective rights of Palestinians in Jerusalem, but also
contravenes Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), and destabilizes conditions for
an agreed resolution based on a two-State framework,
with two capitals in Jerusalem.
The recent escalation of violence and tensions
in our region further underscored the centrality of
Jerusalem to the conflict and its wider implications on
regional stability. The main trigger behind the clashes
was the ongoing pressure to undermine Palestinian
rights to Jerusalem, exemplified by the continued
erosion of the status quo on the Temple Mount/Haram
Al-Sharif, the arbitrary closure of the Damascus Gate
plaza during Ramadan and the pending evictions of
Palestinian families in Sheikh Jarrah. Indeed, in recent
years, the number of evictions of Palestinian families
and home demolitions has significantly grown, serving
as an acute mechanism of Palestinian displacement
from Jerusalem.
I am speaking before the Council today because
these measures of Palestinian displacement have
recently increased in scope and scale in an unprecedented
manner. A total of four Palestinian communities in East
Jerusalem: Sheikh Jarrah, Batan Al-Hawa, Al-Bustan
and Al-Walajeh, numbering approximately 3,000
Palestinians, are simultaneously under impending
threat of mass expulsion. Many of those families have
exhausted their limited legal remedies, which could
lead to a devastating wave of evictions and demolitions
in the coming months.
Beyond the geopolitical implications, these
measures severely violate Palestinian rights to housing
and the right to family and community life, as an
occupied minority group protected under international
law. The Israeli Government presents its actions as
legitimate within the framework of its democratic and
legal institutions. However, those institutions are largely
inaccessible to East Jerusalem Palestinians, who are
devoid of political rights and the power to participate
6/24

28/07/2021

in the legislative and policymaking processes, which
govern their lives.
The two communities facing mass eviction
are Sheikh Jarrah and Batan Al-Hawa. Nearly 150
Palestinian families, numbering more than 1,000 people,
are at risk of displacement, based on discriminatory
laws. Those laws afford Jews the reclamation of assets
in East Jerusalem, lost in 1948, now inhabited by
Palestinians, while denying Palestinians the same right
for lost properties on the Israeli side of the Green Line.
Many of the families facing eviction are Palestinian
refugees, who lost homes in Israel in 1948 and now
stand to be displaced for a second time.
Although successive Israeli Governments have
framed those cases as standard property disputes,
they are rather part of a systematic campaign aimed at
uprooting Palestinian families and supplanting them
with settlers to create Israeli enclaves in the heart of
Palestinian neighbourhoods. These settler compounds
are accompanied by the daily presence of security
forces, which together generate constant friction and
severely disrupt life in the community.
Currently, several eviction cases in both
neighbourhoods are pending at the Supreme Court,
with a major hearing scheduled for 2 August, pertaining
to four families in Sheikh Jarrah. Concurrently, the
Attorney-General has been asked by the Supreme
Court to submit a legal opinion by 29 August in one of
the cases in Batan Al-Hawa, which will likely impact
the additional cases, involving 80 more families in
that neighbourhood.
The Court’s request indicates a possible
understanding that those cases carry far-reaching
political and moral ramifications and, therefore, require
Government involvement. Through the AttorneyGeneral’s opinion, the Israeli Government is now being
compelled to take an explicit position on these eviction
proceedings. It is therefore essential to hold the Israeli
Government accountable and to urge it to prevent the
large-scale displacement of those communities.
In parallel, threats of mass demolition loom over 140
homes in Al-Bustan, Silwan and Al-Walajeh, placing
some 1,800 more Palestinians at risk of displacement.
Upcoming court decisions in August, concerning
both of those communities, could immediately
accelerate demolitions.
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8826

In Al-Bustan, demolitions are being advanced to
make way for a nationalistic archaeological park, while
in Al-Walajeh they are being carried out due to its
strategic location between Jerusalem and the southern
West Bank settlements — an area targeted for further
de facto or formal annexation.

and cooperation must therefore be cultivated and
measures that exacerbate tensions should be avoided.
Those elements must constitute a basis for negotiations
towards a viable solution out of the understanding that,
in every possible political constellation, the two peoples
will continue to live alongside each other in Jerusalem.

Demolition orders are served under the pretext of
lacking building permits, which are nearly impossible
to procure due to the absence of proper zoning plans
that the Israeli authorities have consistently neglected
to advance. Israeli planning authorities have continually
blocked efforts by residents in both those areas to
authorize their homes and promote plans to enable the
residential development of their communities.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Oppenheimer for her briefing.

A total of four communities of nearly 3,000
Palestinians are currently at risk of losing their homes
in East Jerusalem. These are not private property
disputes, but rather a manifestation of a national policy
aimed at changing the demographic composition of East
Jerusalem, which simultaneously deprives Palestinians
of their basic right to housing and the right to family
and community life.
In his recent remarks to his European counterparts,
Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid stated:
“What we need to do now is to make sure that
no steps are taken that will prevent the possibility
of peace in the future. We need to improve the lives
of Palestinians. Whatever is humanitarian, I will
be for it.”
To fulfil that statement, the Israeli Government
must therefore be urged to, first, immediately cease
all demolitions and evictions of Palestinian families;
secondly, advance proper urban planning and equitable
housing policies in East Jerusalem; thirdly, ensure the
provision of fair and adequate services to all the city’s
residents; fourthly, safeguard both peoples’ rights to
their homes and the city and recognize their historic,
religious and political attachments to Jerusalem; and,
fifthly, engage with the Palestinian national leadership
and together, with the support of the international
community, foster the conditions for a sustainable
resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line
with resolution 2334 (2016).
In the absence of a political agreement in the
foreseeable future, the two peoples in Jerusalem will
continue to share a complex urban reality, predicated
on symbiotic relations and interdependence. Dialogue

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I thank
France for its presidency, which has shed light on issues
of importance for Palestine and humankind, including
the critical matter of the protection for civilians. I take
this opportunity to declare that the State of Palestine
is proud to have joined the call for action to strengthen
respect for international humanitarian law. I also wish
to thank the two briefers for their clear and sober
portrayals of the situation on the ground and the dire
reminder of the need for urgent international action to
uphold international law and the Security Council’s
resolutions in our collective search for justice and peace.
We are often told that we should not air past
grievances and that we need to focus on the future.
While I understand the sentiment, when we speak
of dispossession, displacement and denial of rights,
we are actually speaking of the present reality of our
people, not of an old chapter in our history, an ongoing
dismal reality and injustice. We fear that the future
being drawn on the ground aims at making that our
perpetual reality.
Some people try to explain to us how not to place
our children in harm’s way, overlooking the central and
hard fact that the occupation, violent and belligerent in
every manifestation, is the harm placed in our children’s
way every day. Every job becomes more challenging
in Palestine. A teacher, a doctor, a nurse, a journalist
and a representative of the people can be arrested or
killed for doing their duty. But there is no task more
difficult than being a parent deprived of any means to
afford their children any sense of stability or security.
There is no safe haven in Palestine. Children are killed
in their homes, in their schools and in the streets. They
can experience an arrest when they are as young as
five or six years. They fear forcible displacement from
their homes from the day they are born. In Jerusalem,
in Gaza and in every corner of our country that is the
reality with which parents and children are confronted.

21-208687/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Let us therefore talk about the future by addressing
how to change the reality of our children today. The
battle for peace will be won or lost on the ground by
ending the galloping annexation and occupation and by
upholding Palestinian rights.
The Security Council has called on the parties to
demonstrate in word and practice their commitment to
peace. Occupation and peace cannot coexist; they are
mutually exclusive. Advancing peace requires ending
the occupation. As we speak, peace is at stake in Sheikh
Jarrah, as we heard, and Silwan as the occupation
continues to creep into our homes. It is at stake in
Beita, where the battle against illegal settlements has
reached new heights. It is at stake in Jerusalem and
the Jordan Valley, where annexation plans are being
advanced daily. It is at stake in the Gaza Strip, where
the inhumane Israeli blockade continues. It is at stake
at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, where events demonstrate that
our warnings about attempts to divide the holy site are
well founded.
There are many reasons to despair, but there is a
good reason to continue fighting for just and lasting
peace, which is the alternative. We have to name the
alternative that is becoming more and more obvious
every day: apartheid on both sides of the green line.
That is the alternative. I repeat: it is apartheid on both
sides of the green line.
The past couple of months unequivocally refuted
the claims that the situation was under control while
annexation is under way; that peace is possible while
ignoring or sidelining the Palestinian people; or that
East Jerusalem could remain occupied forever or that
efforts for peace could be delayed indefinitely.
We need to maintain a sense of urgency and
generate the momentum to move forward. There are
reasons to be hopeful: the resilience of the Palestinian
people; the ability of so many to see that only peace
provides a sustainable and safe future for all; a United
States Administration that adheres to the international
consensus; an international community that shares
clarity on the objective of two democratic States, with
an independent and sovereign State of Palestine on the
pre-1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital;
as well as more and more actors, States, companies,
funds and organizations upholding their obligations
under international law and the Council’s resolutions
to distinguish between the territory of the occupying
Power and the occupied territory, not to render aid
8/24

28/07/2021

or assistance to illegal actions and not to recognize
the situation created by those illegal actions. When
companies implement Council resolutions, they should
not be criticized; they should be saluted. We need to see
more of this kind of action, and we need to see respect
for resolutions of the Security Council — not falsely
accuse them of things that they are not doing.
We are moved by the signs of international solidarity
with the Palestinian people all around the globe this
year — the solidarity of those who marched, spoke out
and took action. Many of them had marched in earlier
decades, against apartheid, colonialism, segregation
and injustice. Many of them were born after all those
struggles allowed freedom to prevail, and they refuse
to see the Palestinian people denied the freedom that
all human beings are entitled to. Some of us around this
table were part of those historic movements.
Within these halls and around this table, there are
representatives of nations that know only too well that
freedom is the only path to peace. Their positions are
informed by their own history and by the universal
principles and international rules that the Organization
was built to uphold. There is no reason for those rules
and principles not to apply in Palestine or for those who
violate them to continue enjoying impunity.
The Council has, unfortunately, demonstrated its
limitations in times of aggression and war. That means
that it has an even greater duty to actively pursue peace.
It knows the road that leads to that destination; it is
inscribed in its own resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). It has the tools to help implement those
resolutions. It has a mechanism, the Quartet, established
for that sole purpose, and we support in that regard
the Russian proposal to convene the Quartet at the
ministerial level. The Council must be the catalyst for
determined international action to steer us away from
the path we are on and drive us towards safety.
A lot has been written about this new Palestinian
generation — that it was desperate, seeking individual
salvation rather than national liberation, that it had lost
interest in politics, that it could coexist with occupation
so long as its needs were provided for. This generation
responded with a resounding message: there is no
alternative to our freedom. It has displayed courage,
unity, determination and pride in being Palestinian.
It has already vanquished the occupation by defeating
fear and despair. This generation deserves the Council’s
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

support even when it might no longer be expecting it
after years of disappointment.
Many noted the participation of a team representing
Palestine in the Olympic Games, a strong symbol, but
my duty is to remind the Council of the challenges that
those athletes had to face to make it all the way there
to Japan, and also to speak of the athlete that lost his
life or was paralysed or is detained, of all those whose
dreams could not be fulfilled because of the occupation
and injustice that continue to mar every aspect of
Palestinian life.
When we speak of untapped potential in Palestine,
there is no greater resource than our people, who have
displayed their spectacular abilities and talents in the
worst possible conditions. It is time for them to find
their natural place in history and geography, among
the nations of the world, to enjoy freedom and dignity,
return and independence, and to fulfil their right to
self-determination, a right that stands among the main
principles and purposes of the United Nations and a
right that the Palestinian people will not forgo.
I thank you, Mr. President, and Council members
for their attention to this urgent matter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Two weeks ago, the United
Arab Emirates officially opened its embassy in Tel Aviv.
This week we saw the first direct flight between Israel
and Morocco and Israel’s return to the African Union.
We will soon celebrate the one-year anniversary of the
announcement of the Abraham Accords, which have so
far led to peace and normalization between Israel and
four Arab States, in addition to our long-standing peace
treaties with Egypt and Jordan.
To quote a great Jewish thinker, “The times they are
a’changin’”. And they are changing, even without the
involvement of the Security Council. In fact, perhaps
they are changing because the Security Council was
not involved. Israel and more and more moderate
Arab States are working to move beyond the past of
hate, instability and fundamentalism towards a future
of dialogue, tolerance and peace, a future in which
cooperation replaces conflict and respectful dialogue
replaces violent disputes.
Unfortunately, terrorist groups such as Hamas
and radical regimes such as Iran oppose that vision
of a brighter future. They are fighting to keep the

S/PV. 8826

Middle East stuck in a dark age of conflict, a past in
which the narratives of the extremists dominate the
international discourse and in which Israel is singled
out for demonization.
In May, Hamas launched thousands of rockets
against millions of Israeli civilians. Those who truly
understand the Middle East know that that was a
reaction to the Palestinian Authority’s decision once
again to cancel the planned elections. Hamas was
seeking to increase its political power and popularity on
the Palestinian street at the expense of the Palestinian
Authority and so looked for an excuse to attack Israel.
It found an excuse, a very, very weak one, or at least
one that would be considered very weak in the context
of any other country.
Let me ask you: would you ever accept the narrative
of a designated terrorist organization as a valid excuse
for firing thousands of rockets at your citizens, at your
capital? Of course not. Bringing Hamas’s lies about
Jerusalem to the Security Council strengthens terrorist
organizations and weakens the Palestinian Authority.
You all know why President Abbas cancelled the
elections.
Still, the Council acts as if the most important and
pressing security issue in the Middle East were the false
Palestinian claims regarding Jerusalem. Why else would
the Council need to be briefed by a one-sided speaker
from a political Israeli no-governmental organization
(NGO) affiliated with the far left, an NGO with a long
history of spreading distorted claims regarding Israel’s
legitimacy and presence in Jerusalem while ignoring
inconvenient facts — such as the fact that more than
half of Jerusalem’s Arab residents would prefer Israeli
citizenship to Palestinian citizenship, or the fact that
Jerusalem’s Arab population has increased by more
than 400 per cent since Jerusalem was reunited in
1967, or the fact that just last week during Eid al-Adha,
100,000 Muslims prayed peacefully at the Al-Aqsa
mosque while Jewish visitors to the Temple Mount are
never allowed to pray — never.
As this Israeli non-governmental organization’s
participation in this debate reflects, Israel is a vibrant
democracy committed to freedom of expression.
However, bringing a political non-governmental
organization to brief the Security Council on Jerusalem
is as absurd as bringing a leader of the yellow vest
protests to give an objective briefing on the French
Government’s economic policy.

21-208689/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

But making Jerusalem the focus of the Security
Council’s Middle East debate is not just absurd; it is
dangerous. It could be understood as an acceptance
of Hamas’ narrative that Israeli actions in Jerusalem
justified its latest terror attacks on Israel. Today’s
discussion might serve to increase Hamas’ influence in
Jerusalem and the Palestinian arena. Is this really what
the Security Council wants?
Listening to the Palestinian Ambassador, it is
painfully clear that the Palestinian Authority is stuck
in the past and that it wants to keep the Council stuck
in the past as well — a past where, rather than dealing
with its problems at home or investing in its people,
the Palestinian Authority focuses on attacking Israel
in the international arena and inciting terrorism, a past
where the Palestinian Authority leads the efforts aimed
at having the United Nations waste its resources on yet
another commission biased against Israel.
The latest Human Rights Council Commission of
Inquiry against Israel is not just a waste of resources, it
is a travesty of justice. While the Palestinian Authority
continues to spread hate against Israel at the United
Nations, the Palestinian people are in the streets calling
for the downfall of the Palestinian Authority regime.
Palestinian Authority security forces are savagely
beating and murdering protesters and journalists.
But rather than addressing any of these issues,
the Palestinian Authority is going through the same
old tired act of blaming Israel for its problems. This
approach, which prioritizes demonizing Israel over
helping Palestinians, led to the Palestinian Authority’s
shameful decision to refuse Israel’s offer to transfer over
a million coronavirus disease vaccines that could have
saved many, many lives. Once again, the Palestinian
Authority prioritized its hate for Israel over the lives
and well-being of its people.
The Palestinian Authority claimed that its refusal
was due to the vaccine’s expiry date, but this claim
was baseless, and the proof of that is that Israel then
signed a similar agreement with South Korea. I guess
South Korea’s health standards are too low for the
Palestinian Authority.
Mr. President, do you think you could find the
Palestinian non-governmental organization that would
come before the Security Council to condemn the
Palestinian Authority’s incitement to terror and payfor-slay policy? Of course not: if they dared to speak
10/24

28/07/2021

out, they would be arrested and beaten into silence by
the Palestinian Authority.
Make no mistake: the costs of adopting the
narratives of the extremists in the Middle East and
enabling those who oppose peace to keep the region
stuck in the past are enormous, and not just for the
Israeli- Palestinian conflict. Lebanon is in a state of
crisis. According to UNICEF, Lebanon’s water system
is on the verge of collapse. Parts of Iran are facing
a water crisis so severe that protesters are out in the
streets and the Ayatollah regime is reacting the way it
always does — with violence and murder.
Israel is a world leader in water management
and technology. We would be glad to help the people
of Lebanon and Iran improve their water security,
just as we have helped many other nations in this
field, and just like we accepted to do this month in
our agreement to provide Jordan with an additional
50 million cubic meters of water. Leading the way to
a future of cooperation would hold great benefits for
all. Unfortunately, some countries are not interested in
building a better future.
The regime working hard to keep the region
mirrored in a dark past of conflict is Iran. The Iranian
regime is continuing its quest to become a nuclearthreshold State while spreading terror, destruction
and instability throughout the Middle East and around
the world. The International Atomic Energy Agency
reported this month that Iran is taking steps towards the
production of uranium metal enriched to 20 per cent.
As the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany and the
United Kingdom stated, Iran has no credible civilian
need for research and development in uranium-metal
production, but that is a key step in the development
of a nuclear weapon. Of course, Iran has no credible
civilian need, but it has a clear military need to obtain
nuclear-weapon capabilities.
It is not only Israel that Iran threatens. Iran is
developing ballistic missiles that can reach the heart
of Europe. Iran is destabilizing Yemen and taking
over Lebanon, with its proxy Hizbullah. Iran is behind
attacks on American troops in Iraq and on oil facilities
in Saudi Arabia. Just this week, Jordan’s King Hussein
revealed that Jordan had been attacked by drones with
Iran’s signature on them.
The latest example of Iran’s outrageous behaviour
was the plot to kidnap an American citizen on American
soil. Iran had Masih Alinejad, a brave journalist and
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

activist for freedom and women’s rights, followed and
photographed, and tried to lure her out of the country.
Fortunately, the American authorities foiled the efforts
to kidnap her. However, other regime critics, such as
Ruhollah Zam, who was kidnapped and murdered by
the Iranian Government, were sadly not so fortunate. If
this is what Iran is doing today, imagine what Iran will
do to anyone who tries to oppose its regime once it has
nuclear weapons.
Yet Ms. Alinejad was not invited to brief the
Council today, and Iran is not the focus of today’s
discussion. Instead, we are once again discussing
Israel and Jerusalem, in line with the script of Hamas
and Ayatollah Khamenei. While Iran plots to kidnap
its critics in the West, it has, together with its proxy
Hizbullah, kidnapped the Lebanese people while
making a mockery of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
When resolution 1701 (2006) was adopted,
Hizbullah had approximately 10,000 rockets pointed
at Israel. Today it has 150,000 rockets hidden among
the schools, mosques and homes of Lebanon. Iran is
working day and night to help Hizbullah to obtain
precision-guided missiles and other advanced weapons.
How can it be that institutions such as the Security
Council and the European Union have not designated
Hizbullah in its entirety as a terrorist organization? Why
allow Hizbullah to undermine Lebanese sovereignty
rather than acting forcefully to undermine Hizbullah’s
terror activity?
Last week two rockets were fired at Israel from
within UNIFIL’s area of operation. This is completely
unacceptable. The Security Council must take the
opportunity of the renewal of the UNIFIL mandate
next month to constrain Hizbullah terror activity in
southern Lebanon by ensuring that UNIFIL has the
tools, authority and resolve to fulfil its mandate. If not,
Hizbullah may drag the entire region into a war that
would only bring great destruction on Lebanon.
Should not the crisis in Lebanon and Hizbullah’s
use of Lebanese civilians as human shields be the
topic of today’s debate? But no, once again, the
Security Council is focusing on criticizing Israel and
encouraging Palestinian extremism and rejectionism.
When the Council fails to take strong action
against the world’s worst human rights violators, such
as Iran and Syria, and instead singles out the world’s

S/PV. 8826

only Jewish State, it is no wonder that companies like
Ben and Jerry’s and Unilever allow themselves to
single out Israel for boycott. Those companies have no
moral reservations about operating in countries that
are truly among the world’s worst violators of human
rights, while imposing an anti-Semitic boycott on the
Jewish State. In the light the of those double standards,
the claims of United Nations bodies and companies
like Ben & Jerry’s to be motivated by high ideals and
objective standards melt into nothing like ice cream in
the summer sun.
One or another non-governmental agency, or
even the Security Council, cannot undermine the
millenniums-old connection between the Jewish people
and their eternal capital of Jerusalem. Under every
Jewish wedding canopy throughout the world, a promise
is made to remember Jerusalem. We will always keep
that promise. While Israel will always remain committed
to coexistence and religious freedom for all peoples and
faiths in the Holy City, and we continue to maintain
the status quo despite false claims to the contrary, we
will never accept the delegitimization of our legal,
historical and national rights in Jerusalem — by the
Security Council or any other international body.
Rather than singling out Israel for attack once again,
there are many things that the Council can and should
do for the stability, security and future of the region. It
should reject Hamas’ narrative on Jerusalem and hold
it accountable for using the people of Gaza as human
shields. It should insist that the Palestinian Authority
end its rejectionism and financing of terror and finally
agree to a dialogue with Israel with no preconditions.
Palestinian pressure at the United Nations can never
lead to a viable solution. Only good faith, bilateral talks
and people-to-people ties can move us forward on the
path to peace.
Lastly, the Security Council should support the
efforts of Israel and moderate States to shape a new
regional reality of tolerance and cooperation. Israel
will always have its hands outstretched in friendship
to all who wish to join hands in peace. We hope that
the Council and its members will be our partners in
building a better future for the entire Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Ms. Hastings for her briefing. Once

21-2086811/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

again, I would like to express my deep appreciation for
the work of the United Nations, particularly her team
and Special Coordinator Wennesland. I also thank
Ms. Oppenheimer for her participation today. I welcome
and acknowledge the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
The United States remains committed to a two-State
solution. And we will continue to oppose efforts to single
out Israel unfairly in United Nations forums. Israelis
and Palestinians deserve equal measures of freedom,
dignity, security and prosperity. Violence threatens
those goals directly. We are therefore encouraged that
the cessation of hostilities between Israel and Gazabased militants, for the most part, continues to hold.
We continue to encourage both Israelis and Palestinians
to exercise restraint and refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric, including settlement activity,
the annexation of territory, evictions, demolitions,
incitement to violence and compensating individuals in
prison for acts of terrorism.
We hope to partner with Israel and the Palestinian
Authority in maintaining calm and keeping flash points
like the situation in Jerusalem — whether in the Old
City, on the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif or
in Sheikh Jarrah — from reigniting the situation. As
the immediacy of the most recent escalation recedes,
we must make good on our commitments to provide
humanitarian assistance and support recovery efforts
in Gaza. To that end, the United States continues
to provide critical humanitarian aid to vulnerable
Palestinian refugees.
Two weeks ago, the United States signed a
framework for cooperation with the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). UNRWA and its staff are tirelessly
committed to serving the needs of Palestinian refugees,
but the Agency needs operational and managerial
improvements. I want to be clear: the United States
has zero-tolerance for manifestations of anti-Semitism,
racism or other forms of hatred in United Nations
agencies, and that includes UNRWA.
That is why our framework of cooperation — the
most robust to date — outlines expectations and includes
benchmarks to increase UNRWA’s transparency
and accountability, consistent with United Nations
principles, including neutrality. Shortly after signing
the framework, we announced the contribution
12/24

28/07/2021

of nearly $136 million in additional humanitarian
assistance to UNRWA. The new funding brings the
total of United States humanitarian assistance to
vulnerable Palestinians served by UNRWA this year
to $318 million. But even with our robust support, the
Agency’s needs are vast.
We call on other Member States, especially
our partners in the Gulf, to step up their financial
commitments too. In addition to ensuring that the
Agency is on a stable financial track, it is critical that
UNRWA be able to implement its operations in line with
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. We look forward to
working with donors to intensify those efforts.
As we work to provide aid to Palestinians in need,
we are concerned about recent reports of the Palestinian
Authority acting to restrict Palestinian freedom of
expression and harassing civil society activists and
organizations. That is unacceptable. In particular,
we are deeply disturbed by the death of Palestinian
activist Nizar Banat. The circumstances of his death
must be fully investigated, and those responsible held
accountable. It should be in all of our interests to
promote a sustainable solution for Gaza and take steps
towards ending the suffering on both sides.
In late June, I had the honour to meet Leah Goldin.
Her son Hadar was killed by Hamas militants, and his
body remains in Gaza. For the past seven years, the
Goldins have advocated endlessly for his return. When I
met with her, I promised her that I would do everything
possible to support her efforts to have her son returned.
No parent — no one — should have to endure such a
wretched experience. The United States will continue
to fiercely advocate for the return of Israeli soldiers
killed in action in Gaza, as well as the return of Israeli
civilians held captive there. And we will continue to
push for decency, humanity, equality and peace for all.
Mr. Kakanur (India): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Lynn Hastings for her briefing today. I
also thank Executive Director Yudith Oppenheimer
for her participation. I welcome the participation of
the observer of the Observer State of Palestine and the
representative of Israel at today’s meeting.
The 21 May ceasefire was brought about by the
concerted efforts and assurances of the international
community, which continues its intense diplomatic
efforts in negotiating a long-term ceasefire. We call
on all parties to show restraint and to desist from all
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unilateral actions that could exacerbate tensions. The
regular and predictable entry of goods through verified
channels into Gaza remains vital for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to the Palestinians. Israel’s easing
of restrictions on the entry of essential supplies into
Gaza and on the movement of patients needing critical
medical care in Gaza are steps in the right direction and
need to be furthered.
India welcomes all measures to de-escalate the
situation and encourages further steps from both
parties to ensure the smooth delivery of humanitarian
aid and other critical commodities to Gaza. Such
confidence-building measures, followed by substantial
actions, would help in stabilizing the ceasefire.
India strongly supports Gaza’s early recovery and
reconstruction. The World Bank Rapid Damage and
Needs Assessment report has estimated a requirement
of $485 million for immediate and short-term recovery.
It is important that the international donor community
support the reconstruction of Gaza through the
Palestinian Authority. We encourage all Palestinian
parties to work with the Palestinian Authority to ensure
the well-being of the people of Gaza.
India and other international donors continue to
provide development assistance to the Palestinian
Authority for strengthening its governance institutions
and creating opportunities for the socioeconomic
growth of Palestinians. However, negative trends on
the ground in the West Bank and East Jerusalem are
taking us further away from the two-State solution and
threaten to derail the cumulative gains made by those
efforts.
In that context, we reiterate our concern about the
possible legal eviction of some Palestinian residents
in the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods
in East Jerusalem. The houses were built as part of
arrangements facilitated by the United Nations. We
remain deeply concerned about the continued clashes
and heightened tensions surrounding the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. We reiterate the need to respect the historic
status quo in East Jerusalem and its neighbourhood. All
parties must refrain from provocative and inflammatory
rhetoric in the interest of peace and stability.
Last week’s clashes in Jerusalem are a reminder
that violent confrontations remain a real possibility. We
urge the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to go beyond
the restoration of calm and start a serious dialogue to

S/PV. 8826

address the issues that undercut the viability of the twoState solution.
India has always attached great importance to
ensuring a better livelihood for the Palestinian people
and has provided timely assistance to improve the
economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine. India
has also helped build schools, hospitals and technology
parks and is supporting quick-impact community
projects in Palestine. We have also contributed to the
reconstruction of Gaza.
I conclude by reaffirming India’s firm commitment
to achieving a just, peaceful and lasting solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict. That goal can be achieved only
through two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. There is no other road to
achieving that goal except through direct negotiations.
We stand ready to support all efforts by our regional
and international partners to restart negotiations and
the peace process, which can ensure a future of hope
for all Palestinians and Israelis.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. Hastings and Ms. Oppenheimer
for their detailed briefings. I welcome the participation
of the delegations of Israel and the observer State of
Palestine at today’s meeting.
As we have heard, in spite of the ceasefire in May,
stability in the area remains fragile. There are reports
of frequent violent incidents, with the attendant risk
of triggering greater conflict. We therefore condemn
the recent mosque raids. We are concerned about the
continued expansion of Israeli settlements, including
the transfer of settlers, the confiscation of lands,
the demolition of housing units and the consequent
displacement of the Palestinian population. The most
recent demolitions took place in Khirbet Humsa and
Ras Al-Tin. The demolition of Palestinian-owned
structures led to the displacement of 108 people,
including 62 minors. Such actions are at variance with
Security Council resolutions. We therefore urge Israel
to be respectful of the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and to adopt measures to
reverse the negative trends on the ground, in line with
resolution 2334 (2016).
We note the ongoing cooperation in the civilian
and security spheres between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. However, budgetary restrictions remain
in place on the Palestine Authority. We hope that the
dispute regarding the transfer of tax revenue collected

21-2086813/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on behalf of the Palestinian Authority is swiftly
resolved. At the same time, we urge the Palestinian
Authority to respect freedom of expression, freedom of
association and the right to protest and to move forward
expeditiously in shedding light on the circumstances
surrounding the death of activist Nizar Banat. Those
responsible for his death must be brought to justice.
We also call for a new date to be set for the holding
of free, inclusive and transparent elections. The
protection of human rights and the periodic holding of
elections are the cornerstones of institution-building in
any democratic State.
With regard to Gaza, we commend the efforts of
the international community to provide financial and
material resources for its reconstruction, including fuel
donated by Qatar. We urge Israel to lift the blockade
at the earliest and to facilitate imports of basic goods.
We also urge Hamas to cooperate with United Nations
agencies to accelerate reconstruction efforts in the
Gaza Strip.
Mexico condemns the attacks on Israel, perpetrated
by launching rockets and incendiary devices from
Gaza and missiles from southern Lebanon. We call on
the parties to exercise maximum restraint, avoid the
disproportionate use of force and cease provocations.
Recent contacts between the new Israeli
Administration and the Governments of Jordan, Egypt
and Turkey are encouraging. We hope that that openness
is also reflected in relations with the Palestinian
Authority, with a view to resuming peace negotiations.
It is essential to break the cycle of violence. That is why
we reiterate the need to address the root causes of the
conflict and underscore our support for the efforts of
the international community in line with that goal.
After years of conflict, there are many Palestinians
and Israelis who aspire to live in peace and security.
It is a legitimate desire. We therefore believe that we
in the international community have a responsibility to
promote that goal.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Lynn Hastings for her briefing. I also
thank Yudith Oppenheimer for her insightful remarks.
Let me begin today by reiterating Norway’s strong
support for the efforts of the United Nations and the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
to secure a long-term ceasefire. Despite those efforts,
the situation in Palestine remains unresolved and tense.
14/24

28/07/2021

As Ms. Hastings’ briefing again illustrated, needed
most at this time are stability and sustainable solutions.
As
Chair
of
the
donor
group
for
Palestine — the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC) — Norway convened a workinglevel meeting earlier this month. That meeting discussed
the critical financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority and humanitarian and development needs
in Palestine, particularly in Gaza. It is positive that,
following the meeting, there has been direct contact
between the Israeli Government and President Abbas
for the first time in several years.
We also welcome the intention to resume meetings
of the Joint Economic Committee under the Paris
Protocol. The AHLC remains the only forum where the
parties and the donors come together to assist in building
the foundations for a Palestinian State in preparation
for the two-State solution to the conflict. Encouraged
by the progress and dialogue at the most recent AHLC
meeting, we look forward to the ministerial-level
meeting in New York this September.
Today’s situation in Palestine, economically,
financially and considering the sharpened political
tensions, is more severe and challenging than perhaps
ever before. The international community must work
with the parties to strengthen the Palestinian economy
and improve socioeconomic conditions.
A strong Palestinian Authority is crucial to the
delivery of services to the Palestinian people and
to development, both in the West Bank and in Gaza.
A strong Palestinian Authority is one that is wellfinanced, well-functioning and accountable and enjoys
democratic legitimacy and popular support and where
violence against political opponents and journalists
is unacceptable.
We remain concerned about the continued
settlement expansions, house demolitions, evictions
and violence. We take note of reports that indicate
a significant increase this year in demolitions and
evictions in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Of particular concern are the repeated demolitions of the
Palestinian Bedouin community of Humsa Al-Baqai’a
and the planned construction in Givat Hamatos, which
will isolate Bethlehem and the southern West Bank
from East Jerusalem.
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

All Israeli measures altering the demographic
composition, character and status of the occupied
Palestinian territory are illegal under international
humanitarian law, and they severely undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution.
All parties must respect human rights, including
the right to assembly and peaceful protest. We reiterate
the need to preserve the status quo of the holy sites in
East Jerusalem.
I will conclude my statement today by reiterating
that the current situation is unsustainable. The financial
situation of the Palestinian Authority is critical. A
solid ceasefire in Gaza is still not in place, and, as
long as there is no political process and no end to the
occupation, civilians will continue to suffer. The need
for restarting meaningful negotiations is more urgent
now than ever.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Lynn Hastings for her comprehensive
briefing, and I thank Ms. Yudith Oppenheimer for
sharing her perspective. I warmly welcome the
participation of the representatives of Palestine and
Israel at our meeting today.
Two months after the ceasefire was announced, we
remain very concerned about the continued violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory, particularly the West
Bank. The situation on the ground remains precarious.
The latest incident in the West Bank village of Beita
last Friday, 23 July, and previously similar flashpoints
were very troubling. We urge the Israeli authorities to
refrain from the use of excessive force, especially the
use of live ammunition against civilians. The rhetoric
and provocative actions that have contributed to the
dangerous dynamics on the ground must stop. Those
actions and incidents have only deepened divisions
between Israelis and Palestinians and complicated all
efforts towards peace. To stop such acts of violence, we
must tackle the root causes of the situation.
First, the decades-long occupation, settlement
activities, demolitions, the threat of forced eviction
and the violations of the status quo of the holy sites in
East Jerusalem are the major sources of resentment that
lead to the protests. The incident in the illegal outpost
of Evyatar last week was a typical example of how
settlement activities can spark violence. Those activities
constitute one of the triggers of the conflict. We once
again call on Israel to end such activities immediately
and to uphold and respect the historic significance and

S/PV. 8826

the status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. We believe
that it is in the security interest of Israelis themselves
to do so.
Secondly, the lack of progress in the peace process
has undermined the remaining hopes for peace. During
times of intensified fighting, as in May, we witnessed
strong efforts to reach a ceasefire, and we are grateful
for them. However, it is equally imperative to maintain
a similar level of focus on long-term measures and
steps. In that connection, we welcome the recent
positive signals paving the way for dialogue and urge
the leaders of all relevant parties to act with urgency
to revitalize the peace process. In the same vein, we
welcome all initiatives aimed at bringing the relevant
parties towards a just, comprehensive and sustainable
settlement. Viet Nam continues to support the twoState solution, including the establishment of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
peacefully coexisting alongside the State of Israel, with
secure and internationally recognized borders on the
basis the pre-1967 lines and a negotiated settlement
and in accordance with international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Throughout the decades of endless violence in
this conflict, children have suffered the most. They
were killed or injured in indiscriminate attacks. They
were exposed to all kinds of violence and provocative
incitement. They were denied access to humanitarian
aid, education and medical care. Their homes were
demolished. Their families were displaced, and many
of them became homeless. Sadly enough, they have lost
faith in the ability of the international community, the
authorities and even their parents to help and to protect
them. That is a tragedy with consequences not only for
today but also for generations to come.
With that in mind, the relevant authorities and
the international community should redouble their
efforts to stop the violence, advance peace and
relieve the suffering of those affected by the conflict.
Humanitarian assistance is now more critical than ever
for the Palestinian civilian population, particularly in
Gaza. We call for all relevant parties to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. We commend the
role played by United Nations agencies in providing
assistance to those in need, particularly that of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We call on international
donors to continue their commitment to supporting the

21-2086815/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian and reconstruction efforts to relieve the
plight of the Palestinian people.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Lynn Hastings and Ms. Yudith
Oppenheimer for the quality of their briefings on the
situation in the Middle East. I welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of Israel and
Palestine, whose perspectives have helped to focus our
discussions. As a famous author said, repetition gives
the word lasting existence.
Two months ago, after intense diplomatic efforts,
a ceasefire was reached to end one of the deadliest
escalations in the cycle of violence between Israel
and Palestine. Aware of the fragility of that truce, we
also recalled the need to strengthen, on both sides,
the measures that could contribute to not only the
consolidation of the ceasefire but also to the return
of calm and trust between Israelis and Palestinians in
order to promote the conditions for a resumption of the
peace process.

28/07/2021

The Niger would recall once again that the
destruction and seizure of private property, as
well as the confiscation of land and the building of
settlements on the occupied territories, are forbidden
under international law. Such actions violate United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016);
they undermine the efforts made by the international
community to positively resolve the conflict; and they
ceaselessly increase the threat of confrontation between
the two peoples.
Moreover, it is the settlement policy, injustice and
discrimination against the Palestinian people that cause
discontent, revolt and violence. The tragic events of last
May, as well as the upsurge in protests in the occupied
territories, are a clear demonstration of that reality and
must prompt the Security Council, in accordance with
its obligations, to do everything in its power to put an
end thereto.

The launching of incendiary balloons towards Israel
from Gaza is an act that must stop. The same is true of
Israel’s unbridled settlement policy, which has been in
place for several decades on the Palestinian territories,
with all the resultant immeasurable suffering and
despair. The recent demolitions of 29 June in Silwan,
in the occupied neighbourhood of Al-Bustan in East
Jerusalem, and that of 7 July in the Bedouin village of
Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in the Jordan Valley, are illustrative
of that policy. During the latter operation, several
residential and agricultural structures, including
ones financed by the international community, were
demolished, leaving almost 65 people, including 35
children, without water or food and deprived of shelter
from the blazing heat of the Jordan Valley during
this season.

Here I wish to talk about two other aspects that are
equally distressing, which are linked to the settlement
policy undertaken by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories: the trauma caused to Palestinian children
as a result of the demolition of their homes and the
apartheid system arising from the multiple violations
of Palestinian human rights. According to a recent
report by the non-governmental organization Save the
Children, the demolition of Palestinian structures has
displaced at least 6,000 children in the past 12 years.
Four out of five Palestinian children whose houses were
destroyed by Israel state that they feel abandoned by
the world. The majority of the children interviewed
displayed high levels of psychological distress, namely,
feelings of sadness, fear, depression and anxiety. All
of those restrictions and arbitrary and discriminatory
arrests create for the Palestinian people a climate of
humiliation, fear and daily oppression. The grave
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people,
including thousands of women and children, as a result
of the illegal occupation of Israel, must call us to action
and encourage us to show greater commitment and
resolve to end the suffering and the tragedy of that the
Palestinian people have been experiencing for several
decades already.

Often implemented on the basis of military orders,
those Israeli operations take place without any legal
remedy being offered to the Palestinian people, who can
but yield to the dictates of the occupying Power, which,
in the best-case scenario, conducts forcible transfers or,
in the worst-case scenario, abandons them totally.

Moreover, it is only by doing the aforementioned
that we can hope to see the return of peace and trust
to relations between Israel and Palestine as well as an
environment propitious to the resumption of peace talks
in order to realize the only viable solution: the twoState solution. To ensure that we have every chance

In view of the situation that we have been seeing
in the region for some time, that prospect of peaceful
coexistence between those two peoples and the return
of peace seem to be moving further away, leaving the
spectre of instability and violence still looming.

16/24

21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of achieving that goal, we call upon the international
community, the Quartet, the members of the Council
and regional actors to continue to bring the necessary
pressure to bear to ultimately halt all of the actions
and practices that jeopardize peace and peaceful
coexistence between Israelis and Palestinians.
Given that repetition gives staying power to
speech, and to conclude, my delegation wishes to say
that it remains concerned by the situation in the Gaza
Strip. After the shelling last May of that enclave, the
Israeli authorities have stepped up their restrictions on
the regular movement of goods through the crossings
into Gaza. If those restrictions remain in place, they
will have grave repercussions on the provision of
humanitarian assistance, which is crucial to the recovery
and reconstruction of Gaza as well as its economy.
That is why we urge Israel to show greater compassion
towards the people of Gaza, who have already suffered
so much, by easing its measures in order to avert the
tragedy that is looming on the horizon.
The occupying Power must shoulder its
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
to protect the rights of the peoples under its control.
The Niger affirms that only a return to international
parameters and the resumption of a peace process
leading to the realization of a two-State solution in
which both States are viable, sovereign and independent,
living side by side in peace and security, could lead
to an acceptable solution. No solution can be reached
without taking into account the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Deputy Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Ms. Hastings,
and Ms. Oppenheimer for their briefings, both of
which could help the Security Council understand
the situation more comprehensively and give it fuller
consideration. I would also like to welcome the
participation of representatives from Palestine and
Israel in today’s meeting.
It has been two months since the last conflict in
the Gaza Strip ended, yet the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory remains unstable. Unilateral
actions by Israel are increasing, which is a matter of
concern. In July alone, Israel demolished or confiscated
dozens of Palestinian structures in communities in
Humsa Al-Baqai’a and Ras Al-Tin, displacing more
than 100 Palestinians, including children. Right

S/PV. 8826

before Eid al-Adha, the Israeli police clashed with the
Muslim community near the Al-Aqsa mosque, which
exacerbated tensions in East Jerusalem.
China urges all parties to exercise maximum
restraint and refrain from any action that might
heighten tensions. Israel must earnestly comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions; stop demolishing
Palestinian homes and evicting Palestinian inhabitants;
discontinue its expansion of settlements; put an end
to the violence, threats and provocations towards
the Muslim community; and effectively maintain
respect for the historical status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem.
The current humanitarian situation in Palestine is
worrisome. The international community should scale
up its assistance to the Palestinian people and support
the Gaza Strip in resuming construction. We urge Israel
to earnestly fulfil its obligations under international
law, ensure the safety and rights of civilians in the
occupied territories, facilitate access for humanitarian
assistance and promptly and fully lift the blockade on
the Gaza Strip.
China has always been committed to the interests
of the Palestinian people and has on multiple occasions
provided emergency cash transfers, supplies to combat
the coronavirus disease, vaccines and other humanitarian
assistance. Earlier this month we transferred a donation
of $1 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
support its food aid programme in the Gaza Strip.
China will continue to provide Palestine with muchneeded assistance and donate 1 million additional doses
of vaccines. China will also partner with Egypt and use
the vaccine-bottling factory in Egypt jointly established
by the two countries to donate half a million doses of
vaccines to the Palestinian people in Gaza.
The Palestinian question is the root cause of the
turbulence in the Middle East. The resolution of that
question cannot be delayed indefinitely. China remains
firmly committed to the just cause of the Palestinian
people to gain national rights. We support the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine that
enjoys full sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Recently, the State Councilor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi, had in-depth exchanges of
views on the Palestinian question with the relevant

21-2086817/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

countries during his visit to the Middle East. He
emphasized that the two-State solution enjoys
international consensus and demonstrates equity and
justice. It is also the only practical solution to the
Palestinian question.
China has put forward three ideas on bringing
forth the two-State solution. First, the authority of
the Palestinian Authority should be enhanced and it
should be authorized to exercise sovereign functions
in security, finance and other areas, so as to gain
effective control over the autonomous and occupied
territories. Secondly, the Palestinian factions should be
supported in striving for greater unity, whereby they
achieve internal reconciliation through consultation
and dialogue and come to a unified position on talks
for the settlement of the Palestinian question. Thirdly,
Palestine and Israel should be encouraged to resume
peace talks based on the two-State solution.
Palestinian and Israeli negotiators are welcome to
conduct direct talks in China. In the meantime, China
calls for the holding of an international peace conference
led by the United Nations with the participation of the
permanent members of the Security Council and all
stakeholders in the Middle East peace process with
a view to seeking a comprehensive, lasting and just
settlement of the Palestinian question and to enabling
both countries to coexist in peace.
These ideas from China have received positive
responses from countries in the region, and they
were welcomed in a declaration made by the Foreign
Minister of Palestine, Mr. Al-Maliki. We stand ready
to work with relevant parties and the international
community to put true multilateralism into practice,
enhance international cooperation, defend equity and
justice, turn the vision of the two-State solution into
reality, translate consensus into action and continue to
undertake unstinting efforts aimed at realizing lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East at an early date.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): At the outset, I would like to
thank Deputy Special Coordinator Lynn Hastings and
Ms. Yudith Oppenheimer for their detailed briefings.
We also recognize and welcome the participation of the
representatives of the observer State of Palestine and
Israel in today’s meeting.
Kenya notes that, despite the fragile ceasefire,
efforts aimed at advancing the Middle East peace
process and re-engagement in the political process
continue at various levels, including through the Office
18/24

28/07/2021

of the United Nations Special Coordinator and the
Special Envoys of the Middle East Quartet, and with
regional mediation efforts spearheaded by neighbouring
countries. We recognize that all constructive and
inclusive engagement undertaken on all tracks, from
the communal track to diplomacy at the track-one — or
State — level, have a critical role to play in the quest for
sustainability of the peace efforts.
As we have done before, we urge all parties to refrain
from inflammatory rhetoric and acts of provocation
and incitement that further contribute to the fragility of
the peace of Jerusalem and of the region. I also reaffirm
Kenya’s condemnation of all acts of violence and other
violations of Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), by all parties.
We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks and acts
conducive to terrorism by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other militant groups, and we reiterate that no
cause can justify the deliberate targeting of civilians.
We continue to urge the new Israeli Government to
resolve the possible forced evictions of Palestinian
families from their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah and
Silwan neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem.
Kenya once again underscores that the practicality
and full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
requires that the issues relating to settlements, territorial
contiguity and the viability of the two-State solution
be addressed. Indeed, the establishment by Israel
of settlements in the Palestinian occupied territory,
including East Jerusalem, in violation of international
law, remains a major impediment to the actualization
of the vision of a two-State solution, where the two
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace,
and within secure and recognized borders based on
the 1967 lines. We further reiterate that continued
economic isolation of parts of the region from the wider
regional and global economy has implications for the
peace and security and stability of the broader Middle
East region.
Kenya urges that as the rebuilding of the Gaza Strip
is undertaken, steps must also be put in place to prevent
the misuse and diversion of aid by Hamas and other
armed groups. We note that the recent June 2021 joint
Gaza Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA)
undertaken by the World Bank Group, the European
Union and the United Nations following the May
2021 conflict recognizes that appropriate safeguards
should be instituted to prevent any diversions as an
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

immediate recovery initiative. In this regard, and as
the RDNA consultations continue through the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee, we emphasize that timely
operationalization and unhindered humanitarian
access to the affected areas should be a factor in all
existing agreements, instruments and mechanisms
with a view not only to preventing any diversion,
but also to submitting recommendations that would
comprehensively address Gaza’s economic rigidity and
closed economy, in coordination with the role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
The low vaccination rate in Gaza, the West Bank and
East Jerusalem continues to be a concern, particularly
with the increasing number of delta-variant cases
being reported. We welcome and encourage efforts
aimed at ensuring equity in the access to vaccines and
medical care.
I conclude by reaffirming that the urgency of
pursuing a new approach following the 11 days of
hostilities in the month of May will be critical to
achieving meaningful stabilization of the situation,
a reversal of negative trends on the ground and the
creation of the conditions necessary for successful
direct final status negotiations.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Deputy Special Coordinator
Lynn Hastings for her briefing, and we carefully
listened to Yudith Oppenheimer’s briefing.
We believe that the main tasks for the upcoming
period are to strengthen the agreements on the ceasefire
and to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to all the
victims, in particular those in the Gaza Strip who need
it. Of key importance in that respect is that both sides
show restraint and refrain from unilateral steps and
provocative actions.
This applies first and foremost to the forced
evictions of Palestinians, the expropriation of houses
and plots of land, the building of settlements, arbitrary
arrests and any violence. It is important to guarantee
respect for the special status and inviolability of the
holy sites in Jerusalem. It is also very important to step
up efforts aimed at offering assistance to the Palestinian
authorities in overcoming socioeconomic difficulties.
A particular influence on this aspect of life continues
to be played by the coronavirus disease pandemic, with
which the Palestinians cannot cope by themselves.

S/PV. 8826

In this regard, we are in favour of comprehensive
humanitarian assistance for the Palestinians in the
occupied territories and in neighbouring countries
through United Nations specialized agencies, in
particular through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
without politicization and without preconditions. The
Palestinian-Israeli cooperation is of prime importance
in this area.
The challenges I have mentioned are urgent
pressing tasks. Tackling them will no doubt contribute
to stabilizing the situation. However, it is important
to recognize that this kind of stabilization will not
and should not mean that the international community
should become complacent. Quite to the contrary, the
events of last May confirm that, without movement
towards a just solution to the Palestinian question, peace
and stability will not be achieved either in Palestine or
in the region as a whole.
We believe that we should not lose sight of, or
postpone until a more favourable moment, the task
of reviving the political peace process, including
relaunching direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations on
all final status issues, based on the widely recognized
international legal framework. We believe that it is
important to pursue efforts to build an international
consensus that favours resolving the Palestinian issue
based on the two-State solution. We place special
emphasis on the role played by the Middle East Quartet,
which remains the only internationally recognized
mechanism to support the Palestinian-Israeli process.
We also highly value Egypt’s efforts to overcome the
intra-Palestinian division, which is key to restarting the
peace process.
In that regard, we intend to continue efforts to
bolster the activities of the Quartet. We call on our
Quartet colleagues to take into account our well-known
initiatives, including the convening of a ministerial
meeting and consultations in an expanded format, with
the participation of the States of the region. At the
same time, we count on the international community’s
support for those initiatives.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Deputy Special
Coordinator Hastings and Ms. Oppenheimer for their
briefing. Estonia aligns itself with the statement
submitted on behalf of the European Union and its
States members.

21-2086819/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would first like to touch upon the ongoing fragile
situation between Israel and Gaza. It is essential that
the parties continue to respect the ceasefire and do
their utmost to avoid further violence. The launching
of incendiary balloons towards Israel is unacceptable.
Israel has the right to defend itself, while ensuring the
safety and protection of the civilian population. We fully
support the international and regional efforts towards
securing long-term peace, enabling the reconstruction
in Gaza and ensuring unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the Strip. All parties should take steps to
improve the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation
in Gaza, while taking into consideration Israel’s
security concerns.
Efforts must be continued to create the necessary
conditions for the resumption of direct negotiations on
a two-State solution, based on international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Until such
conditions are met, we urge the Government of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to take practical steps
to rebuild confidence. Further coordinated efforts to
combat the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as
enhance economic cooperation, are vital and would
benefit the citizens of both sides. We also call on all
parties to calm the volatile situation in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. The status quo of the holy sites
must be upheld and respected.
Estonia is concerned about Israel’s continued
settlement expansion, evictions and demolitions of
Palestinian property in the West Bank, including in
East Jerusalem. They run contrary to international
law and are escalating tensions in an already-tense
environment. We are also deeply concerned about
the death of activist Nizar Banat during his arrest by
the Palestinian Authority’s security forces in Hebron
and the clashes between protesters and security forces
in Ramallah that followed. We call for a full and
independent investigation of the incident. The exercise
of freedom of expression must be ensured for all.
Lastly, regarding the postponement of the elections
in Palestine, we encourage all relevant stakeholders
to support efforts in establishing a new election date
and ensuring that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and take place throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Lynn Hastings for her briefing and, through her,
the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator for
20/24

28/07/2021

the Middle East Peace Process. I also thank everyone
working on behalf of the United Nations in the occupied
Palestinian territory for their commendable efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people and
promote peace. I also thank Ms. Yudith Oppenheimer
for her briefing.
The international community has succeeded in
containing the recent crisis, which was the result
of Israel’s aggression against the Gaza Strip and
continued grave violations in the West Bank, especially
East Jerusalem, against Palestinian residents and
worshippers at Al-Haram Al-Sharif. However, Israeli
settlers, supported by occupation forces, continue
violating the Al-Aqsa Mosque and committing acts of
aggression against Palestinian residents of the Old City.
In addition, the occupation authorities are pursuing
their settlement activities and home demolitions,
raising serious concern of renewed escalation and grave
repercussions for security and stability in the region.
Given this dangerous situation, Tunisia once again
calls on the international community, especially the
Security Council, to shoulder its responsibilities and
compel the occupying Power to respect its commitments
under international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law; cease its
violations, expansionist plans and settlement projects;
and stop all unilateral actions that could lead to further
violence and escalation, thereby undermining the
prospect of achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East. We also call for ensuring
accountability for the grave violations of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions in the
occupied Palestinian territory and call for putting an
end to impunity.
Given the tension on the ground and the absence
of any meaningful prospect of settling the conflict, we
members of the Council must now step up our efforts to
find the ways and means needed to de-escalate tension
and end the stalemate in the peace process in order
to resume negotiations under international law, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the agreed
terms of reference.
We call once again on the Middle East Quartet to
redouble its efforts and engagement with the relevant
parties in order to help create the conditions necessary
to bring about peace, end the occupation, enable
the establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem as its capital, and strengthen regional
security and stability.
The question remains: How long will the
unjust occupation continue, in flagrant violation of
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions? The Council already made its position clear
on this matter more than 54 years ago, in resolution
242 (1967), in which it called for the withdrawal of the
occupation forces from Palestinian territories to the
4 June 1967 borders. It is incumbent upon us to ensure
compliance with international resolutions. The only
way to do so is through hard and effective joint action
to resume serious and credible negotiations according
to the agreed terms of reference and a specific timeline.
Given the decades-long aggression against
Palestine and the unjust blockade imposed on the Gaza
Strip, which is targeted continuously, we must increase
the level of humanitarian assistance and response in the
occupied Palestinian territory while enhancing building
and reconstruction efforts. In the light of the growing
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian refugees,
especially owing to the pandemic threat, it is imperative
to meet the financial needs of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East so that it can continue to provide its vital services.
In conclusion, we reiterate that peace and security
in the Middle East will not be possible without a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict in line with international law and resolutions
of international legitimacy. Any attempt to impose
a fait accompli will not change that fact. It will lead
only to further escalation and threaten regional and
international peace and security.
As a staunch supporter of just causes, Tunisia
remains steadfast in its principled support to the brotherly
Palestinian people in order to end the occupation and
restore their legitimate and imprescriptible rights.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank all our briefers for their briefings. I also welcome
our colleagues the representatives of Israel and the
State of Palestine to today’s meeting.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to
stand in solidarity with the State of Palestine in its
quest to live within safe and secure borders. As the
occupying Power, Israel has an obligation to restore
normal civilian life for all Palestinians and to realize
the human rights of residents of the occupied territory.

S/PV. 8826

It is unfortunate that in recent months, tensions within
the State of Palestine have been stoked from outside,
thereby undermining the country and the aspirations of
its people. Our goal should be to forge a secure and
durable peace between Israelis and Palestinians and
consolidate efforts to preserve a sustainable two-State
solution, without departing from relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions. In that
vein, we call for the activation of the Middle East
Quartet to restart peace talks and negotiations as an
urgent priority.
On the issue of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the fundamental point about
settlements is that they are illegal. International law is
clear on that point. Let us be reminded that in 2004, the
International Court of Justice unanimously found that
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
breached article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
We must also act as responsible members of the
international community and condemn such breaches
of international law.
The impact of the illegal Israeli occupation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continues to
highlight the daily Palestinian struggle. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines remains concerned about Israel’s
policy of demolishing Palestinian homes and property
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Equally, we unequivocally condemn the most recent
demolition by Israeli occupation forces in the Palestinian
Bedouin community of Humsa Al-Baqai’a, in the
northern Jordan Valley of the occupied West Bank.
There is absolutely no justification for those actions.
The international community must take effective and
timely diplomatic action to end this policy.
Turning to the situation on the besieged Gaza Strip,
we are concerned about the worsening humanitarian
crisis, which has been compounded by the 11-day war
in Gaza, with further attacks kept at bay by a fragile
ceasefire. The rebuilding of Gaza must begin in earnest.
We welcome the small steps taken in that regard, but
much more must be done. The United Nations estimates
that millions of Palestinian people are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. We once again call on the
international community to provide additional funding
to support the programme budget of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. We were again reminded earlier today of the
$100 million shortfall and imminent cash-flow crisis.

21-2086821/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Additionally, it is evident that Israel’s illegal 15year blockade has devastated the economy in Gaza. In
that connection, we reiterate our call on Israel to fully
lift the blockade on Gaza and facilitate a greater supply
of humanitarian assistance to the area.
In conclusion, we echo the plea of Michael Lynk,
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, to
the international community to adopt a plan of action,
which includes calling upon Israel to fully dismantle its
illegal settlements and ensuring full accountability of
Israeli leaders, who are responsible for grave breaches
of international law in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Furthermore, we welcome the decision of
the Human Rights Council to form an independent
international commission to investigate Israeli
violations of Palestinian rights. For such a time as
this, let us redouble efforts and focus on increasing the
protection of the rights of the population in the occupied
territory. Minister Riyad Mansour underscored earlier
today that this generation of Palestinians believes
that there is no alternative to their freedom. This is a
legitimate aspiration and we are duty-bound to ensure
that it is realized.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to welcome the
participation of Deputy Special Coordinator Hastings
and Ms. Oppenheimer, Executive Director of Ir Amim,
and thank them for their comprehensive briefings
earlier today.
I would also like to welcome the participation of
Ambassador Erdan and Ambassador Mansour.
While the ceasefire agreed in May broadly
continues to hold, it remains fragile. Ireland reiterates
that all unilateral actions, which threaten the ceasefire
and undermine prospects for a two-State solution, must
be avoided. The root causes of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict must be addressed.
We emphasize that women and girls are
disproportionately impacted by the conflict, not least
during the recent escalation in May, and must be an
intrinsic part of efforts to secure sustainable peace.
We continue to be concerned about worrisome
trends on the ground. Ireland condemns the demolitions
and seizures in the communities of Humsa Al-Baqai’a
and Ras Al-Tin in Area C of the occupied West Bank
earlier this month. The increased rate of demolitions,
including of donor-funded structures, across the West
22/24

28/07/2021

Bank so far in 2021, is deeply concerning. We have seen
an increase in the total number of structures targeted
and people displaced in the first six months of 2021
when compared with the same period in 2020.
The most recent mass demolition in Humsa
Al-Baqai’a constitutes the sixth incident of demolitions
or confiscations the community has faced this year.
This disturbing cycle has serious implications for
affected communities. There is the particular risk of
long-term effects on children, whose sense of safety
is fundamental to their development. Ireland calls
on the Israeli authorities to end further unnecessary
demolitions of Palestinian homes and property,
and to ensure humanitarian access is granted to
communities in need and in compliance with the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
Ireland is also deeply concerned about the possible
evictions of families from their homes in East Jerusalem,
including in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan, a source of
tensions, which seriously undermines the prospects
for peace. It is imperative that those evictions do not
go ahead; that families are allowed to remain in their
homes, living in dignity and in safety. Recent events
once again underscore the importance of maintaining
the status quo at the holy sites.
I repeat Ireland’s call on Israel to halt all settlement
activity in the occupied territory, including in East
Jerusalem. Such actions are illegal under international
law and continue at an alarming rate, despite repeated
calls from the Council for their immediate and complete
end. Furthermore, Ireland underscores that individuals
exercising their rights to freedom of peaceful assembly,
association and expression, must be protected and those
rights upheld.
We note the appointment of a commission of
inquiry by the President of the Human Rights Council,
to be chaired by Navi Pillay, and express support for the
commission in undertaking its mandate.
In the Gaza Strip, our immediate priority must be
on the recovery from the latest cycle of conflict. The
World Bank, the United Nations and the EU Rapid
Damage and Needs Assessment identified a need for
almost half a billion dollars for immediate and shortterm recovery. An integrated, robust support package
is essential for sustainable reconstruction and recovery
that supports the Palestinian people and strengthens
their institutions. Ultimately, however, only a political
solution will address the challenges in Gaza and
21-20868

28/07/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, and we
must redouble efforts to that end.
As the largest international organization operating
in Gaza, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has
a critical role to play. In the face of an increasingly
complex operating environment, we urge international
donors to support UNRWA’s emergency appeals and
increase support. Ireland renews its call on Israel to end
the blockade of Gaza.
I would like to briefly touch on the situation in Syria.
Ireland supports the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen
and underlines that a negotiated political solution, with
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
and the inclusion of young people, is the only solution
to the Syrian conflict. We urge the Syrian Government
to engage constructively with the Special Envoy so
that a meaningful sixth session of the Constitutional
Committee can commence.
Finally, turning to Lebanon, we are following
the political and socioeconomic crisis with growing
concern. We welcome the nomination of Najib Mikati as
Prime Minister-designate, and we call on all Lebanese
political leaders to put the people of Lebanon first
and form an inclusive Government so that reform and
recovery, so badly needed, can begin.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Deputy Special Coordinator Hastings and
Ms. Oppenheimer for their briefings.
I share concerns already expressed regarding the
current situation on the ground. In view of that, it remains
crucial that all parties take steps to avoid exacerbating
tensions in order to prevent a further escalation.
The United Kingdom once again condemns
unequivocally Hamas’s inflammatory action and
indiscriminate attacks against Israel, including the use
of incendiary devices. We continue to call on Hamas
and other terrorist groups to permanently end their
rocket fire against Israel.
The United Kingdom has made clear that
Israel’s settlement activity presents a barrier to
peace. Rates of demolitions are rising, and this
month we have seen particularly concerning mass
demolitions and confiscations in the communities
of Humsa Al-Baqai’a and Ras Al-Tin. Demolitions
are illegal under international law in all but the most
exceptional circumstances.

S/PV. 8826

We also remain concerned about the high number of
Palestinian households in East Jerusalem with eviction
and demolition cases pending, including in Sheikh
Jarrah and Silwan. The United Kingdom remains
strongly opposed to Israel’s proposed demolition
of Khan Al-Ahmar, and we again call on Israel to
reconsider its plans.
We remain concerned too by the high number of
Palestinians killed in confrontation with the Israeli
security forces in the West Bank. In the past week alone,
two Palestinian children died as a result of live fire by
the Israeli security forces. Israeli investigations, where
there are accusations of the excessive use of force,
should be comprehensive and hold those responsible to
account. Settler violence also remains a concern.
In Jerusalem, we urge steps to end the ongoing
tensions on Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount. The Waqf
Administration and the Jordanian and Israeli authorities
must work together to restore and sustain the historic
status quo, including ensuring that any policing is
sensitive to the sanctity of the site.
Turning to Gaza, we must continue to address
immediate humanitarian needs and work towards a
long-term humanitarian solution. We welcome Israel’s
commitment to allowing access for goods identified in
the United Nations humanitarian response plan. We urge
regularized and predictable access into and out of Gaza,
in accordance with international humanitarian law, for
humanitarian actors and supplies and reconstruction
materials and for medical purposes.
Lastly, we commend the positive engagement
at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians on 6 July, and we welcome positive
signals from both parties towards the re-establishment
of the Joint Economic Committee. An effective Joint
Economic Committee is essential in supporting the
recovery of the Palestinian economy and ensuring the
sustainability of the Palestinian Authority. We urge the
parties to make progress at pace, and we stand ready to
provide support.
In conclusion, it is not too late to reverse the
negative trends, rebuild trust and work towards a
sustainable ceasefire and comprehensive peace. We
welcome the early engagement between the new Israeli
Government and the Palestinian leadership, as well as
Israeli engagement with regional partners. We urge all
parties to seize the opportunity to take action, tackle

21-2086823/24

S/PV.8826

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

immediate and long-term threats to peace and stability
and work towards a two-State solution on the 1967
lines. The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
playing its part in those efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank the Deputy Special Coordinator and
Ms. Oppenheimer for their briefings.
It is now more necessary than ever for the Security
Council to mobilize in order to preserve the prospect of
the two-State solution, both States having Jerusalem as
the capital. Only that solution can meet the aspirations
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and ensure the
security of all and the stability of the region.
The time has come to open a new page on the IsraeliPalestinian issue. The latest exchanges between Israelis
and Palestinians show a desire to resume dialogue. That
desire must be reflected in reciprocal small steps aimed
at restoring trust. That is what France is encouraging,
alongside its German, Egyptian and Jordanian partners.
We wish to deepen our relationship with the new Israeli
Government. We welcome the continued normalization
between Israel and several Arab States, as well as the
re-engagement of the United States with the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
It is vital that the parties refrain from any unilateral
measure so as to allow this new beginning and prevent
a new conflagration. France is concerned by this
year’s record level of demolitions and confiscations
of Palestinian structures in Area C, some of which are

24/24

28/07/2021

financed by France and its European partners. We have
condemned the new demolitions in Khirbet Humsa,
which are in breach of international humanitarian law
and the Council’s resolutions. We also call on Israel to
halt eviction procedures in Silwan and Sheikh Jarrah.
The status quo of holy sites must also be respected.
Easing tensions also requires a consolidation the
cessation of hostilities in Gaza through lasting
arrangements that allow for reconstruction and greater
freedom of movement of goods and persons. That
also requires unhindered humanitarian access to all
the Palestinian territories and increased cooperation
between Palestinians and Israelis, in the common
interests of both peoples.
Finally, there must be an improvement in Palestinian
governance. France deplores the decision of President
Abbas to postpone the elections, which would have
made it possible to renew the democratic legitimacy
of Palestinian institutions. It calls on the Palestinian
Authority to propose a new electoral calendar as soon
as possible. It also reiterates its commitment to freedom
of expression and to respect for human rights across the
Palestinian territories. Strong, democratic institutions
based on respect for the rule of law remain crucial if we
are to build a viable Palestinian State.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more speakers on my list. Before
adjourning the meeting, I wish to inform delegations
that written statements received by the end of today
will be included in the compilation of statements from
this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21-20868
