S/PV.7358

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7358th meeting

Tuesday, 13 January 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-fifth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2014/892)

15-01100 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501100*

S/PV.7358

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

are an indication of the confidence of the international
community in Côte d’Ivoire’s recovery and potential.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirty-fifth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2014/892)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite Ms. Aïchatou
Mindaoudou Souleymane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2014/892, which contains
the thirty-fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
At this meeting, the Security Council will first hear
a briefing by Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou Souleymane.
I will then make a statement in my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mindaoudou.
Ms. Mindaoudou: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak before the Council in
order to present the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Cote d’Ivoire (S/2014/892), dated
12 December 2014, and to provide an update on recent
developments in the country.
I am optimistic for Côte d’Ivoire. During the
past six months, Côte d’Ivoire has continued to make
important progress towards sustainable peace and
sustained economic recovery. The completion of
several important infrastructure projects, as well as the
return to Abidjan of the headquarters of the African
Development Bank and the successful organization of
several regional and international events in the country,

2/8

13/01/2015

As noted in the report before the Council,
President Ouattara and his Government continue to
take steps towards consolidating national cohesion and
reconciliation. Concrete measures have been taken,
including the release on bail of some 300 persons
detained in connection with the post-election crisis,
the unfreezing of bank accounts, the return to their
legal owners of illegally occupied properties, and the
reintegration into public service of those associated
with the former regime. A significant number of
Ivorians affiliated with the former regime, including
former top officials, have also returned to the country.
Political dialogue with the former ruling party, the
Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), which had stalled since
22 May 2014, resumed on 29 December 2014, and has
been reinvigorated. The Government is committed to
finding concrete solutions to all the concerns raised by
the FPI.
A new Independent Electoral Commission
comprised of 17 commissioners, four of whom are
women, was inaugurated on 11 August 2014. The
Commission, with the participation of the opposition,
has initiated its work and is moving forward in
implementing its mandate. With presidential elections
on the horizon, political positioning and pre-campaign
activities have begun. So far, eight personalities across
the political spectrum have announced their intention
to run for the presidency next October.
With the support of international partners, I hosted
a consultative platform at the headquarters of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in Abidjan,
on 18 and 19 December 2014, aimed at enhancing
dialogue among a wide spectrum of political actors.
This was an important opportunity to constructively
engage on ways to ensure the conduct of successful
elections. All participants, representing 23 different
political parties and civil society organizations, agreed
that certain measures were warranted to address
the shortfalls of the 2010 elections. These measures
were, inter alia, reducing the number of arms in the
hands of non-State actors, impartial treatment for all
alleged perpetrators of the 2010 post-election violence;
compensation for victims, the return of those living in
exile; impartial justice, the release or trials of detainees
linked to the 2010 post-electoral crisis, and the updating
of electoral lists. These are important concerns that
shall be fully engaged.

15-01100

13/01/2015

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

UNOCI will continue to work closely with all
concerned actors to ensure the conduct of a transparent
and inclusive election. We will also continue to engage
with international partners to ensure coordinated
support to the work of the Commission. In addition,
the Mission will continue its close engagement with
the Government to ensure that the necessary security
measures are in place to guarantee the conduct of
peaceful and secure elections. ONUCI FM radio will
also continue its efforts to sensitize the larger public
on democratic values and to advance peace education.
(spoke in French)
The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission
completed its three-year mandate and submitted its final
report to the President of the Republic on 16 December
2014. The report provides details on the events that
occurred during the most recent crisis; an analysis
of the root causes of conflict; recommendations in
the area of political, administrative and institutional
reforms; and proposals for ensuring reparations for
the victims and the duty to remember. The report is
currently before the President of the Republic, who
has also made $20 million available for reparations
for the victims in 2015. He has also sought the support
of partners in supporting the Government’s efforts to
ensure the timely implementation of the process.
I began my statement by expressing my optimism
for Côte d’Ivoire. However, while we have cause for
satisfaction, progress still needs to be made in several
areas. We must remain vigilant and determined to
ensure that the hard-won gains that have helped to
promote stability and prosperity in the country are
irreversible.
The fight against impunity, an essential factor for
national reconciliation in Côte d’Ivoire, is proceeding
slowly. Furthermore, we must step up our efforts to
ensure that the perpetrators of human rights violations,
including sexual crimes, are prosecuted and brought to
justice, particularly when the suspects are uniformed
officials. With regard to acts of sexual violence, I am
pleased to note that a committee of national experts
on conflict-related sexual violence was established on
21 July 2014. Moreover, the Forces républicaines de
Côte d’Ivoire have undertaken an awareness-raising
campaign for its troops on this important issue. UNOCI
is providing technical support to the committee of
national experts on conflict-related sexual violence and

S/PV.7358

continues to encourage the authorities to adopt a zerotolerance policy on issues of sexual violence.
On 1 December 2014, some 150 people close to
former President Laurent Gbagbo detained in the
Abidjan Detention and Correction Centre for alleged
crimes during the post-electoral crisis, began a hunger
strike to denounce the conditions and duration of
their detention without any ruling on the matter.
On 25 December, I went to the prison to meet these
detainees, who agreed to suspend their hunger strike
the same day. I indicated to the national authorities
the urgent need to accelerate the legal proceedings so
as to ensure the impartial handling of the situation of
all those accused of human rights violations and abuse
committed during the post-electoral period, without
consideration of their political affiliations. That would
also contribute to advancing and strengthening national
reconciliation and political dialogue. It was to meet
these concerns, among other things, that the political
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
resumed on 29 December 2014.
Coordinated demonstrations organized by the
Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire throughout the
country illustrate, in case there was any doubt, one
of remaining challenges to achieving effective and
integrated security sector reform. A comprehensive
security sector reform process is essential to ensuring
that Côte d’Ivoire’s security institutions are not only a
constructive force in guaranteeing stability and security
of the country, but also a tool to maintain democratic
gains. The security forces must meet the necessary
professional and ethical standards and norms. This is
crucial to strengthening the confidence of the civilian
population in their security institutions. UNOCI will
continue to support and encourage the Government in
completing the necessary reforms.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process is making satisfactory progress.
However, it still needs work before we can declare
mission accomplished. In fact — as the Authority for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration has
said — after June 2015, the target date set by the Ivorian
authorities for the end of the DDR process, there will
still be a surplus of about 14,000 former combatants who
will have to be rehabilitated and reintegrated. UNOCI
will continue to support the Authority, in cooperation
with its international partners, in order to ensure the
speedy and effective completion of the DDR process.

15-011003/8

S/PV.7358

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

13/01/2015

Although the security situation has improved
significantly since my last briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7197), armed robbery, banditry and other
criminal activities continue to pose security challenges
throughout the country. I am happy to note, however,
that we have seen a slight decrease in inter-community
conflicts, particularly those involving undisciplined
members of the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire,
former combatants and dozo. On 10 January, after more
than six months of calm in the areas bordering Liberia,
there were two attacks on security force posts in
western Côte d’Ivoire, in which two soldiers lost their
lives and 1,600 people were displaced from the area.
UNOCI’s forces immediately intervened to protect
civilians and provide support to the national security
forces. The attacks demonstrate both the importance of
making progress in the political process and how vital
it is that Côte d’Ivoire establish a professional security
force capable of protecting its people.

in order to be better prepared for every eventuality.
UNOCI’s operational flexibility will further increase
with the deployment of its rapid reaction force of 650
troops, which will be operational in May.

So far there have been no confirmed cases of
Ebola in Côte d’Ivoire. The epidemic in West Africa
has nonetheless affected refugee returns and prevented
Ivorian and Liberian security forces from conducting
the joint activities they used to undertake on the
borders. It has also temporarily halted inter-mission
cooperation between UNOCI and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. I would like to take this opportunity
to commend the Government and the private sector
for their efforts, which, with the support of donors
and the United Nations, have enabled them to respond
effectively to the epidemic in terms of preparedness
and prevention. However, while combating Ebola
remains a priority, it will be important to implement a
humanitarian strategy for the period 2014-2015. More
internal resources must be mobilized in order to support
residual humanitarian needs, resettle people displaced
from Mont Péko and implement a national strategy for
natural risk reduction.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004), concerning Côte
d’Ivoire.

As outlined in resolution 2162 (2014), the
drawdown of UNOCI’s strength began on 1 December
with a reduction of 840 troops. The current strength of
6,300 troops will be reduced to 5,437 in June. After a
comprehensive restructuring and review of its concept
of operations, the military and police components of
UNOCI are now much more mobile and visible. They
are much more capable of meeting the people’s needs
and ensuring the protection of civilians and the security
of United Nations personnel. At my request, the troops
now train regularly, including with live ammunition,

4/8

Regarding the general outlook, as the Council
is aware, Côte d’Ivoire is entering an election year.
Creating an environment conducive to holding free,
democratic and fair elections will depend upon the
progress that has to be made in the areas of electoral
reforms, maintaining a political dialogue, DDR,
security-sector reform and justice. Côte d’Ivoire still
needs support if it is to build on the gains made so far
and complete the important process it is engaged in.
For that, the continued support of the Security Council,
Member States and international and regional partners
remains essential.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mindaoudou for her briefing.

On 29 October of last year, in my capacity as
Chair of the 1572 Sanctions Committee, concerning
Côte d’Ivoire, I briefed the Security Council on the
Committee’s work (see S/PV.7292). At the time,
Council members reminded me that I had promised to
brief them again on my return from my visit to Côte
d’Ivoire, which took place from 2 to 7 November.
During the visit I explained its purpose to everyone I
spoke to, which was to emphasize the importance of
the full implementation of the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, gather information firsthand on the situation in the country and promote
meaningful dialogue between the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire and the Committee. Both President Ouattara
and the ministers I met emphasized how positively
they perceived a visit from the Chair of the Security
Council’s Sanctions Committee, a promising sign that
has strengthened cooperation and dialogue between the
Council and Côte d’Ivoire.
The authorities I met were very receptive and ready
to engage in serious dialogue. For example, the Minister
of Defence outlined the needs of all the armed forces
in detail, explaining that many of their security needs
had to do with preparing for the national elections,
scheduled to take place later this year. He described

15-01100

13/01/2015

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

S/PV.7358

his priorities and the reasons behind the requests
he had submitted to the Committee for the relevant
authorizations. As I expected, the President and his
ministers expressed their desire to see the sanctions
fully lifted. My response was that my visit was an
opportunity to assess the degree to which the Côte
d’Ivoire authorities were implementing the relevant
resolutions and the difficulties they were encountering
in doing so. I underscored the fact that the measures in
force were carefully designed to support the efforts to
establish peace and post-conflict development that are
under way in Côte d’Ivoire.

the production of this important natural resource. When
I visited the areas of Seguela and Tortiya, I saw the
importance of the lifting of the embargo for the larger
local communities. I deplored the fact that the export of
diamonds had not resumed, but I understand that it will
take time to restore the national capacity to ensure the
traceability of sales of this important resource. I trust
that the second visit in the framework of the Kimberley
Process, scheduled for next March, will confirm the
significant progress achieved so that the country and
the local communities can reap the benefits of the legal
trade in this natural resource.

In view of the significant changes that have
taken place in the sanctions regime since last year,
particularly the lifting of the embargo on trading in
diamonds and the partial lifting of the arms embargo, I
explained that additional changes would be dependent
upon the progress made in implementing the four pillars
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform, national reconciliation and
fighting impunity. Generally speaking, I had the
impression that significant progress had been achieved,
but that more needed to be done for Côte d’Ivoire fully
to comply with its obligations pursuant to the relevant
resolutions, in particular as regards the upcoming
elections in October.

I reiterated to the local authorities the importance
of cooperating with the Group of Experts. I highlighted
its independence and underscored the need to respond
to its requests for information. I explained that the
best way to make the Government’s views known was
to respond to the requests of the Group; otherwise,
the Government was closing off an important means
of communication with the sanctions Committee. The
authorities promised to improve their cooperation. I took
the opportunity to provide to the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs a complete list of the communications
or submissions submitted to the Group of Experts that
still had not been responded to. On 5 December, I had
the opportunity to inform the Committee about my visit
to Côte d’Ivoire.

I underscored in particular the Council’s concerns
with respect to the lack of progress made in reintegrating
former combatants and the need to establish security
forces that are inclusive and responsible, so as to
ensure the stability of the country. In the run-up to the
elections, Côte d’Ivoire will need to have police and
gendarmerie forces that are sufficiently trained and
equipped in order to ensure a democratic and peaceful
process.
In that context, I noted that some ministers were
not fully aware of the changes introduced by resolution
2153 (2014) with regard to the process to be followed to
request from the Committee equipment for the police
and the gendarmerie. During the meetings held at the
various ministries, I explained in detail the procedures
to be followed to submit notifications and request
exemptions to the arms embargo. I promised them that,
together with the Secretariat, I would help them prepare
and present such submissions to the Committee.
With regard to lifting the embargo on the sale of
rough diamonds, it was very useful for me to meet not
only with the Deputy Minister of Industry and Mines,
but also with the local communities that participate in

I would like by way of conclusion to once again
express my gratitude to and support for the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the Group of
Experts and the Permanent Mission of Côte d’Ivoire
throughout my visit. I should like also to thank the
delegation of France and the Secretariat for supporting
me throughout this very important initiative that I
undertook on behalf of the Committee.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Since
this is the first time that I am taking the floor under
your presidency, Sir, I wish to extend to you the sincere
congratulations of my delegation on the assumption by
your country, Chile, of the presidency of the Security
Council for January 2015.
My delegation takes note of the excellent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/892), dated 12 December
2014, and thanks the Special Representative of the

15-011005/8

S/PV.7358

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, Her Excellency
Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou Souleymane, for her briefing
on the situation there. I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your working visit to Côte d’Ivoire
in November 2014 in your capacity as Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire,
during which you were able to see first-hand the
exceptional progress that has been made in all sectors
of activity in the country. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General also confirmed in her briefing
the remarkable progress made in all areas as a result
of the efforts undertaken under the authority of
President Alassane Ouattara.
I should like to now stress a few salient points.
First, regarding the upcoming presidential elections
to be held in October 2015, President Ouattara and
his Government are committed to ensuring that the
elections are transparent, inclusive and peaceful in order
to strengthen peace, stability and democracy in our
country. Political dialogue between the Government and
the opposition, facilitated in particular by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has resumed,
as she said. In this regard, we would like to note with
satisfaction the establishment of the new Independent
Electoral Commission, which is consensual, and which
includes representatives of the opposition and civil
society.
There is now intensive activity among all political
parties in the country in the run-up to the elections
of October 2015. All of this bears witness to the
irreversible commitment of the Ivorian political class
to the culture of democracy.
In the area of justice, President Ouattara is
determined to build an equitable society base on
impartial justice accessible to all. He recently indicated
that following a difficult period, during the postelectoral crisis, which had led us on occasion to have
recourse to international justice, our judicial system
was now on track thanks to the reforms undertaken by
the Government and the improvement of the working
conditions of the judges. Today our country can
guarantee equitable justice to all and respect the norms
of international justice with regard to the judicial
process and trials. The process under way with regard
to the post-electoral crisis will make it possible, once
justice has been provided to all concerned, including
those indicted by the National Commission of Inquiry,

6/8

13/01/2015

to definitively turn this painful page in our history and
to consolidate national reconciliation.
With regard to national reconciliation, the Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, has concluded its
sterling work after three years of activity. Its Chairman,
Prime Minister Charles Konan Banny, submitted the
final report of the Commission to the President of the
Republic on 15 December, during a formal ceremony.
The Commission’s mandate was to work independently
to build social cohesion among all communities in
Côte d’Ivoire, including through transitional justice.
The Commission’s report, which covers this process of
reconciliation, can be broken down into four parts: the
preparatory phase; the quest for the deep-rooted causes
of the crisis; hearings, investigations and testimony;
and recommendations and reparations.
The hearings held by the Commission made it
possible to obtain the testimony of 72,483 people,
including 28,064 women and 757 children. That
testimony shed light on events and made it possible
to identify those who suffered harm during the crisis.
The hearings also provided the basis for a typology
of the kinds of violations committed and the damage
caused and their legal and juridical nature. On the
basis of the testimony gathered, the Commission made
recommendations for reparations.
President Ouattara took note of the Commission’s
report and asked the Government to consider it in order
to implement those recommendations that it considers
pertinent in order to complete the process. He announced
that a reparations fund for victims would be put in
place in 2015, with an initial amount provided by the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire of 10 billion CFA francs,
or $20 million. He asked our international partners to
support those efforts by making a contribution.
In the area of security, the situation continues to
proceed apace, and the city of Abidjan now has the same
level of security as New York and Geneva. However,
we are aware that significant efforts are still needed
to achieve a fully satisfactory situation. That is where
security-sector reform comes into play, as was pointed
out by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.
In that regard, I note that the Permanent
Mission transmitted to the members of the Security
Council, through the Chair of the 1572 Committee,
a comprehensive account of the security sector
reforms being undertaken by the Government of Côte

15-01100

13/01/2015

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

d’Ivoire. That dossier sets out Côte d’Ivoire’s vision
of security sector reform, which aims to modernize
our defence capabilities, strengthen the operational
capacities of the security forces and ensure regular
capacity-building through training. The doctrine is
centred around the following six pillars: national
security, post-crisis reconstruction, the rule of law and
international relations, democratic oversight, economic
governance, and the human dimension. The doctrine
also incorporates 108 operational decisions and will
be implemented in four stages — urgent, short-term,
medium-term and long-term.
On 11 December 2014, the Council of Ministers
adopted a draft law on the organization of the defence
and armed forces of Côte d’Ivoire. The text, which
superseded the previous law of 1961, was developed as
part of the new Ivorian army in the context of security
sector reform. The draft law will be introduced for
consideration before Parliament as soon as possible
with a view to modernizing the armed forces of Côte
d’Ivoire.
With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, we noted that progress is satisfactory and
that more than 46,000 former combatants — that is 62 per
cent — had been reintegrated into the socioeconomic
fabric.
With regard to the diamond sector, following the
adoption of resolution 2153 (2014), which lifted the
embargo on diamonds produced in Côte d’Ivoire, the
Government developed a post-embargo strategy that
takes into account the implementation of the Kimberley
Process. The strategy, which seeks to complete the
traceability system for the export chain, is built
around four components: strengthening the governance
framework, building evaluation capacity, implementing
anti-fraud activities and establishing legally constituted
purchasing offices.
Paragraph 14 of resolution 2153 (2014) provides for
a review mission at the end of January 2015. However,
following consultations with the Chair of the Kimberly
Process Working Group on Monitoring, it was agreed
that the review visit would take place from 10 to
20 March 2015, as you noted, Mr. President. This period
was proposed so as to allow for testing of the entire
system, including export. All of these elements are set
out in a letter from the Ivorian Minister of Industry
and Mines transmitted to all members of the Council
through the Chair of the 1572 Committee.

S/PV.7358

Overall, since 2012, Côte d’Ivoire has been engaged
in the implementation of a diamond supply chain that is
transparent and that upholds the minimum standards
of the Kimberley Process, while maintaining open and
frank dialogue with the 1572 Committee and its Group
of Experts. As such, we are working together to ensure
that the Kimberley Process review mission can fully
meet the spirit of resolution 2153 (2014), which in our
view should evaluate the entire Côte d’Ivoire diamond
value chain.
With regard to economic recovery, economic
growth was expected to reach 9 per cent by the end
of 2014, confirming the renewed dynamism of the
Ivorian economy. President Alassane Ouattara
intends for all Ivoirians to benefit from that growth,
which he is determined must be inclusive. From 2015,
Government action will therefore focus on social
sectors and on strengthening stability, including by
implementing universal health coverage, continuing to
implement technical platforms for hospitals, building
new health facilities, implementing the education
for all programme, stepping up the decentralization
of universities, creating jobs and reducing youth
unemployment, providing housing, fighting poverty
and high living costs, supporting women’s economic
and commercial activities and gender promotion,
compensating victims of the post-election crisis,
furthering the process of national reconciliation and
social cohesion, and continuing dialogue with the
opposition.
At the regional level, regarding the Ebola epidemic,
thanks to the drastic measures taken by the Government,
both at borders and within the country, no Ebola cases
have occurred in Côte d’Ivoire. However, Côte d’Ivoire
has shown its solidarity with the affected neighbouring
countries by providing $1 million to the Economic
Community of West African States Ebola response
fund. In addition, Côte d’Ivoire deployed medical
personnel to the affected neighbouring countries, at the
request of the African Union and West African Health
Organization.
In conclusion, given the significant progress made
in all sectors of the country, we can say, as has President
Ouattara, that the year just past marked the beginning
of the transformation and modernization of Côte
d’Ivoire. The construction of the Henri Konan Bédié
Bridge on the Ébrié lagoon in Abidjan, which opened
on 16 December 2014, in many ways symbolizes the
renewed dynamism in the Ivorian economy. President

15-011007/8

S/PV.7358

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Ouattara and his Government remain committed to
doing everything possible to continue on this promising
path so as to consolidate the gains and ensure lasting
stability in Côte d’Ivoire.

13/01/2015

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

8/8

15-01100
