THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:
NEW

30 MARCH 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1998) . . , . . , , , . I . . , , . I . . . . . 1 . . . . . . . .

Pug-e

1

. . +, . . , . , , , . . , 1, _, . . , . . . . . . , . , , . , , . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to th.e
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12295) .

1

Adoption of tlw agenda

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1998TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,
Besideit;

Mr. Andrew YOUNI;_(IJ?ited.Sfates

30 March 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
--Molapo (Lesotho),
Mrs. A. &ooks-Randolph
(Liberia),
Mr. H. Rasolondraibe (Madagascar), Mr. M. Kane (Maurita&), Mr. 1: Puntsagnarov (Mongolia), Mr. L. 0. Harriman
(Nigeria), Mr. M Fall (Seielzegal),Mrs. S. I< Gbujama (Sierra
Leone), Mr. A. H. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. I. B. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. A. J. Thunborg (Sweden), Mr, M. Allaf (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. A. Kodjovi (Togo), Mr. S. A. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania}, Mr. J. Petri6 (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Umba di Lutete (Zaire) and Mr. D. W. Kamana
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

of America).,,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/i 998)
1. Adoption of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I shouId like to inform
members of the Council that a letter has been received from
the representative of Ethiopia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the question on
the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in accordance
with the usual practice and with the consent of the Council,
to invite him to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the’provisional rules of procedure.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations,
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12295)
The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representative of Ethiopia to take
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes to
address the Council.

The agenda wiadopted.

The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/l 2295)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. Bekele (Ethiopia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council [1988th-1991st,
1994th
and 1996th meetings], I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Bahrain, Botswana, Burundi, Cuba, Egypt, the
German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire and Zambia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when they
wish to address the Council.

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to four draft resolutions
sponsored by Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and
Mauritius and contained in documents S/12309, S/12310,
S/123 11 and S/123 12, which were distributed this
morning.
5. Mr. BARTON (Canada): We are meeting in response to
the request of the African Group to consider the question
of South Africa in the context of General Assembly
resolution 31/6 on the subject of apartheid and Security
Council resolution 392 (1976) concerning the violence at
Soweto.

At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. A. &ha1 (Algeria),
Mr. S. M. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. T. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. 2, Banyiyezako (Burundi), Mr. R. Alar&n (Cuba),
Mr. A. E: Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. P. Florin (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. T B. &m (Ghana), Mr. M. S.
#mara (Guinea), Mr. A. Marpaung (Indonesia), Mr. D. 0.
Mills (Jamaica), Mr. l? M. Kasina (Kenya), Mr. C. D.

6. To say that this is not the first or the second time that
the Security Council has taken up a subject related to the
policies of South Africa is a considerable understatement.
Over the past 17 years, the Council has repeatedly had to
turn its attention to the policies of the Government of
1

South Africa. It has examined the South African policies of
apartheid and so-called separate development in the light of
Sharpeville and Soweto. It has been obliged to comment on
the continuing occupation by that ‘Government of Namibia,
an international Territory, and on its attacks on neighbouring African States in defence of that occupation. The
Council has similarly deplored South Africa’s refusal to live
up to its international obligations under the Charter and to
respect the mandatory sanctions of the United Nations
against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia. All these
questions are still before us, but I suggest that the core of
the complex of problems involved in the question of South
Africa is the policy of apartheid of that Government and it
is on this issue that I intend primarily to focus my remarks
today.
7. The Charter establishes as one of our fundamental
purposes the achievement of international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion.
8. Today, more than 30 years after those words of hope
were written into the Charter, the task of developing
international respect for basic human rights remains before
us, largely unresolved. But in one area of human rights we
can point to real progress: the colonial era has virtually
ended, The change of rCgime in Portugal in 1974 foreshadowed the end of that period of African history wherein
the fate and future of African peoples were decided by
foreign minorities. In southern Africa there remain now to
be resolved, so far as colonialism is concerned, the
situations in Namibia and Rhodesia. These are on their way
to solution, whether by the peaceful means which the
Charter urges us collectively to pursue, or, I fear, by
violence if we fail in our efforts.
9. But what about the situation in South Africa itself?
One perceives there policies and attitudes which resemble,
in all the most negative aspects, those of the colonial era in
Africa. And yet this is not a colonial situation: this is a
situation in which people of different origins have been
sharing for some 300 years a large and prosperous land, but
have not been sharing the privileges and obligations of
common citizenship in an equitable manner,
10. The Canadian Government has spoken out time and
again about its abhorrence of the apartheid policies of
South Africa and of the pattern of institutionalized racial
discrimination which is established under them. The apartheid system is cruel and demeaning, in that it impinges
upon the daily life and possibilities of the great majority of
the citizens of that country. They are not permitted to
participate fully in the economic, social, political or
cultural life of their country on equal terms with all other
citizens. Their lives are circumscribed by a web of legislation which prescribes which jobs they may hold, on what
level and at what salary, what kind of education is available
to them and to their children, where they may live, whether
they must live separated from their families, whom they
may meet, and in what circumstances. The cruelty of the
_ system lies not only in the daily persecutions and repres-

sions of African and other non-white peoples, but alsOin
the fact that men and women can hope to live a peaceful
life only by accepting the inferior and unequal role assigned
to them by that society, and accepting it not only for
themselves but also for their children and their grand.
children for generations to come.
Il. A direct and unacceptable development of apartheid is
the policy of bantustanization. The Canadian Government,
along with all other States Members of this Organizatica,
has rejected the so-called independence of the Transkei, the
first offspring of the bantustan system. We have done so
because it purports to present as self-determination a
system which allocates to 80 per cent of the population of
South Africa rights in only 13 per cerit of that territory.
Frequently, the territory allocated to the blacks is poor and
@possi@ to develop. Furthermore, the bantustans are
divided up inIb as many as 10 unviable tiny parcels of land
~~--- --:--with no_ contiguous areas and separated by land reserved for
use by whites. The bantustan policy also discriminates
cruelly against the millions of urban Africans who have not
been directly attached to any homeland and whose present
and future attachment lies with the industrialized city in
which they work and with the townships from which they
commute long distances each day of their working lives,
That is’ no solution for the future needs of all South
Africans. Those artificial economic divisions, furthermore,
make no sense in a sophisticated national and international
economy which demands increasing regional economic
integration rather than the contrary.
12. The violence which took place at Sharpeville 17 years
ago and at Soweto last year-the latter resulting in at least
400 deaths-was not the result of outside instigation ashas
been alleged by South Africa. Rather, it reflects the
profound discontent and frustration of the majority and
their determination to obtain the justice which they haveso
long been denied. They look to the north and see that all
their African neighbours have obtained the right to rule
themselves, That does not mean to say that those countries
have achieved perfect societies; no country can claim that
distinction. The challenges of development in Africa are
great and the problems severe. But each country in its own
way is seeking ways of bringing the fruits of development
to all its citizens. The disadvantaged citizens of South
Africa demand nothing more than the same basic human
rights and they will not rest until they have achieved their
goal.
13. The events at Soweto and those which followed
constituted a terrible human tragedy. But the greatest
tragedy of all has been the South African Government’s
reaction to those events. Thousands of people were
detained without charge or arrested for no other reason
than their status as social, religious or political leaders,
Scores of them have been brought to trial under the
repressive body of apartheid legislation. As many as 18 are
said to have died during interrogations and captivity and
there are indications that large numbers of others have been
tortured or subjected to undue coercion.
14. We recall that in October 1974 (1800th rneetiwl the
representative of South Africa said here in this chamber
that it was the intention of his Government to do awaX

with discrimination on a racial basis. We have waited in vain
for meaningful action. Some minor changes have taken
place and they must be welcomed, but only to the extent
that they presage a change of mentality within the South
African Government. But it had remained evident that in
reality no effort is being made to begin dismantling
apartheid or removing from it even its harshest and most
repressive aspects. On the contrary, the Government has
continued to add to the body of repressive legislation which
supports the system. Recently it indicated its intention to
restrict severely the freedom of the press. That action, if
pursued, would constitute a severe blow to the very limited
body of freedoms existing in South Africa and to a freedom
valued by all South Africans. We have noted within the last
few days that consideration of the pertinent legislation has
been deferred for a year in the expectation that the press
will discipline itself. But the threat remains. Those moves
towards control of the press seem to us ominous, as they
will jeopardize the possibilities that a free press offers to
the South African population of being fully aware of its
situation and of seeking solutions to its pressing problems.

civilization would be undermined should the majority
African peoples of their countries be permitted a full and
equal voice in the government.
18. An essential element of Canadian foreign policy is that
we trade in peaceful goods with all countries, even those
with whose politics we are in profound disagreement,
subject, of course, to our obligations under Chapter VII of
the Charter. Canada will continue faithfully to implement
all mandatory decisions of the Security Council in accordance with its obligations under the Charter. The
Council will, of course, be influenced in its decisions by the
nature of future developments, as they affect not only
South Africa itself but also Zimbabwe and Namibia and, in
this respect, the Canadian Secretary of State for External
Affairs said recently:
“It is my judgement that if there is not some
movement, clear and visible in the foreseeable future,
then we run the real risk in southern Africa of seeing a
very bloody conflict erupt.”

15. It is important to recognize that the key element in
the evolution of South African policies in the direction we
all want to see is the attitude of the South Africans
themselves-and
by that I mean the totality of the
population. I have no doubt that, in time, the pressures
induced by the events at Soweto and Sharpeville, the
solidarity demonstrated by white university students with
their black and Coloured comrades and the increasing level
of active resistance to social and economic abuses will prove
to be the decisive element in changing the present policies
of the Government. But this does not relieve us of the
responsibility to do everything within our power that we
collectively deem appropriate to support the efforts of the
people of South Africa to achieve self-determination and to
promote the objectives that we have identified and, I hope,
will agree upon in the course of this debate.

19. The Canadian Government believes it is essential, at
this stage, to take full advantage and to make constructive
use of any influence which can be brought to bear on the
Government of South Africa by those countries which
maintain relations with it. In that group of countries, let me
be frank, the United States is pre-eminent, and we are
impressed by the resolve expressed by the new Administration to use its best efforts to achieve our common
purpose, In our view, the Council as a whole should do
everything possible to take advantage of it. Of course, we
cannot be sure of the outcome, but that resolve, in itself,
cannot help but influence the future policies of Govemmcnts whose positions on these issues will be decisive.
20. We believe that the Security Council at this moment
has it in its power to take a significant and constructive
step. We hope that it will have the courage and wisdom to
do just that. It is for this reason that we consider it
important that the Council depart for a time from the kind
of approach which has so far provedineffective
and instead
adopt a declaration of principles on southern Africa which
will serve as a statement of purpose for all members of the
Council in terms of our objectives in that region of the
world. The adoption by consensus of such a declaration will
serve a dual purpose. It will, on the one hand, serve as an
unequivocal declaration to the Government of South Africa
of our intentions, On the other, it will serve as a clear
description for the citizens of our countries of the policies
of Council members towards these unresolved problems and
thereby serve as a vehicle to mobilize public opinion in
favour of our objectives. In other words, in pursuing this
course of action, we shall be enlisting the active support of
all members of the Council in working towards a solution
of the problems of the area. Certainly that is the intention
of the Canadian Government.

16. Canada, for its part, in 1963 voluntarily placed an
embargo on the sale of military equipment to South Africa
and, in 1970, we extended that embargo to the export of
spare parts for such equipment, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, we are
a major contributor to the United Nations as well as to
multilateral non-governmental funds which have been established to provide education, training, humanitarian and
development assistance to the African peoples of southern
Africa. We discourage sports contacts with South Africa by
refusing any moral or financial assistance to Canadian
individuals and teams which decide to compete in South
Africa and to any sporting event held in Canada in which
South African teams participate. We support international
actions on this subject because sports in South Africa, by
law, have been and are still organized on a racial basis,
contrary to the Olympic principle.

21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represen- _-_
tative of Jamaica, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

17. We also engage in major programmes of co-operation
with-the independent countries of southern Africa in order
to contribute to the development of those countries and to
assist in their task of building societies with social and
economic justice for all their citizens. Those countries will
stand as proof that there is no foundation for the racist
arguments of minority regimes that stability, justice and

22. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, first of all let me
express to you and to the Council the appreciation of my
3

with the evolution of an economic System,
centring on the
industrialization of the European countries, and of a setof ’
economic and other relationships with the overseasterri.
tories they conquered. That system and those relationships
form the foundations of the situation that we see even
today in the contacts between the developing and the
industrialized countries.

delegation at being granted the privilege of taking part in
this most important discussion.
23. To you, Mr. President, I wish to extend the warmest
good wishes of my Government, as well as my own. We
welcome your appointment as Permanent Representative of
your great country to the United Nations. You come with
the highest reputation for active and uncompromising
involvement in issues concerning human rights. At this
moment in history when the global community faces the
critical task of bringing social and economic justice to those
who have long been deprived of them, it seems a happy
augury that you have come to the United Nations. It is
particularly fortunate that you should be presiding over the
deliberations of the Council at this time.

28, The phenomenon I have mentioned is described
succinctly in, a book by Mr, Leften Stavrianos entitled A
Global History of Man,’ in the following words:
“During the years 1763 to 1914 Europe became
mistress of the world, controlling not only ocean routes
and half-empty territories, but also ancient and densely
populated centres of civilization in Africa and Asia, This
was indeed a most extraordinary development. Never
before in the history of mankind had one small portion of
the globe dominated the remainder.”

24. The Security Council is at present considering one of
the most fundamental issues facing the world community
today. This is the situation in southern Afrfca, of which the
question of South Africa is the core. This situation has long
been the subject of discussion at the United Nations, in
government circles, among business, religious and other
groups and among ordinary citizens throughout the world.
Here at the United Nations there have been many debates,
in the Security Council, in the General Assembly and in
other bodies, and a large number of resolutions have been
adopted. The United Nations has sought, within the limits
imposed upon it by its membership, to carry out the
objectives embodied in the Charter in respect of this issue.
Yet the racist regime in South Africa remains and, along
with it, the pain and humiliation
of those millions of
Africans who are deprived by that regime of the right to
live as ordinary human beings.

Integral to that system of domination was the concept of
racism which produced the enslavement of Africans both in
the New World and in their own homeland in South Africa.
29. Just over 200 years ago, America liberated itself and
now it has become a super-Power in economic, political and
military terms. Early in the nineteenth century, the
countries of Latin America fought and won their liberation,
but Africa, Asia and the Caribbean countries remained until
this century largely under European domination.
30. Vast changes h.rve indeed taken place since those days.
We have seen the abolition of slavery in the Western
hemisphere, the collapse of the colonial system and the
liberation of most of the peoples that once dwelt ia the
shadow of that system. We have also seen the establishment
and growth of the United Nations and the evolution of its
interests and activities.

25. The continued existence of that monstrous system of
apartheid is an affront to all humanity, but it must also be
seen as an expression of failure on the part of the global
community in the face of the high purposes set out in the
Charter and of the protestations, declarations and resolutions which have emerged.

31. But significant elements of the past remain with us,
First, southern Africa is still enslaved in a system of
repression. Secondly, that vast number of’countries, naw
free and Members of the United Nations, which once
formed part of the old colonial system, still find themselves
in a position of grave disadvantage, particularly in economic
relationships with the countries which oicupied the position of dominance. Thirdly, the world has not rid itself
completely of those values which emerged as a part of the
relationships in the past, values which explicitly or implicitly rated different peoples and different cultures as
superior or inferior and which still stand in the way of the
full realization of the rights of the peoples affected,

26. This is not to say that there has been no change in the
entire situation in southern Africa. Indeed, there have been
dramatic changes. These include the collapse of the
Portuguese empire in Africa and the success of the
liberation forces which have brought the countries concerned into full membership of the global community in
the past two years, They include the growing determination
of the black peoples of South Africa, of Namibia and of
Zimbabwe to free themselves of the scourge of white racist
oppression. They also include the growing realization, even
within those countries which have given support to the
oppressive regime in South Africa, that an end to the
system of apartheid is inevitable.

32. It is therefore clear that the issue of the fate of the
people of southern Africa is a fundamental part of the
broader one, namely, the matter of the correction of those
major injustices or imbalances manifested in closely interrelated economic, political and racial policies which have so
deeply affected human history and the lives of so many, It
is clear, in particular, that the liberation of the people of
southern Africa is part of the same process which inspires
the call for the establishment of a new international
economic order.

27. In our view, the situation in southern Africa represents
the most fundamental issue facing the world community.
We face today a number of critical problems which have
their roots in the history of the past 300 or 400 years, They
are associated with the phenomenon of the emergence of
Europe as the dominant community in world affairs, and
the acquisition by the countries concerned of empires and
spheres of influence as a basis for economic, military and
political power and cultural influence. They are associated

1 New York, Ally11 and Bacon, 1974.

4

33. As regards the situation within South Africa itself, the
anger and indignation of people throughout the world were
aroused by the brutal massacre,of schoolchildren at Soweto
in June 1976 and by the events in its aftermath which
amounted to a campaign of organized terror launched
against black people in other parts of South Africa. As the
heroic struggle for freedom continues in that unhappy land,
we are witnessing an intensified campaign conducted by the
Pretoria regime to maintain the subjugation of the black
majority. The stark reality of the prevailing situation in
South Africa is that the apartheid regime is at war with the
black people of the country. The lesson of Sharpeville and
Soweto is that the white minority in South Africa will
resort to more and more savage forms of repression to
maintain their position, while the indigenous peoples of
South Africa, as was said in this debate by Mr. Leballo
[1988th meetingj, are overcoming the fear of the gun and
the reliance by the authorities on the gun makes confrontation inevitable, since the indigenous peoples can also
get the gun.
34. Vorster’s regime continues to treat with contempt and
arrogance the opinions expressed by the world body. The
rGgime continues its ruthless campaign of repression backed
by racist laws and has adopted new and desperate policies
to contain the rising tide of African resistance. Among
those is the policy of bantustanization, which is no more
and no less than a strategy to preserve white racist
domination. This policy has been justifiably condemned in
the United Nations and, by an almost unanimous vote, the
General Assembly rejected the so-called independence of
the Transkei [resolution 3116 A].
35. The South African r&&e stands guilty before the
world not only of the crimes it has perpetrated against the
black majority of that country but also because it continues
to thwart international efforts to bring about peaceful
change to other troubled parts of southern Africa. It
continues to defy the world body by maintaining an illegal
presence in the Territory of Namibia, where it has extended
its evil system of racial oppression. It continues to
undermine efforts to bring about majority rule in southern
Rhodesia by providing military and economic support to
the illegal racist rdgime of Ian Smith. It continues to
threaten and to launch aggression against neighbouring
African States in violation of international law. In recent
times it has invaded the territory of the People’s Republic
of Angola and that of Zambia and has used economic
blackmail to threaten the Kingdom of Lesotho. This
catalogue of crimes testifies to the fact that the apartheid
regime is a canker in Africa. It is a threat to international
peace and security.
36. It is no wonder that negotiations with the Vorster
Government for peaceful change in southern Africa cannot
succeed. South Africa is not preparing for peace; it is
gearing for war. This is evident from the increasing buildup
of military weaponry which has been so well documented
in statements made in this debate, particularly by the
representative of Mauritius and the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, the representative of Nigeria
[1988th meeting]. It is important to note that South
Africa has been able to acquire that awesome military
strength by way of outside assistance. It has received and

continues to receive arms from State’s which are members
of the Council. Those States profess abhorrence of the
system of apartheid, yet they must be aware that the
weapons they provide are being used to kill, maim, and
threaten opponents of apartheid inside and outside South
Africa. Worst of all, continued military collaboration with
South Africa has resulted in the acquisition by the criminal
r6gime of the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons.
37. In addition, investments continue to pour into South
Africa and the economic partnership between that country
and the West is being strengthened. The links that are still
maintained between Western countries and South Africa
play a vital role in keeping the system intact. Although we
are assured that those links with the South African rkgime
constitute a means of influencing that regime in the
direction of more humane policies, we know that they serve
to protect certain economic and strategic interests. In fact,
those links are not agents for the promotion of change but
are in effect the means of giving support to the rbgime.
38. A number of the statements made in this discussion
point to the various steps which are being taken to tighten
the circle around South Africa and to assist in bringing
about the destruction of the system of apartheid and the
eventual achievement of majority rule. The representative
of the World Council of Churches has informed the Council
[I991st
meeting] of the impressive steps being taken by
the various denominations, acting separately or through
their ecumenical tirganizations, to stem the flow of investment funds to South Africa alld to secure strong action on
other fronts against apartheid. Mr. Olof Palme, in a particularly forthright statement [1992nd meeting], drew attention to action being taken by trade unionists towards
weakening the economic basis for the apartheid system in
the interests of destroying the repressive regime in South
Africa.
39. Again, athletes and other sportsmen all over the world,
along with many Governments, are taking steps to isolate
South Africa in sports matters, and the United Nations is
now charged, under a resolution (31/F] adopted by the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session, with the task of
preparing an international convention against apartheid in
sports.
40. Thus, increasingly, non-governmental organizations,
interests and individuals are taking positive action against
that evil system. And as this movement grows it contrasts
significantly with the inaction on the part of many
Governments.
41. It should now be clear to all of us that the situation of
the peoples of southern Africa represents the most flagrant
violation of human rights on a scale and in a form quite
unequalled anywhere else. This has for a long time been
recognized by large numbers of Member States. The
non-aligned movement, to which my country is happy to
belong, has always placed the subject of southern Africa
high on its agenda of priorities, recognizing the massive
unprecedented violation of human rights which takes place
daily in that region. This concern is reflected in the nine
draft resolutions against apartheid presented at the thirtyfirst session of the General Assembly on the initiative of the

was in a turmoil of racial conflict, make it only appropriate
that you should be presiding over the Council at this time.
Your close association with the great American civil rights
leader, Martin Luther King, who was brutally assassinated
at the height of the civil rights struggle in the United States,
and your personal commitment to freedom and justice,
human equality and dignity throughout the world make
you eminently qualified to preside over the deliberations of
the Council on the cancerous problem of aparfkeid. It is
also gratifying to note that this debate takes place soon
after the declaration by President Carter-when he addressed us in the General Assembly hall-of the objective of
the new United States Administration to work for majority
rule in southern Africa. That factor and the recent action
by the United States to repeal the Byrd Amendment giveus
renewed optimism about the efforts of the international
community to attain freedom and justice in southern
Africa.

Non-aligned Group, It is our strong hope that this subject
will continue to be the focus of world concern whenever
the issue of human rights is raised.
42. My Government was pleased to see the entry into
force last year of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid
(General Assembly resozution 3068 (XXVIII)J.
Jamaica is,
of course, a party to that Convention, and we urge States
that have not already done so speedily to sign and ratify it.
Thus it will become an instrument which reflects the
universal abhorrence of the system of apartheid and the
determination of the entire international community to
bring about the early attainment by the indigenous peoples
of southern Africa of their basic and fundamental human
rights.
43, In our view, the Council carries a grave responsibility
in respect of the problem of southern Africa. The struggle
for freedom and equality and against racial tyranny is the
concern and responsibility of all of us and must be seen as
an important part of the effort by the United Nations and
the global community to build a peaceful world in which
fundamental human rights are respected. Failure to take
action in the past has prolonged the suffering of the black
peoples of the entire region of southern Africa. But it is not
too late.

47. It is fitting that the Security Council should have
begun consideration of the item before it on 21 March
1977, the seventeenth anniversary of the Sharpeville massacres of African people by the South African police. The
21st of March has special significance in the history of
South African oppression of the black majority. It wasthe
date when peaceful demonstrators, urging the abolition of
the discriminatory pass laws, were met by police violence of
the most brutal kind, killing 69 people and wounding 178.
This sad and cruel action by the South African police on
the orders of the racist Government. was followed by
enactment of numerous pieces of legislation to -ensure
further oppression of the African majority and the preserva
tion of white supremacy.

44. It is the view of my Government that firm and
resolute action can and should be taken, particularly in the
implementation
of those General Assembly resolutions
which call for the imposition of a mandatory arms embargo
against South Africa and the cessation of economic
collaboration with that racist rbgime. Great interests are at
stake here: the lives of the people of southern Africa as well
as the credibility of the United Nations system as a whole
and of the Council and its individual members.

48. Seventeen years have passed since Sharpeville but the
brutal and ruthless nature of the apartheid rGgime has not
changed. Since Sharpeville, there have been many other
abominable acts of repression and senseless violence perpetrated against the African people. Some of these actions
are known to the outside world and others, more vicious,
remain the knowledge only of the sytem’s victims. Arbitrary arrest and detention, murder of innocent people
whose only crime is to oppose the obnoxious system,
systematic torture and even killing of political detainees,
massive repressive legislation-all these and more are part of
the arsenal of the apartheid rkgime. And yet there are
people-some very well meaning-who tell us, and so
persistently, that South Africa is changing. It took Soweto
to shatter that myth, for Soweto symbolized the height of
the desperation of the apartheid rbgime. The reckless and
criminal shooting of schoolchildren by Vorster’s armed
forces clearly revealed the true nature of the system which,
to quote my President, is itself “an aggression against
humanity”. Soweto, at the same time, represented the
growing resistance of the African people against the
tyranny of the apartheid rkgime. The international community was outraged by Soweto. The revulsion against the
Pretoria r&me was eloquently demonstrated by the unanimous adoption by the Security Council of resolution
392 (1976), which condemned the South African Government for its massive violence and wanton killings of African
people, including schoolchildren. In a few weeks, a year will
have passed since the uprisings of Soweto and other urban
centres in South Africa and the adoption of the afore-

45. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
46. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation is gratified to have this opportunity to participate in the deliberations of the Security Council on one of
the most burning issues facing our Organization today: the
question of South Africa. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and through you the members of the Council, for
giving my delegation this opportunity. It is indeed not
simply a matter of courtesy or formality when I say that it
gives my delegation great satisfaction to take part in these
discussions under your presidency. Since you took up your
new assignment, my Government and my delegatidn have
bad the benefit of exchanging views with you on many
occasions. We have welcomed you to the United Nations in
the firm belief that you will work in the best interests of
the Organization and that in you we shall find a sympathetic person, one who understands the many problems
that bedevil our area. In this context, we were very happy
to welcome you last month to our country, both at its
capital, Dar es Salaam, and in Zanzibar. Your own personal
qualities as a man of principle and vast experience in
political leadership in your own country, especially when it
6

mentioned resolution by the Council. Yet the regime has
neither lamented nor retracted any of its policies.

the Council is how the Council can fulfil its obligations
under the Charter to put an end to the obnoxious system
which not only threatens and destroys the lives of the
African people in South Africa but above all poses a direct
grave threat to international peace and security. And I
should say in all candour, as those who have preceded me in
this debate have done, that mere expressions of moral
outrage, no matter how moving they may be, without the
will to match such outcries with concrete action, will
simply not do. Indeed, those who continue to give support
to the apartheid regime, militarily, economically or otherwise, while expressing moral abhorrence of the system, run
the serious risk not only of eroding their own credibility
but of being considered hypocritical.

49. Since this debate began, several eminent speakers have
addressed the Council and brought home forcefully the sad
facts of the continued denial of the fundamental human
rights-including
political, civil and economic rights-of the
African people in South Africa. Among those who have
addressed the Council, mention must be made of the
inspiring and most cogent address of Mr, Olof Palme of
Sweden (1992nd meeting] and that of the Commissioner
for External Affairs of Nigeria, Brigadier Garba /1989th
meeting], as well as that of my friend and colleague, the
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
Ambassador Harriman [1988th meeting]. Those personalities as well as many other representatives from our
continent and other continents, have clearly put the
problem of South Africa in its proper perspective and there
is no need at this late stage of the debate to labour the same
points. I shall therefore only highlight some aspects of the
problem.

52. The representative of the World Council of Churches,
Mr. William P. Thompson, brought the issue into proper
perspective when, in his address before the Council on 24
March, he declared:
“The focus of concern is upon two systems. The first is
the evil system of apartheid which exists in South Africa.
The second, without which the first could not survive, is
that international system which supports and enables the
South African Government to continue policies in gross
violation of the Charter and the Declaration. That
international system undergirds the military and police
structures of South Africa through the sale and transfer
of technology and military hardware used in and required
for the support of a totalitarian system. It strengthens the
economic structure through the continued operation of
transnational corporations in South Africa and the
continued flow of investments and loans which make the
apartheid system profitable.” [I991st meeting, para. 56.1

50. The South African racist regime does not seem to have
learnt anything from Soweto. It is determined to perpetuate its white supremacy, using maximum violence and
other repressive measures to do so. Furthermore, to
accomplish this objective, the regime has embarked on a
frenzied military buildup. This excessive militarization is
taking place not only in South Africa itself but also in the
international Territory of Namibia. South Africa’s military
power is being used for internal repression and oppression
of the African people and external aggression against
neighbouring independent African States. In this connexion, South Africa’s aggressions against Zambia and
Angola are a matter of record. Indeed, South Africa is the
only country in the history of the Organization ever to be
specifically condemned by the Security Council as an
aggressor.

53. Thus the real question confronting the international
community today is why South Africa continues to be
armed and supplied with sophisticated weapons by some of
the very countries which profess opposition to apartheid?
Why do those countries allow themselves to be accomplices
in South Africa’s systematic acts of internal and external
aggression? Why does South Africa continue to be treated
as a major trading and economic ally of many of the
Western nations? What is the rationale for the continuation
of investments, credits and loans to that regime? DO those
countries seriously want the international community to
believe that they are not conscious of the fact that their
cokboration
and co-operation with the Vorster regime
serve to give sustenance and nourishment to the policies of
apartheid
and its attendant evils, both internally and
externally?

51. But all these facts are known to this aUgUSt Council.
The Council is also aware of the unique and, if I may say
so, unblemished record of the Pretoria regime of systematic
and arrogant defiance of the United Nations. The issue
really is not whether the apartheid regime constitutes a
total negation of all the moral and ethical values for which
the international community stands. It is not that that
r6gime is a complete misfit in the Organization by virtue of
its anachronistic colonial and racist policies and its calculated systematic violation of the Charter and the many
decisions and resolutions of the United Nations. The issue is
not so much that South Africa is at war with the
international community and with the United Nations over
its illegal occupation of the international Territory of
Namibia, as was aptly and cogently put by my brother and
friend, Ambassador Ramphul of Mauritius [ibid.]. Nor is it
in fact necessary to point out that it is South Africa which
has sustained and actively supported the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, in absolute contravention of the Security Council’s mandatory sanctions
against that r&&me. All these are incontestable facts, of
which the Council, as well as the entire United Nations
membership, is fully aware. In asking for these meetings of
the Council, we have not acted simply in order to state
what is common knowledge. Rather, the real issue before

54. The challenge before the Council is to put an end to
the misery in South Africa. It must answer the challenge
constantly being thrown at it by the Vorster r&me. The
Council must act once and for all to stop the flow of arms
to South Africa. An imposition of a mandatory arms
embargo under Chapter VII of the Charter is long overdue.
The Council must also act to dissuade any type of
economic co-operation with that regime. At the very
minimum, lt must act to endorse the significant initiative
taken by the Government of Sweden by prohibiting further
investments in South Africa. But above all, the Council
must provide leadership by taking such measures as are
7

a proposed new initiative to be launched or backed by the
Council. We also appreciate the appeal by the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid, Ambassador
Harriman, in the Committee’s opening meeting on 25
January this year,2 to abandon confrontation and to
initiate purposeful co-operation. We see this as a welcome
sign of a new spirit and an invitation to combine our
efforts. I am personally grateful also for the valuable
contribution which my good friend Ambassador Ramphul,
in his capacity as spokesman for the Organization of
African Unity, has made in the past few days and, I trust,
will continue to make in steering serious negotiations aimed
at bridging the gap and moving towards a consensus. Efforts
which have the backing of all members of the Council are
more likely to impress upon South Africa the gravity of the
situation. South Africa must see these issues in their true
proportions. It must shed the illusions which have so far
stood in the way of peaceful change. Only if a country is
ready to honour its commitments and obligations under
international law, can it hope to retain the advantages of
partnership with other States.

necessary to ensure that freedom and justice will prevail in
South Africa, as indeed in the whole of southern Africa.
55. In beginning its current deliberations on the seventeenth anniversary of the Sharpeville massacre, the Security
Council has underscored its concern over the deteriorating
situation in South Africa. That action is almost a symbol of
solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa. But
the time for symbolism and rhetorical manifestations of
sympathy is long past. The threat of an all-out racial
conflagration in South and southern Africa is real. The
Council can and should make a difference between the path
of an escalated confrontation and the search for a genuine
solution based on freedom and justice on the basis of
majority rule. Members of the Council, and more particularly the Western members, who are the major trading
partners of South Africa, have a clear choice: either to
encourage the seeds of confrontation
or to cpntribute
effectively to defusing the situation. Inaction by the
Council would contribute to progress down the former
path, while decisive and meaningful action would help the
latter course. The responsibility is entirely that of the
Council. But please remember that the struggle will and
must go on. The people of southern Africa, led by their
national liberation movements, do not have any option. For
the alternative to the struggle is the status quo and no one
in this Council can ever expect the African people to
acquiesce to their perpetual humiliation and degradation.
Last year’s uprising at Soweto and other townships in
South Africa was merely a signal of things to come.

59. The Federal Republic of Germany is conscious of the
magnitude and urgency of the tasks. In our country there is
a consensus of opinion that human dignity, equality before
the law and the individual’s right to develop his personality
as he sees fit, as well as political freedoms and values, are
rights which must be there for every man and woman to
exercise. These are fundamental values-incorporated in the
Charter of the United Nations. They are embodied in our
own Constitution as fundamental rights. It is a dictate of
humanity that people throughout the universe should be
able to exercise those rights and-enjoy the benefits of
tho$e values, and that dictate brooks no compromise. If
human rights are trampled underfoot, we cannot remain
mute. Racism is a policy which negates those fundamental
values and should be condemned in any form.

56. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
This Security Council debate is taking place against the
background of developments in southern Africa that are
most disquieting. In that region, there is a growing
inclination to change the political situation in Rhodesia and
Namibia by force; racial conflict in South Africa produces
ever more outbreaks of violence and an escalation of
repressive measures. But there are also signs which suggest
that the efforts to get away from the rigid fronts and
overcome the stagnation by political means are not in vain.

60. The Federal Government has time and again declared
that it condemns South Africa’s discriminatory treatment
of its people on grounds of race and colour. South Africa is
certainly not the only country which is open to the
accusation of racial discrimination or vidlation of human
rights, but the difference in South Africa is4that racial
discrimination
has been institutionalized. Apartheid is a
refined system which dominates the entire body politic and
is designed to regulate relations between government and
people as well as between population groups, The Federal
Government’s condemnation of apartheid receives wide
public support in the Federal Republic of Germany. The
constant violations of human rights by the South African
Government have incensed public opinion in my country.
Our trade unions, political parties, Churches and youth
organizations are actively involved in the broad public
campaign against apartheid. Only recently, the large textile
workers’ union sent a letter of protest to the Commission
on Human Rights.

57. The Security Council has often discussed the situation
in southern Africa but its ability to have a lasting influence
on the situation there has constantly decreased. Disagreement over the ways and means of resolving the problems
besetting southern Africa has prevented the Council from
determining the course which developments should take.
We have witnessed a number of debates which ended up in
fruitless confrontation instead of producing progress towards a solution. We are now faced with the choice of
either repeating the counter-productive spectacle of last
year’s Namibia debate and putting on record yet another
struggle leading to ineffective draft resolutions, or seizing
this unique opportunity of bringing about a constructive
change in southern Africa, an opportunity, in my view, of
historic dimensions. If the Council proposes to apply all its
moral and political authority to the task of securing a
peaceful solution, it must act in unison. This presupposes
the understanding and co-operation of our African partners.

61. The question at issue is not the right of the white
minority to regard South Africa as their home and to enjoy
equal rights there. Nobody-including
the leaders of black
Africa who are conscious of their responsibility-questions

58. The friendly and constructive talks I have had in
recent months with leading African representatives here in
New York have been an encouragement to me in supporting

2 A/'AC.115/SR.340.
8

th.at right. But there, can be no peaceful internal develop
ment without true recognition of the principles of justice
and humanity. The clashes in black districts, universities
and SCHOOLS in South Africa flrish an urgent warning. OnJy
by the abandonment of racial discrimination can a racial
conflict be avoided.

65. In this spirit, we are determined to back solutions
which guarantee respect for equal rights without racial
distinction. The white minorities should realize that they
must not bank on such commitments merely to protect I
themselves and no one else. The world may become less
concerned about the fate of the white population in South
Africa if its leaders remain stubbornly wedded to their
policy of injustice and violent oppression.

62. Apartheid also constitutes a violation
of South
Africa’s solemn commitments under international law. We
appeal to South Africa to remember its own obligations
under the Charter and the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which
it has ratified, as well as under the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development and the Declaration on the
Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples, adopted by
the General Assembly in resolutions 2542 (XXIV) and
2037 (XX) respectively and which South Africa has endorsed.

66. In the Federal Government’s view, the aim of leading
Namibia and Rhodesia to independence and of removing
racial discrimination in South Africa cannot be achieved by
force. Armed conflict would jeopardize the very objective
which we are trying to achieve. The German people have
learned from the misery of past experience. The Federal
Republic’s policy is an expression of a deep conviction that
the use of force must be avoided at all costs. We understand
the bitterness of the oppressed people of southern Africa
on account of the rigidity of the dominant political systems
there, and we appreciate that the call to remove the yoke of
oppression by all available means is a cry of desperation at
the failure of previous efforts. But we do not share the view
that armed conflict will resolve their problems.

63. In our view, Pretoria’s policy of apartheid and its
support for the illegal r6gime in Rhodesia, as well as its
illegal occupation of Namibia, are based on a political
concept which has no chance of survival. In the long run it
will neither protect nor further the interests of the white
minority and before long, apartheid will damage the
prospects of economic growth. In a modern industrial
society, social integration of the working population is
essential. The situation of conflict in southern Africa also
has a bearing on our economic co-operation with other
African States, in particular those in southern Africa which
have become a focal point of the Federal Government’s
development policy. Under a comprehensive long-term
programme, the Federal Republic assists those countries in
their economic development. This year the Federal Government plans financial and technical co-operation commitments of something like DM 220 million to BOtSWana,
Malawi, Lesotho, Zambia and Swaziland, that is an increase
of 75 per cent. It goes without saying that the Federal
Government does not want long-term development investments of this magnitude to be jeopardized by a parallel
increase in African defence expenditure in response to
South Africa’s policy or in view of constant tensions as a
result of border incidents or interruptions of major lines of
communication.

67. The only way of bringing about. the necessary change
in southern Africa without causing a racial war is to achieve
a peaceful settlement by negotiation. But avoiding the use
of force does not mean remaining inactive and letting things
drift. A policy of peaceful change demands energetic and
responsible action. We know that southern Africa’s prob-,
lems are complex. The present situation has emerged from a
long historical process which no one can ignore. But this is
no justification for sticking to the status quo and ignoring
the calI today for fundamental change.
68. The assessment of the present situation has prompted
the Federal Government to join the other four Western
members of the Security Council in advocating a new
approach. We propose that the Council, in a solemn
declaration, should proclaim those principles concerning
southern Africa on which we all agree. On the basis of that
declaration and together with the other Western members
of the Council, we pledge sincere efforts and action in
South Africa with a view to overcoming the present
deadlock. The fact that some of South Africa’s most
important trading partners are joining their efforts to that
end, should dispel any doubts on the part of Pretoria asto
the seriousness of the undertaking and the need to achieve
progress. My Government is ready to shoulder its responsibilities as a member of the Council.

64. The white minority in South Africa must not close
their eyes to reality. They must not ignore the fact that
those currently at the receiving end of racial discrimination
will one day assert their rights. They should rather have a
major interest in establishing solidarity among all who
favour peaceful development on the basis of equal rights.
The Federal Government endorsed the principle laid down
in the 1969 Lusaka Manifesto of the Organization of
African Unity, which reads as follows:
“ . . . the individuals in southern Africa shall be freed
from an environment poisoned by the propaganda of
racialism, and given an opportunity to be men, not white
men, brown men, yellow men or black men.

69. On the question of Namibia, the Federal Government
reaffirms the points which the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs expounded at the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly? that South African rule in Namibia should be
terminated and the earliest possible date for independence
fixed in a binding manner; that the United Nations should
supervise the transition of the former mandated Territory
to independence; and that, in exercising the right of
self-determination,
all political groups in the country
should participate in the preparations for independence,
under the supervision of the United Nations.

“Thus the liberation of Africa for which we are
struggling does not mean a reverse racialism.“3
3 See Official

Records of the General Assembly,

Twenty-fourth

Session,Annexes,agenda item 106, document A/7754, paras. 10
and 11.

4 Ibid,, Thirty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, I th meeting.
9

70. Only if all these demands are speedily met, will a
further exacerbation of the situation be avoided. This new
attempt to tackle an old, long-overdue problem will only be
successful if all co-operate. I appeal to the members of the
Council to support the declaration of principles and
thereby give weight to the efforts to find a constructive
solution. This appeal is also addressed to the Government
of South Africa. South Africa should regard this initiative
on the part of the Council as a clear and serious exhortation
to take the necessary steps. It should recognize that only
serious negotiations can prevent a conflict with unforeseeable consequences.

Africa or to ensure peace in the African continent.
Furthermore, it is clear that the Pretoria Government has
not been awed by the appeal made to it by the Council
several years ago in its resolution 134 (1960), in which it
called upon the South African Government
“to initiate measures aimed at bringing about racial harmony based on equality.. . and to abandon its
policies of apartheid and racial discrimination”.
Indeed, the Government of South Africa has been even
more energetic in its attempts to perfect the institutional
framework of the system of oppression and discrimination
in order to perpetuate the supremacy of the racist regime
over the African population.

71. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation from French):
The decision of the General Assembly at its last session to
call for a re-examination by the Security Council of the
question of South Africa, and also the impressive number
of those taking part in this debate, without any doubt are a
reflection of the well-justified concern of the whole
international community about the very serious situation in
that part of the world.

75. In recent years we have witnessed an escalation of bloody repression against the peaceful population, repression that culminated in the Soweto and Nyanga massacres
and those of Guguletu and Langa. The Pretoria &me has
introduced ominous and very elaborate legislation, the
purpose of which is to repress all opposition to the
inhuman practice of apartheid. It has intensified the
implementation
of a policy aimed at separate development
on the basis of racial criteria by the creation of bantustans.
Along with those domestic measures, the Pretoria Govemment has consolidated its illegal occupation of Namibia by
measures aimed at militarizing the Territory and undermining the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia. Furthermore, the South African military forces
have intensified their acts of aggression and armed attacks
against independent African States.

72. It is a well-known fact that the policy of racial
segregation and actions undertaken on the basis of that
policy by the Pretoria authorities have been condemned
repeatedly by the United Nations and the Security Council
as being contrary to the Charter and the obligations of
Member States of the Organization. Suffice it, in this
regard, to recall that in 1966 the policies of apartheid
practised by the South African Government were described
as a crime against humanity, and herici: a potential danger
to international peace and security (General Assembly
resolution 2202 (XXI)/.
That threat persists, and is growing, in spite of the debates and the decisions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the whole international
community.

76. These are the circumstances which have made the
complicated problem now being considered by the Council
even worse. In our view, the mere repetition and reaffirmation of previous resolutions do not amount to a remedy to
this situation; nor can a mere appeal to the better instincts
of the South Aftican Government bring the hoped for
results.

73. Our delegation believes that what should be of
particular concern to the Council now is the explosive stage
which has been reached in the evolution of the South
African situation, and also the fact that the conflict is
continually getting worse. We whole-heartedly support the
demands expressed here by many delegations, and also by
the representatives of the African National Congress
[1992nd meeting] and the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania [1988th meeting] for action without further delay,
firm determined action to solve the grave problem created
in southern Africa by the racist minority regimes, particularly that of South Africa. The path towards the solution of
this problem should finally lead to the restoration of the
rights and dignity of the people of South Africa, to the
elimination of the policy of apartheid and to the establishment of the political power of the majority of the people
based on equality and justice. In other words, we have to
create the necessary conditions to permit the peoples of
southern Africa to exercise, without impediment,
their
sacred right to a free and independent life in accordance
with their aspirations and national will.

77. The present debate represents a new test of the
Council’s effectiveness and, at the same time, a test of the
willingness of its members to resort to ways and means
likely to bring about a decisive turning-point in a situation
which is on the way to becoming a general clash of arms in
Southern Africa. The Charter of the United Nations offers a
number of specific measures which can and should be used
by the Council when peace and security of the world are
threatened. On this score, the representatives of African
States have put forward a whole series of suggestions which
deserve careful consideration and should be approached
with a sense of great responsibility by the members of the
Council.
78. In order to be truly effective, the measures to be
decided upon by the Council should go to the very heart of
the problem before us, that is, the elimination of apartheid
and the elimination
of the causes of the segregationist
policies and practices. In a word, it is a question of
satisfying the claims of the people of South Africa and not
of reforming the system of apartheid.

74. The events which have occurred since the Sharpeville
massacres have taught us that mere declarations of intent
on the part of the Security Council, and the mere
reaffirmation of humanitarian requirements, are not sufficient either to eliminate the causes of the tension in South

79. Like the vast majority of States in the world, Romania
considers that we must do away completely and for ever
10

with the policy of apartheid pursued by the South African
r&$me,a pOhy which is in flagrant contradiction with the
new realities of today’s world and with the fundamental
demands of human progress.

has reached a decisive point after which there is no turning
back.
87. We feel legitimate pride in seeing you preside over the
Security Council on behalf of the United States of America,
not only because you originate from the African continent
which has given of its best to constitute a precious part of
the soul of the nation which you represent here, but above
all because of your active commitment to the cause of the
weak and oppressed of the world. An indefatigable disciple
of the late Martin Luther King, you have raised your voice
with exemplary courage wherever the struggle for human
rights and the defence of fundamental freedoms waswaged.
We see in you not only a brother and a comrade-in-arms but
also a man who has transformed the daily activities of his
life into moral principles. It is therefore with hope and
sympathy that we are following your actions, both here in
the Security Council and in the United Nations system.
Your personal qualities, your wisdom, your competence
and your high sense of duty will contribute, we are
convinced, to the successof the work of the Council.

80. MY country has always displayed whole-hearted solidarity with the struggle of the peoples whichhave risen up
to defend their national identity against imperialism,
colonialism and neo-colonialism. My country resolutely
condemns the racist policy of apartheid, which represents a
challenge to the whole of mankind and creates grave
dangers to general peace and security.
81. In a spirit of militant solidarity with the peoples of
Africa-something
which was once again reaffirmed by
President Nicolae Ceausescu on the occasion of his recent
visit to Africa-the Romanian delegation associates itself
with those African delegations which, in this debate, have
called on the Council to adopt resolute measures, including
the application of a mandatory embargo on the sale of arms
to South Africa and the application of economic sanctions,
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter.

88. The intransigence of some Governments and their
desire for domination have twice brought mankind to the
brink of catastrophe. Since the end of the Second World
War and the birth of the United Nations, the hotbeds of
tension that had arisen in South-East Asia, Latin America
and a part of the African continent have been extinguished
one after another. While the cessation of those conflicts are
largely due to the determination and sacrifice of oppressed
peoples, it was also due to the wisdom and political courage
of public opinion in the former colonial Powers. The
wisdom that has prevailed has made it possible for colonial
Powers and the oppressed nations of yesterday to weave
new relations in a climate of confidence and mutual esteem.

82. The Romanian delegation is ready to contribute on
this occasion also, together with all the members of the
Council, to efforts to determine the appropriate measures
which would win general agreement, in order to achieve
significant progress towards the elimination of the policy of
apartheid and racial discrimination.
83. Faithful to the principles of its foreign policy, my
country is determined to continue to give its whole-hearted
support to the peoples of southern Africa which are
fighting against foreign oppression and occupation in order
to exercise their right to self-determination and a dignified,
free and independent life,

89. Such a change could have served as an example. But,
despite that lesson of history, the situation in southern
Africa remains what it was at the birth of the United
Nations. That situation is a permanent challenge which the
citadel of apartheid has flung down before the international
community. It has caused so much ink to flow, has
provoked so much anger and indignation and has disappointed so many hopes, that the weak and oppressed
nations have sometimes doubted the reason for the existence of the Organization and the value of its aims.

84. The PRESIDENT: The final speaker is the representative of Mauritania. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
85. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretation jkom French):
Consideration of the question now before the Security
Council is taking place at a moment when Africa is going
through a particularly difficult period in its history.
Political changes and acts of violence observed on the
African continent, and most particularly in the southern
part, are signs revealing an explosive and infinitely dangerous situation, the consequences of which threaten to
have a serious effect on international peace and security if
immediate and energetic measures are not taken by the
Council.

90. There are few countries that have benefited from so
much indulgence on the part of the Organization and there
is no country that, like South Africa, which has openly
flaunted its policy of oppression and discrimination, has
been given so many chances to make amends.
91. Despite the hundreds of resolutions and decisions
taken by the General Assembly and the Security Council
and despite the unequivocal opinion of the International
Court of Justices concerning the specific case of Namibia,
South Africa remains unapproachable and unbending.
Because of our heavy schedule, I should not like to go into
@z _details.
.-... Iv@eover..L such an appfoach would take UJ

86. Before proceeding to the substance of the matter
before the Council, I should like to perform &pleasant duty
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of March. As luck
would have it YOU are presiding over the Council at a time
when it is considering one of the most burning issues to
which the fate of the whole continent of Africa is linked
and this fact can, for us Africans, only strengthen our deep
and le$timate belief that on the road to the restoration Of
legitrmacy and the- rule of law in~soutn~~~iica,-e-~-~uncil
_:

m-3&-gal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa
in Namibia (South West Africa) notrr(it(lstanding
Security Council Resolufion 276 [1970), Advisory Opmion, I.C.J.
Reportr1921, p.;16.

11

art of decimating entire villages and massacring indiscriminately women, children and old people. The Council must
adopt an unequivocal position if it wishes people to
continue endorsing the assignment to it of that fundamental role which is to prevent anything which might
jeopardize international peace and security.

several days, perhaps several weeks of intensive work. I shall
therefore merely refer to Council resolution 366 (1974). In
that resolution the Council based itself on the ‘verbal
declarations made by the South African Government and
requested the latter to let it have a written declaration in
which it would promise to co-operate with the Council in
implementing the various resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations.

98. While the role of preserving international peace and
security is incumbent upon the Security Council, the
strength of the Council depends essentially upon scrupulous
respect by the wealthy member countries of its resolutions
and decisions, It is paradoxical, in fact, that those countries
vote for resolutions with the aim of drawing political
advantages from them and that, on the other hand, they
flout them by maintaining illicit relations with racist
Pretoria.

92. I should like to add that a year before that resolution
was adopted the Pretoria regime said it would take six
months for it to change the conditions existing in southern
Africa and abide by the wishes expressed by the international community.
But, once again, the mountain has
brought forth a mouse. On 27 May 1975, in its reply to the
Security Council (S/11 7011, the Pretoria regime said it was
not in a position to assume commitments in compliance
with resolution 366 (1974).

99. The productive trade some developed countries main.
tain with Pretoria and the massive sale by those countries of
weapons utilized by South Africa to massacre the African
population are immoral acts which the Council should
condemn unflinchingly, One cannot attempt to preserve
friendship with the peoples of Africa and at the same time
try to enrich those who are the potential enemies of Africa
and of the international community.

93. Other initiatives were taken by some African Governments as well as by some other Governments throughout
the world to unfreeze the situation in southern Africa.
Despite the good will of the former Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. Henry Kissinger, and despite promises made by him to the Pretoria Government, Vorster and
his friends preferred to remain silent and to play the game
of the ostrich, a tactic which has been successful up to now.

100. It is a simple and clear choice: the developed
countries involved should choose Africa or place themselves
on the side of the enemies of Africa. The breaking point has
been reached, and positions must be taken unequivocally.

94. This attitude on the part of South Africa can surprise
no one because it is part of an immutable policy deliberately designed and maintained for more than 25 years. In
the opinion of the Government of South Africa, the South
African people prefer colonization to sovereignty, exploitation to prosperity, brutal police methods to freedom,
division to unity. This is what has constituted and
continues to constitute the policy of the South African
Government.

101. With regard to trade with the racist regimes of
southern Africa, although I may be touching upon a subject
which is not before the Council at present, I should
nevertheless like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Government of President Carter for the decision it took to
halt imports of Rltodesian chrome. We are all aware of the
difficulties to which the United States Government is
exposing itself in taking that courageous decision. But the
decision of President Carter to bring morality into international relations could not find a better terrain. Map it serve
as an example to other countries that have trade relations
with Rhodesia and South Africa.

95. The frequently dashed hopes of the African majority
could only lead to mass uprising in the towns and viIlages
and in the country. The war of resistance waged by the
South African people under the direction of the liberation
movements has made it possible for the world, through the
mass media, to witness the brutalities to which the African
majority is subjected and the Calvary imposed on it for
more than 25 years.

102. A great head of State, President Mao Tsetung, said
that even the longest voyage in the world begins with the
first step. The first pioneers who understood this lesson
preferred to give their lives at Sharpeville so as to serve as
examples to posterity. The events of Soweto and the mass
uprisings throughout South Africa demonstrate, as is said in
an African proverb, that “from the roots to the leaves the
sap rises and never stops”. South Africa will finally
understand that it can do everything with a bayonet except
sit on it. Oppression cannot be a system of government for
ever.

96. After the massacres of Sharpeville, which continue to
haunt our consciences, the massacres of Soweto, a modemday genocide, have come as a last warning to remind us of
the fact that the time for negotiating with the citadel of
oppression and apartheid has for ever passed. For more
than a week each of us was able to see on television the
scope and the brutality of the repression unleashed on the
South African people. Clubs, police dogs, machine guns and
automatic rifles ravaged, like a plague, a population whose
only fault was to have demanded the liberty that exists
everywhere else.

103. An irreversible process leading towards the total
liberation of the African continent and southern Africa in
particular has thus been begun. It is our wish and our hopa
that the Security Council will help that liberation.

97. It is not desirable and it is not possible for the
Security Council to continue to spare the South African
Government, which has now become a past master of the

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

12

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Genbve.
KAK

IKOJIY’fNTb

IiSfiAHZiR

OPrAHH

BAl&,ZIN

OD%EAHHEHHhIX

HAUHH

H~~amrr
Opranu3anuu
OIS-bemuresnbrx
Haunt2 MOXI(HO ~yna~b
B KHUXHLIX MM-&JHH&X w areHTcTa&x
ao ecex pagoziax
aapa. HaeoAwTe
cnpaeaw
06 x3Aarrnax
s
BarneM ~nn~no~
Mara3nne
wnw nmr.mre no aflpecy:
Opranu3aqnn
06~eAmiennbrx
HaqwR, Ceauwa no nponaxe
u3Aanu8, HLM-Ffopx
wn~ Xeueea.
COMO

CONSEGTJIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lltho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U,S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
