United Nations

S/PV.6679

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6679th meeting
Thursday, 8 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2011/741)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-62803 (E)

*1162803*

S/PV.6679

personnel of the South Sudan Police Service remain
present within the Area, and it would seem that the two
parties are in the process of replacing their military
staff with police officers. That, too, contravenes the
letter and the spirit of the Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area (S/2011/384, annex), signed on
20 June.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2011/741)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/741, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hervé Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to outline for the Council the situation in
the Abyei Area.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/741),
which was submitted to the Council on 27 November,
provides a detailed account of the evolving situation
over the past two months. I shall therefore briefly
update the Council on the situation on the ground and
focus my briefing on the deployment status of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) as well on the latest political developments,
including the recent discussions held in Addis Ababa.
First, the security situation in the Abyei Area
remains fragile. The armed forces of the Sudan and of
South Sudan have still not withdrawn from the Area, in
contravention of the 20 June Agreement. North of the
Kiir/Bahr al-Arab River, units of the Sudanese Armed
Forces (SAF) and police remain present in Abyei town,
Goli and Diffra. South of the river, on 9 November the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) transferred its
brigade staff to Mijan Kol, approximately three
kilometres south of the Area boundary. However,

2

In spite of the significant efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, and of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, very little progress has been
achieved in the establishment of the Abyei Area
Administration. In recent weeks, the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel has proposed a
compromise for the nomination of candidates for posts
within the Administration and the Legislative Council.
This led the Government of the Sudan on 1 November
to propose a new candidate for Chair of the Legislative
Council. Unfortunately, the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel has informed us that the
Government of South Sudan has rejected that
candidate. It is of the view that the chairmanship of the
Council will have influence over voter registration and
participation in the referendum that is provided for
under the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to resolve
the Abyei issue. The resultant deadlock does not augur
well for the stabilization of the Abyei Area or the
implementation of UNISFA’s mandate, both of which
depend on the establishment of a functional
Administration and the withdrawal of the armed forces
of both parties.
The ongoing presence of armed forces and the
lack of political progress pursuant to the 20 June
Agreement are all the more disturbing as we near the
end of the rainy season and the start of the Misseriya
migration through the Abyei Area. This year, the
migration has begun rapidly. Large numbers of nomads
have been seen in Abyei and its environs for over a
month. This is an unexpected turn of events, given the
heavy rainfall this year and the availability of
pasturelands further north. At the same time last year,
while there were similar levels of rainfall, the
migration did not even reach the village of Goli, which
lies exactly 40 kilometres north of Abyei. Even in 2008
and 2009, when the paucity of rain made southward
migration necessary, by early December of those years
the migration had reached Goli but not the environs of

11-62803

S/PV.6679

Abyei town. The Head of Mission, Lieutenant General
Tesfay, is in contact with the Misseriya chiefs and has
encouraged them to slow down their migration.
(spoke in English)
The presence of arms among elements of the
migrating population, while consistent with past
migration seasons, is also of concern in the absence of
inter-community negotiations on the migration this
year. To prevent the entry of armed militias into Abyei
town, UNISFA has changed its posture in the town and
established
around-the-clock
checkpoints.
Unfortunately, when UNISFA refused a SAF request to
remove one of these checkpoints, the SAF reinforced
its position in the town with one platoon from the
Abyei Area. In addition to maintaining a robust
posture, UNISFA continues its direct engagement of
both communities, including through the establishment
of a liaison office in El Muglad, to address tensions
over resources and arms.
In the context of the migration, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that there
is now considerable anxiety on the part of the displaced
population to return to their villages, despite the
ongoing presence of the SAF. In addition, the
replacement of the Banton bridge by Ethiopian
engineers has improved conditions for the returns
process and movement of the humanitarian community.
At the present time, between 40 and 80 people are
crossing the bridge each day to inspect or work on their
properties. In addition, during the past 10 days,
UNISFA has observed more than 1,000 displaced
persons crossing the river at various locations. UNISFA
and United Nations agencies continue to engage with
representatives of the Ngok Dinka community to
facilitate a smooth returns process, including through
joint security assessments in returns villages.
In this complex and challenging environment,
UNISFA continues its efforts to implement its mandate.
As of today, 2,853 troops are on the ground, following
the deployment of the second battalion in October. Two
standing police capacity personnel have also been
deployed to plan for implementation of the mission’s
police mandate once the Abyei Police Service has been
established. Supplementing existing bases in Abyei
town, Diffra and Agok, new bases have been
established in Todach, Noong, Um Khariet, Dokura,
Marial Achak and Banton. This widespread presence
and rapid response capacity, combined with intensive

11-62803

patrolling and joint security assessments with both
communities, has enabled UNISFA to establish a
security umbrella in Abyei. To further increase its
capacity to mitigate tensions in the Abyei Area,
UNISFA will start deployment of a third battalion on
11 December.
In light of the significant threat posed by mines,
the UNISFA force has also recovered and disposed of
more than 100 unexploded ordinance and mines in
advance of a dedicated United Nations Mine Action
capacity. I am pleased to inform the Council that this
dedicated capacity began deploying on 2 December.
Further to the commitment made by the parties in
September, an SPLA team has been deployed to help
identify mined locations. However, the SAF has not yet
provided such assistance or maps of its mined
locations, and I urge it to do so.
As Council members will recall, there are
significant logistical challenges involved in supporting
the deployment and operations of UNISFA. These
include the long supply chains from Port Sudan and
South Sudan, constraints on the operational availability
of a logistics space, and gaps in essential support
personnel. We have also faced difficulties replacing
outgoing military observers and staff officers who are
critical to the operations of the Mission. We continue to
address these issues as far as possible, in consultation
with the Governments of the Sudan, South Sudan and
Ethiopia.
I would also like to update the Council on the
negotiations between the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan that were held in Addis Ababa from
21 to 30 November, under the auspices of African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel. These
negotiations focused on oil and transitional financial
arrangements, as well as on border issues. On the
former, the positions of the parties proved too far apart
for an agreement to be achieved. However, the parties
did agree to hold additional talks in Juba and Khartoum
through December and January. Similarly, the border
discussions ended without agreement on the next phase
of the border demarcation process for the agreed areas
or on the process required to resolve differences over
the disputed ones. In addition, no progress has been
made on the adoption of an operational map defining
the safe demilitarized border zone.
In that context, the security of the border between
the Sudan and South Sudan remains of concern. We

3

S/PV.6679

continue to believe that the establishment of the joint
border monitoring mechanism, already agreed by the
parties on 29 June and 30 July, is needed to build
confidence between the parties by verifying reports of
violations by both armed forces. It is important,
therefore, that Council members urge the parties to
reach agreement on the mapping of the border zone and
locations for the monitoring mechanism technical
details, under the auspices of the African Union Panel.
In addition, I hope that the Council will favourably
consider the expansion of UNISFA’s mandate to
incorporate support for the border mechanism, as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his 29 September
report (S/2011/603).
Many of the ostensibly procedural problems
currently faced by UNISFA, from disagreements over
the establishment of the Abyei Area Administration to
the withdrawal of armed forces from the Area, are
indicative of the lack of trust between the parties. A
return to the negotiating table is absolutely essential to
prevent a further descent of the two new countries into
violence, which would inevitably have an impact on
the whole region. In that regard, I urge Council
members to engage both parties on the implementation
of UNISFA’s mandate, the long-term status of Abyei
and the resolution of all outstanding issues between
them.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. My delegation would also like
to express its appreciation for your outstanding and
substantial contributions to the maintenance of
international and regional peace and security, as well
as your principled and fair positions during the
Council’s consultations on all important regional and
international issues. In addition, through you, I would
like to express by gratitude to Mr. Hervé Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for the briefing he has just given us, in which he
presented the main elements of the periodic report
(S/2011/741) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

4

In its political section, the report before us
emphasizes that progress has been made in the
implementation of the Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area, which was signed on 20 June.
However, in paragraph 9, the report highlights an
important fact, namely, that progress towards the
establishment of Abyei’s administrative bodies has
been delayed considerably due to continuing
reservations on the part of the Government of South
Sudan in connection with all the recommendations
made by the Government of the Sudan with regard to
the selection and appointment of the members of those
bodies. That is the main reason for the delay. However,
this is not motivated merely by who has been
nominated; rather, there is an underlying motive to
obstruct the establishment of those bodies — in spite of
the fact that we pledged before the Council to set them
up and have abided by that pledge in order to achieve
security and stability in Abyei. This is an important
aspect to which we expect the Council to give
appropriate attention, bearing in mind the refusal of the
Government of South Sudan to cooperate in that
matter.
As the Council will have noted, the Government
of South Sudan has gone beyond creating obstacles and
fabricating crises. As we have reported to the Council
in several communications, the Government of South
Sudan is now involved in a dangerous attempt to
escalate the situation in the governorates of Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile by providing direct financial
and military support, including weapons, to the popular
movement in those governorates. The situation has
even reached the point where the Government of South
Sudan has sponsored the establishment of the so-called
Revolutionary Front, following meetings hosted in the
Southern Sudan cities of Yei and Juba under the
leadership of Darfur rebel movements working
alongside the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth. That coalition issued a public declaration
announcing its goal of toppling the Government of the
Sudan through armed action. We are fully aware that
many influential parties and countries on the Council
have sufficient evidence to prove the involvement of
the Government of South Sudan in supporting that
rebellion. Has not the time come for the Council to
issue a strong message, given that the maintenance of

11-62803

S/PV.6679

international stability and security is at the heart of its
mandate?
All of this has been taking place while the
Government of the Sudan has continued to maintain its
firm position, repeatedly reiterating its choice of
dialogue as the sole option for resolving all the
pending issues between the Republic of the Sudan and
the Republic of South Sudan. That continues to be our
position. We also stress the need to develop relations of
cooperation and integration between our two countries,
rather than engaging in hostile acts and arguments.
The Government of the Sudan continues to show
its good intentions aimed at maintaining excellent ties
with South Sudan, reflecting the fraternal relations
between our countries. The most vivid example of that
is the fact that, since the independence of South Sudan,
we have continued to allow the export of oil through
our territory and ports, without demanding any
payment. Everyone is aware that international law
guarantees the right of the Government of the Sudan to
impose transport, transit and storage fees in that
regard. However, we have not raised this issue and
have facilitated exports since 9 July. Is that not proof
of the good intentions of the Republic of the Sudan and
its desire to establish excellent ties with South Sudan?
What have we gained in return for that? Our
recompense was the exporting of rebellion and
weapons and an attack on the territorial integrity of our
country.
The aggression and violations committed by the
Government of South Sudan have not ceased. I
mentioned the most recent of those in my statement
yesterday afternoon, namely, the treacherous act of
military aggression perpetrated by the armed forces of
the Government of South Sudan inside Sudanese
territory, namely, in the area of Jawa, which is near
Lake Abyad in Southern Kordofan governorate.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for circulating our
complaint among the members of the Council. We hope
that the Security Council will look into this and the
series of previous complaints that we have submitted to
the Council, providing a detailed record and
indisputable evidence of the involvement of the
Government of South Sudan in efforts to violate
Sudanese territory and undermine peace and stability in
the Sudan, especially in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan states.

11-62803

We also hope that the Council will assume its
natural role and responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations by sending a strong and urgent
message to the Government of South Sudan that it must
immediately cease all actions that could undermine
stability and security and do not serve the aspirations
of the peoples of the two countries to live in peace and
stability.
In truth, in order to establish, build and maintain
peace, we need the good offices of the Security
Council. The entire operation is now focused only on
peacekeeping. However, efforts to make and build
peace require strong messages to be sent to those who
have committed wrongs and violations; they should not
enjoy impunity, for that would lead to instability. I trust
that everybody here knows who is at fault.
The report before the Council affirms in section
VI, pertaining to the status of the deployment of
UNISFA, indicates that approximately 3,000 troops
have been deployed out of the overall authorized
number of 4,200 troops. That means that 68 per cent of
UNISFA’s troops have been deployed five months after
the issuance of the mission’s mandate. Undoubtedly, as
stated in the report, the record speed for deployment
could not have been possible without the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan and its desire to
facilitate the task of UNISFA.
In line with that commitment, we have come a
long way in our ongoing negotiations with the United
Nations towards signing a status of forces agreement.
We anticipate fulfilling the requirements of
deployment, including of the civilian component, very
soon. In the same spirit, we have dealt with all visa
requests submitted through the special UNISFA liaison
office in Khartoum.
In closing, with regard to expanding the mandate
of UNISFA to include support for the Border
Monitoring Support Mechanism between the Republics
of the Sudan and South Sudan, we have examined the
relevant draft document that was submitted to the
Security Council. On that basis, we would like to
remind the Council and the members of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations that the original terms of
reference for the new mandate should be the agreement
signed between the Government of the Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan on 30 July in Addis
Ababa. That agreement stipulates in paragraphs 4, 5, 6,
7 and 8 the nature and quality of support that the two

5

S/PV.6679

parties have requested of the United Nations by virtue
of that agreement regarding the mission’s tasks and
capabilities relevant to border monitoring support
between the two countries.
We hope that the Government of South Sudan
will reconsider its erroneous positions, immediately
halt its flagrant violations, come to its senses and grasp
the importance of positive engagement with the
Government of the Sudan in a constructive dialogue,
resolve all outstanding issues and create more space to
build civilized, neighbourly ties that would serve the
interests of the two States and the two fraternal
peoples. I say “fraternal peoples”, because that is my
true feeling. It is also the genuine feeling of my
Government. I said as much here when the
independence of the State of South Sudan was
declared. It is our hope that the other party shares our
sentiments.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for presiding over this important meeting. I
would also like to thank Mr. Ladsous for his remarks.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Abyei Area (S/2011/741). We wish to
express our appreciation to the Government of Ethiopia
for providing troops to the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and for its
continued efforts in support of peace and stability in
the region.
The Republic of South Sudan supports the
Secretary-General’s calls for a full withdrawal of all
troops from Abyei. We note that the 20 June Agreement
on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and
Security of the Abyei Area provides for
“the redeployment of Sudanese military forces
(Sudanese Armed Forces and Sudan People’s
Liberation Army) from the Abyei Area,
immediately consequent on the deployment of an
Interim Security Force for Abyei (ISFA)
composed of Ethiopian troops” (S/2011/384,
annex, para. 1).
The Secretary-General has reported that UNISFA
is operational. It is therefore incumbent on both parties
to withdraw their troops. As the Secretary-General
noted, the vast majority of South Sudan Armed Forces

6

troops has now been withdrawn from the Abyei Area.
Elements of the South Sudan Police Service remain in
the area as they will be integrated into the Abyei Police
Service, pursuant to the 20 June Agreement. Their
presence also serves to maintain law and order and
prevent further looting and property damage in the
absence of area residents.
It is now incumbent on the Republic of the Sudan
to make arrangements for the full withdrawal of its
troops from the Abyei Area. The imposition of
additional conditions, such as the establishment of the
Abyei Area Administration prior to a withdrawal, is
unacceptable. In no agreement between the parties is
the withdrawal of troops conditioned on the
establishment of that institution. Only once the
Republic of the Sudan initiates a withdrawal can
further progress be made.
We remind the Council that, in May, the Republic
of the Sudan used excessive force to occupy the Abyei
Area, driving roughly 110,000 people from their
homes, looting, damaging their property and destroying
their livelihoods. It is not realistic or fair to expect
South Sudan to do more than it has already done
without any movement from the Republic of the Sudan.
The Republic of South Sudan shares the
Secretary-General’s regret that the provisions of the
20 June Agreement have not been implemented, and is
fully prepared to move forward with establishing the
Abyei Area Administration. We note that in line with
the Agreement’s provisions, the Republic of South
Sudan must accept the Republic of the Sudan’s
nomination for the position of Deputy Chief
Administrator for the Abyei Area. The current nominee
is not a resident of the Area, as required by the Abyei
Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as
well as the more recent Agreement between the parties.
Furthermore, while the Republic of South Sudan
accepted that the position of Speaker of the Legislative
Council for Abyei could be a nominee from the
National Congress Party, it was agreed that that person
would be a Ngok Dinka from the Abyei Area. The
Republic of South Sudan will consider any nominee
who meets the criteria agreed on by the parties. It is
essential for the Abyei Area Administration to be
established quickly, and my Government is ready to do
what it can to ensure that this happens.
We are concerned for the Ngok Dinka residents
of the Abyei Area, large numbers of whom have been

11-62803

S/PV.6679

unable to return to their homes. Their humanitarian
situation remains extremely difficult. As the Council is
aware, roughly 110,000 residents were displaced from
their homes in the Abyei Area in late May. Rampant
looting and burning of homes took place in the
aftermath of the Republic of the Sudan’s occupation of
the area. Civilian returnees will require significant
assistance in rebuilding their lives and homes.
In this context, we regret that the mission of the
Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights
sent to assess the possibility of establishing a human
rights presence in the Abyei Area, pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph 10 of resolution 1990 (2011),
has repeatedly been denied access to the Abyei Area by
the Republic of the Sudan. We request the Council to
take action to ensure that the human rights monitoring
it called for in resolution 1990 (2011) be allowed to
take place.
The Republic of South Sudan is also fully
committed to the successful implementation of the
29 June and 30 July Agreements between the Sudan
and South Sudan on border security and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. We welcome the
willingness of the Security Council to mandate
UNISFA to support the operational activities of the
joint border verification and monitoring mechanism.
My Government is ready to begin implementation of
all agreements on border security. We call once again
on the Republic of Sudan to join us in moving to
demarcate those areas of the border that have not yet
been demarcated, and to reach final agreement on the
five areas that are contested between the parties.
In this context, we are very concerned by the
recent escalation of tensions at the border, and in
particular the recent attack by the Sudanese Armed
Forces on Jau, in Unity state. We stress that Jau is part
of South Sudan. Since the beginning of the interim
period of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
consistent with the security arrangements agreed by the
parties, Jau has served as the headquarters of the
9th Division of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army.
The Republic of the Sudan has always accepted this.
The Republic of South Sudan emphasizes that it
is willing and ready to continue serious negotiations
with the Republic of the Sudan on all outstanding
issues. We seek a lasting peace in the Abyei Area that
provides for the return with dignity of the displaced
populations of the Abyei Area to their homes. We wish

11-62803

to see the security situation on the ground stabilize in
order to enable the civilian population to return
peacefully. We recommit to negotiating in good faith
the terms of a final agreement on the status of the
Abyei Area, consistent with the relevant provisions of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the 2009
award of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
With regard to the other outstanding issues, my
Government has been praised for putting a constructive
proposal on the table during recent talks in Addis
Ababa concerning transitional financial arrangements.
We regret that this generous proposal was not accepted
by the Republic of the Sudan. We recommit to the
negotiation process and look forward to the next round
of talks later this month. We thank the Council for its
continued support for peace and stability in the region,
and stand ready to continue cooperation with the
Council, the United Nations peacekeeping missions,
the African Union and regional partners in support of
that purpose.
I would like to affirm once again that the
Republic of South Sudan is in no way giving support to
any opposition, although the Republic of the Sudan has
repeatedly stated that we are supporting the opposition
in South Kordofan and Blue Nile. This has no grounds.
Our policy has clearly been one of non-interference in
the affairs of any country. I repeat that all of these
allegations are groundless and have no basis in fact.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of the
Sudan, who wishes to make an additional statement.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
just like to take two minutes to clarify that Jau is an
inseparable part of the territorial integrity of the Sudan.
What we heard today is not true. Yes, the 9th Division
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement is in Jau,
but its presence is illegitimate and a form of
occupation of those lands. The land itself is 100 per
cent northern territory.
A second point I would like to comment concerns
the reference to paragraph 10 of resolution 1990
(2011), which established the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). With regard to the
civilian aspect of the mission, I affirm that we are fully
committed to the resolution in its entirety, but
especially paragraph 10, which relates to that civilian
aspect. We expect that all aspects of the UNISFA
mandate, including human rights monitoring, will be

7

S/PV.6679

implemented by UNISFA’s civilian component. In
other words, civilian implementation is the letter and
the spirit of the resolution. We do not expect any new
foreign entity to be formed outside the scope of the
resolution. It should rather fall within the framework of
the civilian component of UNISFA, as is the practice
followed by all peacekeeping missions.

nomination process. Once these bodies are established —
we are ready for them, and our nominees are ready —
they will take charge of all administrative issues, such
as the return of internally displaced persons, human
rights monitoring and impartial administration of the
region. It is the Government of South Sudan that is
really obstructing all of this.

The delay in the formation of administrative
bodies is a very important issue that I would like to
emphasize.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2011/741) states that the delay occurred because the
Government of South Sudan did not cooperate in the

The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.

8

The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

11-62803
