S/PRST/2017/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2017
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7906th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 March 2017, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses deep alarm at the situation in South
Sudan, stresses again that there is no military solution to the conflict, and
renews its condemnation of continued fighting across the country. The
Security Council reiterates its call upon all parties to imme diately adhere to
the permanent ceasefire as called for in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan (“the Agreement”), reminding all parties that
implementation of a ceasefire is critical for the success of any genuine,
inclusive political process.
“The Security Council is deeply alarmed that famine was declared in
parts of South Sudan, that many more South Sudanese face severe food
insecurity, and is deeply concerned about the actions of all parties to the
conflict that are perpetuating the humanitarian crisis. In this regard, the
Security Council condemns any undermining of the ceasefire and restrictions
and attacks on humanitarian personnel and their facilities as well as on the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially to famine -affected locations
and calls for an immediate cessation of such actions and immediate and
unhindered access to all those in need. The Security Council further calls for
all parties to take appropriate measures to protect United Nations and foreign
premises and personnel and other civilians in South Sudan. The Security
Council commends countries in the region who continue to receive and host
refugees.
“The Security Council condemns reported human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law, as applicable, and
expresses deep alarm at the numerous and ongoing reports of sexual and
gender-based violence and recruitment and use of children in violation of
international law in South Sudan. The Security Council underscores the
pressing need for accountability for any violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law. The Security Council calls
for swift implementation of Chapter V of the Agreement, and expects all
relevant parties mentioned in the Agreement to take all necessary steps
towards the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. The Security
Council also stresses that the Commission of Truth, Reconcilia tion and

17-04756 (E)

240317

*1704756*

S/PRST/2017/4

Healing, as stipulated in the Agreement, is a critical part of the peacebuilding
process in South Sudan.
“The Security Council underscores its conviction that a political solution
to the conflict is essential, underscores its support for regiona l and
international efforts to find such a solution in order to advance the Agreement.
The Security Council supports the Joint Press Statement by the African Union
(AU), Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the United
Nations of 29 January 2017 which commends the work performed by the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC) Chairperson Festus Mogae
and encourages the AU High Representative for South Sudan Alpha Oumar
Konaré to undertake active shuttle diplomacy towards ensuring th e
implementation of the Agreement and the inclusivity of the National Dialogue
in close consultations with the JMEC Chairperson, IGAD, and the UN. The
Security Council calls on all parties to fully cooperate with Presidents Konaré,
Mogae, and the United Nations in their efforts to advance peace in South
Sudan.
“The Security Council notes the announcement on December 14, 2016 by
President Kiir of the launch of a National Dialogue process. The Security
Council notes that an immediate ceasefire by all partie s is vital for any
National Dialogue to be credible and recalls statements by Presidents Mogae
and Konaré, that an inclusive political process must also be authentic,
autonomous, and impartially led by a credible facilitator accepted by the
people of South Sudan, and which supports the Agreement. The Security
Council agrees that an inclusive political process is necessary to improve and
maintain the security in the country. The Security Council emphasizes that an
inclusive political process would include representatives of all the main parties
to the conflict, the full and effective participation of women as well as
representatives for a wide range of stakeholders and constituencies.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the failure of the
parties to fully adhere to their commitments to implement the Agreement, and
in this regard, the Security Council calls for the following steps to be taken:
1.
Immediate adherence to the permanent ceasefire by all forces of the
parties to the conflict and all other armed groups.
2.
Urgently address the challenges faced by humanitarian personnel in
the delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout South Sudan and
specifically to famine-affected areas, including through meetings of the
Humanitarian High Level Oversight Committee and urgent implementation of
its decisions.
3.
Unconditional support of all parties for the endeavo urs of the UN,
AU, and IGAD towards ensuring the implementation of the Agreement and the
inclusivity of the National Dialogue as outlined in their 29 January 2017
statement.
4.
Immediate removal of obstacles to UNMISS and the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM)
operations including obstacles to the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and attacks on UNMISS and CTSAMM personnel.
5.
Immediate cessation of obstructions to and attacks on all national
and international humanitarian personnel and facilities endeavo uring to
provide life-saving assistance throughout South Sudan.

2/3

17-04756

S/PRST/2017/4

“The Security Council expresses its intention to review progress on the
steps outlined above no later than 30 April 2017.
“The Security Council expresses concern that the Government of South
Sudan has not upheld all of its commitment towards implementation o f the
September 4, 2016 Joint Communiqué and renews its invitation to government
to update the Security Council on the Communiqué’s implementation.
“The Security Council stresses that actions which threaten the peace,
security or stability of South Sudan may be subject to sanctions under
resolutions 2206 (2015) and 2290 (2016).
“The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering support for the people of
South Sudan.”

17-04756

3/3
