UNITED

NA TIONS

ITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TH//ZTY-FIRST

YEAR

1953’d

MEETING:

25 AUGUST 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l953)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . .. , . .. I . . . .

1

. . . . . . .., . . . .

1

Complaint by Greece against Turkey:
Letter dated 10 August 1976 from the Permanent Representative’of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12167) . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , , , , , , . , , , . (. , . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . , .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,....,..,,.,...

S/PV* 1953

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates .a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officicrl Records qf the Secrrrity Corrtlcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolr/tions
crud
Decisions
oJ’ the Security
Council.
The new system,:which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1953rd MEETING
Held in New York, on Wednesday, 25 August 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
Mr.

PI’c.s~c/c/I~:

IS~O

ABE

(Japan).

P/v.xJ///: The representatives of the following
States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l953)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Complaint by Greece against Turkey:
Letter dated 10 August 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12167)

Adoption of the agenda

Camplaint by Greece against Turkey:
Lelter dated 10 August 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12167)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the deciSims taken at the 1949th meeting, I shall now, invite
the representatives of Greece and Turkey to participate in the Council’s discussion without the right to
vote.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the draft
resolution sponsored by France, Italy, the United
Kingdom and the United States in document S/12187.
3. Mr. RICHARD
(United
Kingdom):
MY Government has followed with grave concern the recent
developments
in relation to the Aegean Sea which
have led to an atmosphere
of tension in the eastern
Mediterranean.
our concern is deepened bY the fact

that both the parties concerned are bound by close ties
of friendship and alliance to the United Kingdom.
4. It is perhaps the duty of friends and allies in a
situation such as this to exercise their every effort
to ensure that differences are settled peacefully and,
at the same time, that they are resolved in the best
interests of both the parties. My Government,
together with its partners in the European Community,
has therefore pursued efforts with the Governments
of Greece and Turkey to try to ensure that the present
dispute is settled fairly and amicably. These attempts
have naturally been reflected here at the United Nations, where, together with the United States, the
delegations of France, Italy and the United Kingdom
have tried to reconcile the differences between the
two sides in their approach to this debate.
5. The fact that two weeks have elapsed since the
Council heard the statements by the Foreign Ministers of Greece and Turkey [/9#9th trod 1950th mcfings]
shows that this has not been an easy task. Members
of the Council will be aware that our efforts to this
end are now reflected in a draft resolution contained
in document S/12187. We recognized that it would not
be wholly acceptable to either side. In our view, it is
however a carefully balanced document, and was
designed to be so. It takes account of the needs of
both sides and protects their essential interests, without prejudging any of the issues in dispute.
6. I am sure that it is totally accepted by everyone
at this table that whatever the United Nations does
must be designed to assist a settlement of the dispute
and must in no way contribute to any increase in
tension. For this reason my delegation does not believe that it is appropriate for the Council to enter into
the substance of the dispute. Not only are the legal
aspects of the problem highly complicated, but it also
appears to us that any such attempt would almost
inevitably be construed by one or other of the parties
as being prejudicial to their side of the case. If so, it
would hinder, rather than encourage, settlement of the
dispute. In these circumstances, my delegation believes that the task of the Council is, first, to express
its concern over the tensions which have arisen
between Greece and Turkey in relation to the Aegean
Sea, and then to give its considered view of the general direction in which efforts to achieve a solution
should be aimed.

7. There is also general recognition that the situation
arising from the disagreement
between Greece and
Turkey is a dangerous one, and that it threatens the
stability and harmony of the Aegean. Council members are only too well aware that the maintenance of
peace in the eastern Mediterranean
requires of the
Governments
concerned that they exercise the most
restrained and responsible statesmanship in the pursuit of their respective interests. For this reason my
delegation
believes that the Council must call for
restraint on both sides and must then go on to urge
them to do everything in their power to reduce the
present tensions. Operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the
draft resolution reflect this conviction. I believe that
the two Governments
will respect and heed this
appeal, which carries with it the wishes and hopes of
the Council that this situation should not be prolonged.

to continue to take into account the contribution that
appropriate judicial
means-and
in particular the
International
Court of Justice-are
qualified to make
to the settlement of any remaining legal differences
which they may identify in the course of their negotiations. Members of the Council will observe that
this point is covered in the operative paragraph 4 of
the draft resolution.
11. I have spoken briefly because, as I have already
said, I do not believe that the cause of peace in the
eastern Mediterranean will be served if the Council
goes deeply into the substance of the problem. I would
hope therefore that the Council can now adopt the
draft resolulion which has been submitted, by consensus, and thus provide a framework in which the
dispute between Greece and Turkey can be resolved.

8. It goes without saying that a solution to the differences between Greece and Turkey can only be
lasting and tension between them can only be finally
removed if the eventual settlement of the dispute is
acceptable to both sides. It follows from this that the
solution to the dispute has to be worked out primarily
in direct and meaningful negotiations between thqse
concerned. I may appear to be stating the obvious in
dwelling on the value of such negotiations.
Yet misunderstandings
and misconceptions
of the policies of
others can arise only too easily in the absence of direct
contact and frank and thoroughgoing
discussion.
Moreover,
the circle is a vicious one. Once misunderstandings
begin, communication
may thereafter
rapidly be limited to formal exchanges through diplomatic channels. I do not think that such complicated
and wide-ranging
problems as those to which OUI
attention has been drawn by the Foreign Ministers
of Greece and Turkey can satisfactorily be resolved
in such a manner.

12. May I conclude by appealing again to the parties
to settle their differences amicably. I am encouraged
by the continued presence in New York of such distinguished and busy statesmen as Mr. Bitsios and
Mr. Caglayangil to hope that the wishes of the Council1
in this regard will be heeded. I go further and say that
I would hope that they could meet together SOOIL
possibly before they leave New York, to consider the
modalities of how negotiations between their Governments are to be resumed. The general feeling of
the Council is, I am sure, that direct talks should now
be resumed. If they are, then this meeting of the Council will have more than served its purpose.
13. Mr. VINCI (Italy): We listened with great inlerest and attention to the statements which were delivered here by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Greece and Turkey. Both spoke in forceful and eloquent terms, giving us a very lucid picture of the positions of their r&pective Governments
on the item
under consideration. Their statements and the useful
documentation
with which rhe Council was provided
have made clear how ‘sensitive both parties are to th’e
questions relating to the Aegean Sea, since they rightly
feel that interests of great importance to their OWN
countries are involved. In acknowledging their earnest
efforts to clarify their respective positions on a COFIplex issue which has arisen between two neighbouring
countries, I wish to pay a personal tribute to these
two speakers. In fact, the climate of the debate and of
our work has immeasurably
benefited from the restraint and gentlemanly dignity with which they have
spoken and acted throughout all these days.

9. My Government
believes therefore that the resolution we adopt must include a call on the Governments of Greece and Turkey to resume the negotiations with a view to arriving at a satisfactory settlement,
and that they should also do everything in their power
to ensure that these result in mutually
acceptable
solutions. Such a call to the parties is contained in
operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution In the
view of my delegation negotiations should be resumed
on the wider dispute over the continental shelf. I would
go further and express the hope that Greece and
Turkey will hold direct talks on other topics of dispute
concerning
the Aegean to which there have been
allusions by the Foreign Ministers of Greece and
Turkey in their statements.

14. The result of nearly two weeks of intensive consultations is the draft resolution before the Council in
document S/12187, of which my delegation is a COsponsor. I do not think that for my part I need add
any further considerations to those so eloquently set
forth by the representative of the United Kingdom,
with whose clear presentation I wish cordially t.0
associate myself. My remarks will therefore be of a
more general nature and will aim at stressing the
impact and the political implications of this issue.

10. At the same time, while not wishing to enter
into the substance of the dispute between Greece and
Turkey, it seems clear to my Government
that the
questions which divide them contain both legal and
political aspects. In such circumstances it seems to us
necessary that the draft resolution which we adopt
should invite the Governments of Greece and Turkey
2

Y

15. To begin with, I should like to say that my Government is obviously deeply concerned about and
interested in what is taking place in the Aegean Sea,
owing, first of all, to the very close ties between Italy
and both Greece and Turkey. These long-standing
relations of friendship and co-operation have been
strengthened in particular by formal treaties and
association between these two countries and the
European Community,
adding a new link to the already well established common partnership in the
North Atlantic alliance. May I also recall here that
the proximity to our shores of the area which is the
object of the dispute is obviously a further reason for
my Government to follow this matter very closely.
The situation which seems to prevail at this point in
the relations between Greece and Turkey is for my
Government and the Italian people a cause for concern
and distress.

witnessing too much trouble and turmoil. We cannot
afford further crises. They would make things worse
than they are. May I say that, while we are aware of
the great importance of what is at stake, we feel that
the burden of finding the right and Iawful solution for
sharing the wealth of the Mediterranean
lies with the
responsible leadership of all the coastal countries.
I have in mind the tremendous benefits which could
accrue to all the inhabitants of the shores of the Mediterranean as a result of the combined efforts of the
States concerned.
19. Having given the matter our most careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion that it
would be difficult indeed for the Council to rule on
the substance of such a highly complicated
issue,
which by its very nature requires that it should be
settled by the parties primarily concerned through an
effort of conciliation and goodwill, using every available means. I refer in particular to Articles 33 and 36
of the Charter, which specifically mention procedures
suited to the present circumstances.
We understand,
moreover, that this view is by and large shared by the
two parties concerned.

16, Having said that, I should like to add that my
Government is however perfectly aware of the many
aspects of the difficult issue has been brought before
the Council. These aspects of a legal, political and an
economic nature make the whole dispute ail the more
complex. All these elements seem to have become
progressively enmeshed in such a way as to raise
emotions on both sides and exacerbate the controversy, and it appeared as if the crisis was reaching a
point where it could have got out of control. Since
this danger had not completely vanished, and since
the Council has been seized of the dispute, my Government feels it has a duty, at this stage, to
express its most heartfelt wishes to the Governments
concerned and appeal to them not to lose sight of their
real long-range interests, which call for a solution of
the present dispute in a spirit of conciliation and
understanding for each other’s positions and views.
It further seems to us that the two Governments
should not lose sight of the many political, economic
and social values they share.

20. However, the approach which my Government
would naturally endorse whole-heartedly
would be a
sincere effort by the two parties to come to terms with
their problems in an atmosphere of good-neighbourliness and without recourse to outside bodies. In this
connexion 1 would fully and whole-heartedly support
the appeal made by our British colleague, Ambassador Ivor Richard.
21. I should like to conclude this statement by
expressing the fervent wish of my Government that
this approach may once again be explored and that it
will ultimately prevail, and by reaffirming that my
Government and our partners in the European Community will certainly be more than willing to do whatever they can do to promote this development.

17. I should like the Council to know that the nine
members of the European Community have long been
well aware of the seriousness of the situation in the
Aegean Sea and have been concerned about the
growing feud building up between Greece and Turkey.
May I therefore recall that the Nine have neither
relented nor ceased to offer to both Ankara and Athens
their contribution of ideas and initiatives. I do not think
that I am divulging a State secret by letting the Council
know that the Nine have not failed to undertake proper
initiatives in these very days in relation to the present
course of events. In so doing, they have fulfilled what
they feel is their duty, for they are linked to both
Greece and Turkey by treaties of association, as I have
already mentioned, and, furthermore, they share with
these countries basic political philosophies and systems of government.

22. Finally, I can only recommend the present draft
resolution as an effort in this direction, in other words,
towards conciliation and the resumption of a friendly
dialogue. I sincerely trust that they will support it and
give it unanimous approval.
23. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
My delegation has followed the course of this discussion in the Council with great interest and special
concern, for the United States has the closest of ties
with both Greece and Turkey. They are our friends
and allies. We share with them common purposes
based upon common interests. Accordingly,
differences between them are of special concern to us.
A problem such as this-which
has led both Governments to send their Foreign Ministers to address the
Council-requires
not only our most careful attention
but has led to my Government
exerting its best efforts
to encourage progress towards a resolution of the
issues.

lg. Needless to say, Italy’s interest in peace and
security in the Mediterranean is self-evident. I should
like to add that in the Mediterranean we are currently
3

29, In such a situation, I believe that there are two
cardinal elements to any advice which this Council
might give to Greece and Turkey.

24. We do not underestimate the depth of feeling on
both sides or the complexity of the legal issues involved. The historical roots of some aspects of the
problem go back to classical times. The legal issues
related to the continental shelf are among the most
sensitive in the entire field of the law of the sea. I do
not believe, however, that this is the place to analyse
such complex issues of international law. The Council, should instead, rather do all it can to encourage
the two parties to engage in contacts and discussions
that will ensure that the problem between them does
not now or at any time in the future lead to a threat to
the peace of the area, To achieve this objective, this
Council must exercise its responsibilities
under the
Charter in a way that will contribute to the settlement
of the dispute.

30. First, it is essential that the Council urge Greece
and Turkey to continue to exercise the utmost restraint and to avoid falling into a pattern of action and
reaction, the result of which would be an increasing
rigidity of position the raising of the stakes each party
considers to be involved in the conflict, and a consequent heightening of tensions between the two
countries.
31. Second, both Governments should be encouraged to pursue the away of procedures which are available to them for the peaceful settlement of this dispute.
From what we have heard here from the spokesmen
of Greece and Turkey, I think it is clear that both
countries recognize that it is only through the resumption of direct and meaningful discussions between
them that such a settlement can be achieved or indeed
must be achieved. For its part, the United States
strongly favours and urge the earliest resumption by
the parties of such discussions. I believe it is also clear
that both parties recognize the potentially valuable
role of the International Court of Justice to consider
matters which remain unresolved after negotiation,
The important thing is that the parties find a basis
through direct contacts between them for whatevet
combination of direct talks and supporting adjudication may be necessary to achieve the peaceful settlement that my Government is confident both Governments seek.

25. In working with other delegations to develop the
draft resolution before the Council, my delegation
held the strong view that nothing was to be gained by
settling on language which would simply provide temporary satisfaction to one or the other of the parties,
because inevitably the result would be that the underlying problem would remain unaffected. What was
needed was a text which both parties could accept and
under which they both could work to strengthen the
peace. My Government believes that objective has
been achieved. We hope the draft resolution can be
adopted by consensus.
26. During recent weeks and days my Government
has been in close touch with both the Greek and the
Turkish Governments to encourage restraint on both
sides and a renewed effort to achieve a basis for discussion. We are gratified that the leaders of both countries have sought to approach their differences with
statesmanship and moderation.

32. Finally, I have no doubt that all of us are also
agreed that the conditions for progress in solving the
problems between Greece and Turkey can only further
improve if both sides avoid any military measures that
could in any way be interpreted as threatening and
thus detracting from an atmosphere of peace, which
is now so essential.

27. On 9 August Prime Minister Caramanlis stated
that Greece is avoiding any resort to force and is
hoping instead that the dispute will be ,resolved by
peaceful procedures. At the same time Turkish leaders
have expressed their desire to resolve the dispute
through negotiation and they have affirmed that their
research activities are not intended to prejudice the
legal rights of either Greece or Turkey in the Aegean.

33. My delegation sought to bear these criteria in
mind in our participation in the efforts that led to the
preparation of the draft resolution we have joined in
proposing. We believe that text is fair and reasonable,
It is intended to assist in creating a context in which
the parties can solve their differences. We urge the
parties to accept the Council’s advice.

28, In the course of our current debate the Foreign
Minister of Greece has stated that there are many
opportunies offered by Greece to Turkey for the peaceful settlement of the dispute and that these were not
confined only to the proposal that the matter be referred to the International
Couit of Justice. The
Foreign Minister of Turkey has reaffirmed that Turkey
stands ready to resolve all outstanding
differences
with Greece by peaceful means and that it does not
exclude recourse to the Court. Therefore, both sides
have reaffirmed to this Council their willingness to
resolve their dispute regarding the continental shelf of
the Aegean. We now believe that a fundamental basis
exists for the kind of discussion and adjudication
which must be undertaken if a settlement is to be
achieved.

34. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretatiorr
jiw??
French): Having on 10 August considered a request
from the representative of Greece for a meeting, the
Council is today, 25 August, going to take a decision
on the matter before it. It has had very few official
meetings in the intervening 14 days because it has been
faced with a situation which generally requires a great
deal of patience, imagination and work on the part of
its members. Three European countries, includi!$
France, with the support and participation
of the
United States, did their best to find language most
likely to meet with general acceptance. I should ndw
4

like to comment upon the outcome of those efforts by
emphasizing-as
my colleagues, whom I am tempted
to call my team-mates,
have done-the
common
interests that have motivated us throughout.

39. Following the order of the paragraphs, I come to
the very heart of the recommendation.
Operative
paragraph 3 calls upon the parties to resume their
negotiations and to do everything within their power
to find, in the more relaxed atmosphere advocated in
operative paragraph 2, mutually acceptable solutions.
As we know, States are ultimately
responsible for
their own destiny; they are the architects of their own
fortune and misfortune.
They can only be assisted
indirectly. The main brunt of the task is borne by
them. In addition to this general conclusion, there is
another one which is inspired by the friendship which,
as I have said, France feels for both the Greek and
the Turkish peoples. Given the part of Europe in
which they are situated, both Greece and Turkey must
agree and come to an understanding with each other.
They are and will be increasingly motivated not only
to seek but also to find mutually acceptable solutions,
on the basis of law and with respect for the legitimate
interests of both parties.

35. May I first say that France was extremely distressed and greatly concerned by the deterioration of
relations between Greece and Turkey. Those countries are our friends by virtue of history, geography
and mutual agreement. They are our allies; they are
our associates; their ties with Europe are essential in
all respects.
36. Our hearts and minds left us no alternative but
to consider the Greek request for the convening of the
Council, to listen to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Greece and Turkey and to decide how those two
countries could be helped. What was to be done first?
It is well known-and
this is an obligation under the
Charter-that
in the case of a dispute the Council must
attempt through its recommendations
to promote the
resumption of direct dialogue between the parties.
The four delegations that have sponsored our draft
resolution have tried to serve as the instruments of
such a resumption, They have attempted to initiate
an indirect dialogue between Greece and Turkey in
the hope that a direct dialogue could then proceed.
To that end, our text indicates the two preconditions
for such a resumption: first, non-aggravation of the
situation and, secondly, reduction of existing tensions, Since fever does not make for a clear head, it
must first be reduced.

40. Operative paragraph 4 is well known to members
of the Council. It is even better known to its authors,
who had a great deal of trouble with the two parties
regarding it. Since this is a paragraph which is just
as necessary as the others, I shall in this connexion
make the following comment: Chapter VI of the Charter lists the various peaceful ways of settling disputes.
Article 36 (3) specifically singles out the specific role
to be played by the International
Court of Justice in
dealing with a legal dispute, which is clearly what the
limitation
of the continental
shelf is. What we have
tried to recall in this paragraph of our draft resolution,
which is the logical outcome of the preceding paragraph, is that when the parties, in their negotiations,
encounter problems which they are unable to resolve,
they have available to them the judicial channels laid
down in the Charter-and,
in the case of the Court,
those enunciated in its Statute. This reminder seems
reasonable to us and in accordance with the position
previously taken by both Greece and Turkey. Furthermore, there are a number of recent examples of
this kind of recourse, particularly
among European
and Mediterranean
countries.

37. That being so, the events which led the Council
to meet should not be ignored. The inmediate cause
of the Greek action was the research voyage undertaken by a Turkish naval vessel in a contested area
of the continental shelf. This is an objective fact which
no one can deny even if it is differently construed by
the two parties, The circumstances surrounding this
fact will play a role in the reduction of tension which
the Council is urging both parties to promote between
themselves.
38., It is true that the root causes are difficult. As
true followers of Aristotle we know there are immediate causes and ultimate causes. In others words, we
should be prompted to broaden our consideration of
the reasons for our meeting and also to take due note
of certain,less immediate aspects of the Greek-Turkish
dispute. My delegation listened attentively to those
portions of the Turkish statement which dealt with
these aspects. We have taken note of them and we feel
that if both parties can discuss their problems from
various angles without increasing the tension between
them, it would be a good thing for them to do so. The
recommendations
contained in the operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of our draft resolution should be interpreted, both in letter and spirit, as’s desire on the part
of the Council to see no increase but rather a reduction
in the number of points of difference existing between
Turkey and Greece.

41. These are the comments which I think were
called for in connexion with this draft resolution,
whose main purpose is to unsnarl the machinery for
a peaceful settlement. Our delegation co-operated in
the efforts of our four countries with the desire to find
a proper balance between the positions of the two
parties involved, which were very distant at the outset. Like any compromise text, ours will undoubtedly
prompt comments on certain points. We are not
unaware of the fact that neither of the parties regards
this as a faithful reflection of all its claims. But it
appears to us that the essential elements are there and
that the goal proposed is in keeping with the Council’s
responsibilities
in a situation which is likely to threaten
international
peace and security. At this stage of tension, which, through compromise,
we hope can be
made to evolve towards a resumption of the dialogue
5

between Greece and Turkey, there can be no doubt
that it is the duty of both countries to be particularly
careful about what they do and what they say in order
not to hamper the trend towards negotiation,
which
we hope will come about. My delegation also hopes
that, as a result of the efforts which have been made,
the parties will seriously consider either parallel or
simultaneous measures in order to promote a settlement of the problems between them and to create the
sort of understanding
between them to which they
aspire.

46. In view of the situation that has been created,
and weighing the arguments adduced by the parties,
my delegation believes that only bilateral negotiation
can possibly lead to an understanding that will remove
the causes of conflict. Only an understanding between
the parties directly concerned will ensure that the
time and the efforts that are today expended in dispute
can be better expended for co-operation.
47. We support the draft resolution submitted by the
representatives of France, Italy, the United Kingdom
and the United States in its entirety. We believe that
it is an adequate answer to the question before us. The
reasons for that draft resolution are clearly spelled out
in Article 33 (2) of the Charter, The Council, aware
of its responsibility
to the international
community
and basing itself on the irrefutable principle of the
pacific settlement of disputes, urges the Governments
of Greece and of Turkey to preserve the greatest
moderation possible and to exhaust all means for
reaching an understanding as spelt out in Article 33 (l),

42. Finally, my delegation would like to welcome
the presence among us for the past two weeks of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Greece and Turkiy.
Their presence is a sign of the importance which both
those countries attach to the functions of the Security Council and to the assistance which it can try to
give. As 1 have already said, the responsibility
for
substantive conversations lies with the States themselves and with their authorized representatives.
Naturally, I echo the hope expressed by our British
colleague regarding the forthcoming meeting between
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Greece and
Turkey, who are present in New York today-a
meeting which we hope will be likely to promote the
better atmosphere we think so desirable.

48. We know that at times it is difficult to find formulas for conciliatiori.
Agreements sought through
peaceful means often require much time, patience
and even a great deal of tolerance. We Panamanians
know this very well. For many years we have been
the victims of injustice on the part of a great Power
but, aware of our commitments
to the Panamanian
people and to the world community,
we have continually called for bilateral negotiations.
Despite the
frustrations suffered in more than 11 years of progress
and retrogression without anything truly positive to
show, we will continue to exhaust the peaceful means
of negotiation until the end. We trust that, without
having to resort to destructive violence, we will ultimately achieve agreement, that for the good of both
Panama and the other party, we will be able to remove
the causes of tension and pave the way for co-operation based on the sovereign equality of States.

43. Mr. RiOS (Panama) (inrcrprefution
from Sprrtlish): My delegation would like to begin its brief statement by greeting the Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim, who is back with us again after having performed
very delicate tasks at the,Summit Conference of NonAligned Countries that was recently held in Colombo.
44. On 12 August the Security Council met to consider the complaint by Greece against Turkey. The
Greek Government stated that Turkey had committed
flagrant violations of the sovereign rights of Greece on
its continental shelf in the Aegean. When the debate
on this extremely delicate question began, my delegation paid special attention to the statements made
by the Foreign Ministers of Greece and Turkey. The
arguments put forth by both sides are, we believe,
worthy of the greatest attention. This is a classical
case of past frictions becoming more dangerous as the
years elapse, and thereby creating an urgent need to
seek permanent solutions that will do away with the
sources of tensions which endanger the peace not
only of the region but of the wprld. As my delegation
has repeatedly stated, in the world of today, regional
conflicts may very easily become extended, with
unforeseeable consequences.

49. Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to those colleagues who, with great
dedication and awareness of their responsibilities,
have managed to place before us the draft resolution
in document S/12187. We know that the text is the
result of very difficult and laborious negotiation. We
support it, for in so doing we are consistent with our
policy of supporting all constructive efforts to preserve international peace and security and co-operation
between all peoples.
50. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intopretcrtion Ji~onr
Frc~nch): Romania, as a country that is situated in the
Balkans, is deeply concerned with the maintenance
of peace and security in the area as well as in the
neighbouring regions. It is a well-known fact that my
country has always acted consistently
with these
views, including the taking of initiatives for the establishment of a zone of peace and good-neighbourliness
in the Balkans. It should also be noted that, pursuant
to the terms of declarations and agreements signed by

45. The dispute which we are now considering is
centred on the Aegean Sea. That sea, the theatre of
heroic feats of the past, which served as the pathway
and the channel for the first developments of Western
civilization,
which served as a link between the East
and the West, will continue to serve that historic purpose.
6

Romania with the countries of the region, including
Greece and Turkey, the parties assumed a commitment to act to avoid conflicts and to solve any that
arose by peaceful means in order not to endanger the
peace and security of their peoples or of the other
countries of the region.

sures, particularly when such measures might affect
the I*,ights and interests of coastal and other States. We
also feel that, while the settlement of this legal problem
is pending, the States involved should abstain from
any measure that might increase tension and affect
the freedom and security of navigation in the area.

51. In the light of the tensions which have recently
developed in the relations between Greece and Turkey,
two countries with which Romania enjoys c’lose reiations of friendship and co-operation, we feel impelled
to express our deep concern regarding the existence
of confl ict in the area which could affect the peace and
security of the peoples, including the Romanian people. It is precisely for this reason that my country
could not remain unaffected by the situation. We feel
that other States of the region have a duty to act positively and constructively
by all the means at their
disposal to promote and encourage the settlement of
the dispute by peaceful means in accordance with the
terms of the Charter of the United Nations. The
appeals to moderation addressed to the parties to the
dispute and the offers of good offices should be interpreted as so many modalities through which the other
States are performing these duties. Furthermore, it is
extremely important that the parties to the dispute,
like the States of the area and. other States, should
refrain from any action that might aggravate the conflict, increase tension in the area or even provoke
military acts. All States must act calmly, in a lofty
spirit of responsibility towards the peace and security
of peoples.

55. Since the draft resolution submitted
by the
delegations .of France, Italy, the United Kingdom
and the United States-whom
we should like to thank
for their efforts-meets
the concern which we have
voiced, the Romanian delegation will vote in favour
of it. My delegation hopes that that draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus.
56. We remain convinced that both Greece and
Turkey will make every effort to resolve their dispute
by peaceful means in the interest of their peoples and
of the peace and security of all States of the region
and of the world in general. The presence here, at the
Council table, of the Foreign Ministers of Greece and
of Turkey and the constructive tone and moderate
tenor of their statements strengthen our conviction.
57. We appeal to the States of the area and to all
other States. to encourage and to support a friendly
and peaceful settlement of the dispute between Greece
and Turkey in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter and the rules of international law, bearing in
mind the interests of international peace’and security.

53. We also believe that the two countries bear a
grave responsibility for the building of security and
peace in the Balkans and in the Mediterranean as part
of peace and security in Europe and in the rest of the
world. The peaceful settlement of the dispute regarding the Aegean Sea will doubtless be the best
proof of the determination
of the two Governments
to contribute effectively towards achieving that goal.

58. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation jiam Russion): The Council
is now considering the question of the situation that
has arisen in the Aegean Sea in connexion with the
problem of the continental shelf. Two States Members
-Greece and Turkey-are
affected by this problem
and they have presented to the Council their positions
on the matter. On 12 August [1949th meeting], the
members of the Council had the opportunity
to hear
the arguments and positions of the Greek Government, on whose initiative the Council was convened,
as these were set forth by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece; and on 13 August [/95Uth meeting],
the Council heard the views and arguments of the
Turkish Government as reflected in a statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey. From
the information thus available to the members of the
Council, it is clear that the positions of the two parties on the substance of the issues do not coincide.
A dispute thus exists between the two States and there
has been a deterioration of relations between them,

54. The Romanian delegation feels that all problems
concerning the rights and interests of States over a
.given sea area, including the problems of the territorial
delimitation of those rights and interests, must be
solved on the basis of agreement between the countries directly concerned, bearing in mind the special
circumstances of .the area and the principles of international justice and equity. The States must accordingly act with moderation in adopting unilateral mea-

59. Inasmuch as the Security Council has taken up
this problem, it may be useful to recall the criteria
which, according to the Charter, should guide all
Members of the Organization in dealing with such
cases. The first of these criteria is to be found in Article 2 (3) of the Charter, which states that all Members
of the United Nations should settle their disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security are not endangered; the second is

52. We believe that the dispute between Greece and
Turkey can be settled if the two parties act in accordance with the commitment
which they undertook
under the Charter of the United Nations and solemnly
renewed at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. As signatories of the Final Act of that
Conference, it is up to Greece and Turkey to carry out
their obligations in good faith and to co-operate effectively in the solution of their dispute by peaceful
means.

7

to be found in Article 1, which states that one of the
purposes of the United Nations is to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, the adjustment
or
settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace.

negotiate and settle differences by peaceful means.
Furthermore,
the Agreement between the United
States of America and the Unio’n of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Prevention of Nuclear War’, signed
in Washington in June 1973, expressly states that each
party will refrain from the threat or use of force against
the other party, against the allies of the other party and
against other countries. Similar principles guided the
Soviet Union and another permanent member of the
Security Council, the United Kingdom,
when, in
February of 1975, at the highest level, they signed the
joint United Kingdom-Soviet
Statement on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons; those principles are
reflected in other documents as well.

60. The Soviet delegation feels that these provisions
of the Charter are fully applicable in the present case.
In the opinion of the Soviet Union, such problems
should be resolved through negotiation and without
the use, or the threat of the use, of force. Of course,
this is not merely a theoretical precept. Such an approach, in the view of the Soviet Union, should serve
as a code of action for all States. Furthermore,
the
inadmissibility
of the use of force in international
relations is now becoming one of the paramount issues
of the day. I wish to emphasize that. It is a principle
which is of fundamental international
significance.
That is why, in the matter being considered by the
Security Council today, we can see reflected, as in a
pool of water, one of the fundamental principles of
present-day international relations. The position of
the Soviet Union in this connexion is clear and unambiguous. The fundamental position of the Soviet
Union is that disputes between States must be resolved by peaceful means, through negotiation
and
without resort to force. As long ago as the Twentyfourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, which was held in 1971, the following goal was
set: “Renunciation
of the use of force and the threat
of the use of force in the settlement of disputes should
become a law of international life”

62. It is particularly noteworthy that the principle of
the non-use of force has in recent years served as the
basis for the normalization
of relations between a
number of socialist countries-the
Soviet Union,
Poland,
the German Democratic
Republic
and
Czechoslovakia-and
the Federal Republic of Germany. Furthermore,
a new stage, qualitatively
speaking, was reached with the approval of the principle of the non-use of force in relations among States
on a regional basis, namely, in the Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
to which, on 1 August 1975, 35 States affixed their
signatures,
63. In order to become genuinely universal, the
principle of the non-use of force in relations among
States must of course embrace all countries and all
continents of the world. That is why it is a matter of
particular gratification to be able to note the substantial role that is being played by the non-aligned movement in consolidating
and further propagating this
principle. As we know, at the Conference held in the
capital of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
Georgetown, in August 1972, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the non-aligned countries declared themselves in favour of devising “rules of behaviour which
would eliminate force from international relations”.
The ministers particularly emphasized that “States
must refrain from the threat or use of force in their
international relations”.

61. We citizens of the Soviet Union are proud of the
fact that it was precisely the Soviet State, the first
socialist country of the world, that took the initiative
and played the leading role in this important international area. The Soviet Union suggested that those
countries that agreed to this approach should conclude
the appropriate bilateral and regional treaties. Since
then, a great deal has been done in this connexion
on both a bilateral and a regional basis. Renunciation
of the use of force and the threat of the use of force
became one of the key provisions in an extremely
important document, namely, the statement of principles governing co-operation between the Soviet
Union itself and France, signed in Paris on 30 October
1971 by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brezhnev, and the President of the French Republic, Mr. Pompidou. The Soviet-American
document which was signed in May 1972 in Moscow, at
the highest level, entitled “Basic principles of mutual
relations between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America”
[S/10674]
provides that in the nuclear age there is no alternative
to conducting their mutual relations on the basis of
peaceful coexistence. Accordingly, the Soviet Union
and the United States undertook to do their almost
to avoid military confrontations and to prevent the
outbreak of nuclear war; and with that end in view

64. The United Nations also made an important contribution to the affirmation of the principle of the nonuse of force in international relations. This principle
was enshrined in the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International
Security [General Asse/nhly resollrfiolz 2734 (XXV)], which was adopted on the initiative
of the Soviet Union, and also in the Declaration on
Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [Gener~rl
Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV)].
In 1972; on the
initiative of the Soviet Union, the General Assembly
adopted an important
resolution-resolution
2936
(XXVII)-on
the non-use of force in international
relations and permanent prohibition
of the use of
nuclear weapons.
8

65. All that bears ample testimony to the fact that,
in order further to consolidate and make irreversible
the favourable trends which are observable in international relations, it is important, necessary and feasible to banish once and for all the use of force-that
law of the jungle-from
international
relations. The
necessary conditions for this exist. That is why the
Twenty-fifih Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, as another step in its efforts to remove
force from relations between States, set the following
task: ‘L... to work for a world-wide treaty on the
non-use of force in international
relations.”
The
attainment of that noble.goal would be a turning-point
in the history of mankind. The Soviet Union calls
upon all States and all peoples to concert their efforts
in order to achieve this lofty goal.

poses on States the obligation to resolve problems
arising between them by ‘peaceful means, without
threatening international peace and security,
69. This, then, is the approach of the Soviet delegation with regard to the draft resolution which has been
presented to the Council. We believe that, on the
whole, this draft answers the main purpose, that is to
say, in this particular instance to bring about a situation whereby the differences that have arisen between
the two parties can be resolved by peaceful means
and by negotiation. Its adoption will be an important
contribution by the Council to reaffirming the principle
of the non-use of force in international relations. For
that reason the Soviet delegation will support this
draft resolution.
70. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): The delegation of
Pakistan listened with great attention to the statements made in meetings of 12 and 13 August by the
Foreign Ministers of Gi-eece and Turkey on the matter
now under consider&ion by the Council. I should like
to take this opportunity
to extend my delegation’s
welcome to Mr. Cailayangil
and Mr. Bitsios and to
say how pleased and honoured we are to have them in
our midst and how impressed and inspired my delegation has been with the good will they have shown
towards each other and the great respect they have
shown for the principles of the United Nations Charter. We were much impressed by the dignity and
moderation
with which both sides presented their
views on the question under discussion, in particular,
the issues pertaining to the law of the sea, which point
to the existence of a situation which is unsatisfactory
not only for Greece and Turkey but also for the international community as a whole.

66. In its reply dated 13 August 1976 to the questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General concerning
the implementation
of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security, the Soviet Union
stated the following:
“In an effort to reduce still further the threat of
war and to strengthen international peace and security, the Soviet Union has put forward a proposal
for the conclusion of a world treaty on the non-use
of force in international relations. The aim of this
proposal is to make the renunciation of the use of
force for the purpose of settling disputes in relations
between States an immutable law of international
life. The parties to the treaty, including, of course,
the nuclear Powers, would undertake to refrain
from the use of any type of weapons, including
nuclear weapons, to settle disputes between themselves. The Soviet Union has declared its readiness
to consider, together with other States, practical
steps to bring about the implementation
of this
proposal.“*

7 I. The fact that almost the whole of the customary
and conventional law of the sea has been under review
for a number of years and is now being debated in the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea is evidence of the fact that most of the law of the
sea was formulated in the past in different circumstances and therefore requires reformulation in accordance with the principles of justice and equity among
nations large and small.

67. That, then, is the essential position of the Soviet
Union in this extremely important area of international
relations. Those are the noble initiatives that have
been made by the land of the Soviets in this connexion.
In our opinion, that should be the attitude of all States
regarding the need to consolidate in everyday practice
the principle of the non-use of force in international
relations and the settlement of disputes between
States by peaceful means and through negotiation.

72.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, in
of 12 August, .said that it was not his
intention to ask the Council to take a decision on the
legal dispute; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey, in his, statement of 13 August, similarly
expressed his country’s determination
to resolve the
issue before us and other related matters through
bilateral negotiations in a spirit of good-neighbourliness. My delegation will therefore not offer any comments on the legal aspects. of the matter.
his statement

68. ‘In the opinion of the Soviet Union, in the particular case which is today being considered by the
Council, the parties, in seeking a solution to the differences existing between them, should also exercise
restraint, adopt a serious and constructive approach
and.refrain from the use or threat force. May I remind
representatives in this connexion that both parties are
countries which have signed the Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe,
Therefore, it is appropriate and timely to express the
hope that they will act in strict compliance with
the provisions of that document, which makes im-

73. We do appreciate the fact that the question of
the Aegean Sea is a complicated one, in the consideration of which not only the legal but also the equally
important
political, economic and security aspects
9

must be given due and proper weight. Any search for
a solution of the issue will prove elusive unless the
matter is considered in its entirety and in its historical
perspective.

these means of settlement,
namely, conciliation,
arbitration, mediation, judicial settlement or any other
peaceful means of their choice.
78. In this context we have noted what the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Greece said here in his statement
of 12 August, namely:

74. Furthermore,
the nature of the situation is such
that it is the parties themselves that bear the responsibility for seeking a reasonable and mutually satisfactory accommodation.
It is a source of satisfaction
and encouragement
that the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of both Greece and Turkey expressed their
countries’ resolve to solve the issue peacefully and
in accordance with the principles of the Charter. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece said in his
statement of 12 August:

“Many are the opportunities
offered by Greece
to Turkey for the peaceful settlement of our dispute.
They are not confined to our proposal that the
matter be referred to the International
Court of
Justice.” [f949th meerhg, parer. 28.1
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey said, in his
statement on the following day:

“Greece took the view that it owed it to itself
and to the general welfare and peace to leave no
avenue unexplored that could lead to the elimination of a dispute in an area that was already rife with
danger and tension.” [194Ytt7 ~reetina, ~UIYI. 24.1

“If it becomes necessary, Turkey does not
exclude to the International Court of Justice to settle
certain relevant aspects of the problem, but maintains that the dispute should first be negotiated
between the two countries.”
[1950tk meeti~q,

Further, in his statement of 13 August he read the following passage from a declaration by the Prime Minister of Greece:

pnrrr. 12.1

79. In the light of this, we feel that the reference to
the International
Court of Justice, in operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, does not reflect the
minimum common position implicit in the statements
I have just quoted, We feel in particular that in light
of the fact that the Greek Government has proceeded
unilaterally to make reference to the Court-a course
of action which we hope it will now find it possible
to reconsider-the
Council should have been unambiguous in urging upon the parties that direct and
bilateral negotiations offer, in its view, the best way
of reaching a mutually acceptable solution. To invite
them, as operative paragraph 4 does, to contemplate
even at this stage a partial failure of these negotiations
is not, in my delegation’s view, the appropriate course
of action. We note, on the other hand, that this paragraph calls upon the parties to identify any remaining
unsettled issues of h legal nature, an action which by
definition has to be undertaken jointly, before they
have recourse to the Court, if such recourse becomes
necessary.

“Greece has never claimed... that the Aegean is
a closed Greek sea. Neither is she denying that
Turkey, as a coastal country, also has certain rights
in this sea.” [/95Ot/z ~necrilrg, pcrrcr. 37.1
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, for his
part, expressed his Government’s
resolve to settle the
question of the Aegan continental
shelf and other
related issues through bilateral negotiations.
75. We share the general view that the Security
Council should, in response to the wishes of the parties
themselves, encourage them to resolve their differences in accordance with the principles and provisions
of the Charter and as good neighbours on the basis of
equity and justice.
76. We should like to commend the sponsors of the
draft resolution which is before the Council for the
patience and sincere efforts which they put into its
preparation. We are in full accord with the importance
it attaches to the resumption
and continuation
of
direct negotiations between Greece and Turkey to
resolve their differences. We endorse its appeal to the
two Governments “to exercise the utmost restraint in
the present situation”
and “to do everything in their
power to reduce the present tensions in the area so
that the negotiating process may be facilitated”.

80. My delegation regrets that the sponsors were
unable to accept the suggestions for changes in the
draft resolution which would have enabled the Council
to adopt the draft resolution unanimously.
However,
our primary concern is to make it possible for the
process of direct negotiations to be resumed, and we
shall not therefore stand in the way of its adoption.
With the reservations concerning paragraph 4, which
I have made, my delegation is prepared to go along
with the consensus on the draft resolution.

77. My country has consistently held the view in
matters in which its own interests have been involved
that, if a dispute cannot be settled through negotiations between the parties concerned, the other means
mentioned in Article 33 of the Charter should be utilized. In our view, the draft resolution, in its preamble,
does the appropriate thing in reminding the parties of

81. As I said earlier, we have been heartened by the
resolve the two sides have shown in their statements
and in discussions held outside for settling these issues
peacefully. We hope that the process of bilateral
negotiations will commence soon and that the two
10

Turkey and Greece will do their utmost to reduce the
present tensions in the Aegean Sea and will settle their
differences by peaceful means in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. Therefore the Libyan
delegation expresses its hope that the draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus. If the draft resolution
is put to the vote, the delegation of the Libyan Arab
Republic will abstain.

sides will settle their differences in all their aspects in
a spirit of give and take and good-neighbourliness.
82. My country, which has close and friendly relations with both Greece and Turkey, desires peace and
prosperity for their people, and it will be a source of
particular satisfaction to the Government
and the
people of Pakistan when this dispute and other outstanding differences between these two countries are
resolved peacefully in accordance with the precepts
of equity and justice.

88. The PRESIDENT:
If no other representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it that the
Council is ready to proceed to the next step, In this
respect, may I propose that, instead of proceeding to
a vote, the Council adopt draft resolution S/12187 by
consensus?

83.

Mr. HUANG
HUA (China) ft~a,l.sltrtio/z Jkon?
The Chinese delegation has listened carefully to the statements made of the Ministers for foreign Affairs and Greece and Turkey.
Chinese):

84. Both Greece and Turkey are friends of China.
With regard to the dispute between those two countries over the question of the Aegean Sea, we sincerely
hope that, taking to heart the over-all interests of unity
against hegemonism, Greece and Turkey will adopt
an attitude of restraint, seek a fair and reasonable
settlement of the issue through patient negotiations
on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence and thus avoid giving openings for exploitation
by the super-Powers.

89. The PRESIDENT:
Several members of the
Council have expressed a desire to speak at this stage.
I shall now call upon them.
90. Mr. ACAKPO
(Benin) (intcrprettrth
from
F~LJ/&): First of all, my delegation wishes to thank
the sponsors of the resolution we have just adopted
for their work. It is an even-handed and balanced text.
We know that, the situation prevailing in the Aegean
Sea which gave rise to these meetings of the Council
is a complex and delicate one and, as such, it should
be dealt with most prudently. That is what the sponsors
have done, and their efforts have borne fruit. The text
the Council has just adopted by consensus, reaffirms
one of the guiding principles of the Charter-namely,
the peaceful settlement of disputes. This is a principle
which the Military Revolutionary Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin holds very dear.

85. The Chinese delegation supports the draft resolution contained in document S/12187. It does so
because the main thrust of the draft lies in calling on
Greece and Turkey to resume direct negotiations. As
to what appropriate means both sides are likely to
adopt for the settlement of the dispute in the course
of the negotiations,
they can be determined only
through consultation between the two parties themselves.

91. It goes without saying that the Council’s appeal
to Turkey and Greece for restraint and for maximum
efforts to reduce tension in the region in order to
facilitate the process of direct negotiations on all disputes or pending problems is wise and conducive to a
negotiated settlement of the present dispute. Furthermore-and
the sponsors of the draft resolution have
stressed this-if
direct negotiations
should fail to
achieve tangible results the Council invites the parties
to use appropriate judicial means to solve any remaining legal differences connected with the present
dispute.

86. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
The
Libyan Arab Republic, which maintains both historical and friendly relations with Greece and Turkey, is
deeply distressed by the present discord between the
two friendly neighbouring
countries regard,ing the
situation in the Aegean Sea. During the present period
of tension in that area, the Government of the Libyan
Arab Republic, motivated by good will and the friendly
relations it maintains with both nations, has made
sincere efforts with the two Governments to avoid
any actions that would lead to a’n armed confrontation
and has recommended
that the two countries endeavour to resolve their differences through negotiations and by peaceful means. I should like to take this
opportunity
to thank both Governments
for their
understanding and appreciation of our efforts.

92. These are all different aspects of the peaceful
settlement of disputes to which the parties can resort
if necessary. My delegation would also like to express
the hope that Greece and Turkey will heed the appeal
of the Council and do every thing in their power to
achieve a negotiated solution to their dispute and thus
safeguard peace and security in the region.

87. On this occasion I shoud also like to express the
appreciation of the Libyan delegation to the sponsors
of draft resolutipn S/12187 for their consistent efforts
during the last two weeks to arrive at a workable
solution. My delegation feels that this text does not
fully- meet the hopes of the interested parties. HOWever, the Libyan Arab Republic is confident that both

93. Mr. CHALE
(United Republic
of Tanzania.
My delegation supports the resolution the Council has
just adopted. In supporting it, we are mindful of the
very delicate nature of the question involved. It is our
sincere hope, therefore, that the resolution will con11

leading to an amicable settlement of the dispute. All
of us can recall that Article 33 of the Charter provides
that:

tribute towards the peaceful settlement of the issue of
delimitation
of the continental shelf and, by achieving
this, the Council1 will happily have successfully completed its task.

“The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by... peaceful means of their own
choice.”

94. My delegation
believes that disputes of this
nature should be settled amicably in accordance with
Article 33 of the Charter. This is’ precisely what the
resolution calls on the parties to do. The resolution
urges both parties to facilitate the negotiating process
so as not to increase the present tensions. And as an
extension of this negotiating process, the parties may
resort to judicial means to settle their differences in
accordance with international
law. In this way, the
dispute can be resolved in a manner that is satisfactory
to both parties. For this reason, my delegation strongly appeals to both parties to heed this call of the Council. They should proceed in good faith to resolve this
matter speedily and efficiently
so that they may
continue to live in harmony and good-neighbourliness.

100. My delegation recognizes the usefulness of
direct negotiations between Greece and Turkey to
determine the method by which a solution should be
sought. In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
fact that Greece and Turkey have begun negotiations
seeking a solution of the dispute through peaceful
means.
101. We earnestly hope that both Governments will
heed our strong appeal and refrain from any action
which might aggravate the present situation and impair
the effectiveness of the efforts towards a mutually
acceptable solutibn.

95. In the mean time, we ho$e that the current
negotiations of the Conference on the Law of the Sea
will contribute towards the settlement of the Aegean
Sea question by establishing
a clear delimitation
mechanism for the continental shelf. We for our part
will do all we can to make a meaningful contribution in
this regard, because we believe that good fences make
good neighbours.

102. Inasmuch as the resolution,
which was the
product of the arduous efforts of the four sponsoring
delegations,,well
reflects this point of view of ours,
we supported it. We wish to urge the two parties to
the dispute to heed the resolution and strengthen theh
efforts to attain an amicable settlement of the dispute.

96. l\llr. HAMMARSKJZjLD
(Sweden): The Swedish
delegation only wishes briefly to join those who have
expressed their great appreciation to the four members
of the Council who have made such great efforts to
arrive at a text commanding
the widest possible acceptance. ,During these two weeks the members of the
Council have formed a clear picture of how extremely
complex the problems involved are. In supporting
the resolution we have just adopted, it is our hope that
the two parties will find it possible to resume their no
doubt difficult negotiations with a view to finding a
solution which, in spite of all difficulties, is mutually
acceptable.

103. Speaking again as PRESIDENT,
I call upon
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, who wishes
to make a statement.
104. Mr. CAGLAYANGIL
(Turkey) (intoprcfatio~~
f/~/n French): I should like briefly to set forth the
views of my Government on the resolution which has
just been adopted by the Council.
105. As I emphasized in my statement on 13 August
[1950th meeting],
the request made by Greece for a
meeting of the Council was completely
pointless,
because there had been no action on the part of Turkey
which could lend credence or plausibility
to the allegations of Greece that Turkey has been responsible for
creating a threat to peace and security in the Aegean
area. That being so, my delegation from the very outset took the position that Greece’s request did not
necessitate any resolution.

97. The PRESIDENT:
According
to traditional
practice in the Council, I shall make the following
short statement as representative of JAPAN.
98. My delegation is deeply concerned over the
situation in the eastern Mediterranean,
which has
recently deteriorated because of th,e differences between two countries friendly to us, Greece and Turkey,
on questions relating to the Aegean Sea, and in particular their conflicting claims to the continental shelf
of that sea.

106. However, we should like to express our appreciation to the four Western members who drew up
the text of this resolution for all they have done in
attempting to reconcile the positions of the two parties.

99. Indeed, the positions of the Governments
of
Greece and Turkey regarding the continental shelf in
the area remain far apart. My delegation, however,
highly appreciates the conviction expressed here by
both parties to the dispute that the problem at issue
should be solved through peaceful means. My Government strongly hopes that Greece and Turkey will
avoid any armed conflict and will follow a course

107. This resolution has been adopted 13 days after
the first meeting of the Council was held, at Greece’s
request. The very length of the time which has intervened suffices in itself to show that the Council .did
not share Greece’s view regarding the urgency of the
so-called threat to peace and security in the region.
12

accord with our policy, we do not consider that we
are bound by any other provision that could be construed as constituting a precondition ‘or a contraint.

The members of the Council wisely made efforts to
obtain a constructive result by laying emphasis on the
resumption of negotiations. In its wisdom, the Council
did not accept the contention that the Turkish research
vessel, Sismik-I, in its activities, had infringed on the
sovereign rights of any country. It correctly diagnosed
the various sources of tension and conflict in the
Aegean Sea, for which, we are convinced, we are not
responsible.

114. Nor could we accept any provision that would
be likely to prejudge the process of negotiation or its
outcome or that might involve any unilateral recourse
to a judicial body. It should also be borne in mind that
Turkey has not recognized the jurisdiction
of the
International
Court of Justice as binding.

108. The Council stressed the .urgent need to respect
international obligations, and now, more than ever
before, Turkey is entitled to require that Greece
comply with its contractual obligations, which are of
vital importance for the security of Turkey.

115. Furthermore, it is undeniable that the resumption of negotiations implies that no unilateral action
should be undertaken that would be in flagrant contradiction with the concept of negotiation as I have just
defined it.

109. Furthermore,
the ‘Council, in the manner in
which it dealt with the concept of negotiation and
other peaceful means for resolving conflicts, clearly
gave priority and pride of place to the process of
negotiation. It referred to the possibility, should the
need arise, of resorting to the appropriate judicial
bodies in connexion with any remaining legal differences that might he outstanding after substantial
and meaningful negotiations.

116. The PRESIDENT
(i,lter;pr.etation:fr,onl
I now call on the Minister for Foreign
a
Greece.
117.

French):

Affairs of

Mr.

BITSIOS
(Greece) (i~l~~~~~‘~fllti~ll @nr
I wish just to say two words-to thank the
Council. I wish to thank it, first of all, for having
granted our request, secondly, for having listened to
our expression of concern regarding the maintenance
of peace and security in the region and at the same
time our desire to settle our dispute with Turkey
peacefully; and, finally, for having adopted a resolution which, despite the statement that we just heard,
will, I trust, clear away the obstacles to a resumption
of the dialogue and lead to the solution of the problem
of the continental shelf of the Aegean Sea by peaceful
means.
French):

110. The Council, therefore, recognizes the scope
of the problems relating to politics, economics and
security. There can be no doubt that the unilateral
application by Greece to the International
Court of
Justice is in complete contradiction
with both the
letter and the spirit of this resolution, quite apart from
the question of whether it was a valid request.
111. Having clarified that point, I should like to
reiterate that my Government continues to be firmly
convinced that there has been no action on the part
of Turkey that could be described as necessitating or
justifying the adoption of a resolution by the Council.
Turkey has violated no international treaty nor has it
infringed on the rights of other countries. No one, I
think, in the Council could claim otherwise.

118. More particularly,
I should like to thank the
members of the Council who, during these long days
of waiting, have worked unremittingly
to produce a
draft resolution, with the constant concern for reducing tension and for suggesting to the parties the
means for resolving their dispute.
119. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to express my
sincere appreciation to all members of the Council
and to the Foreign Ministers of Greece and Turkey
and their delegations for the spirit of co-operation and
great patience with which they have participated in
the present deliberations,
thus enabling the Council
to achieve the adoption of a resolution by consensus
today.

112. I should also like to repeat that Turkey has
always advocated negotiations with Greece not only
in connexion with disputes concerning the continental
shelf in the Aegean but also to settle all outstanding
problems between the two countries. Turkey has made
this point on a number of occasions, and it was always
Turkey which took the initiative in the field of negotiations. Since our attitude remains unchanged, we
feel that paragraph 3 of the resolution is fully in accord
with the policy that has been consistently pursued by
Turkey.

120. I now declare that ‘the consideration
item in the Council has been concluded.
The nwstitlg

113. I do not believe that I need to expatiate on the
other paragraphs of the resolution since our position
has been made abundantly clear by what I have already said. The core of the resolution can be found in
paragraph 3. While we feel that this paragraph is in

IYISC rrt I.10 p.m.
lv0re.s

I United
Nations,
= A/31/177,
p. 2.

13

Tietr?\~ Serifs,

vol.

917, p. 85.

of this

Hoi’4

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
nmndc
cn!ier. Inl’ormcz-vous
auprts
des ventes.
New York ou Get&e.

CONSEGUIR

COMO

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent en vente dnns les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adresscz-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las pubhciones
de las Nacionrs
todas partes del niundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estln
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o di$jase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

LJNIES

et Ies agcnces
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas disrribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas.

83-60801-February

1985--~.>W)
