General Assembly-Thh-ty-secon<l Session
~------------~--

164

3. Welcomes the comprehensive way in which the
Government of the Solomon Islands has approached the
preparation of a sound political and economic foundation for independence, which is to be achieved in
July 1978;
4. Requests that further steps be taken towards
diy,ersifying the economy of the Solomon Islands and
that the administering Power continue to enlist the
assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as of
regional bodies, in the development and strengthening
of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Solomon Islands under review.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/26.

Question of the New Hebrides

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory, including General
Assembly resolutions 3290 (XXIX) of 13 December
1974, 3433 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and 31/51
of 1 December 1976,
Welcoming the participation of France, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee
relating to the Territory,
Noting the joint statement of the administering
Powers issued on 21 July 1977, 11 as well as their joint
statement of 26 March 1977 ,1"
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland relating to developments in the New Hebrides,rn
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the New Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory and
to the views, wishes and aspirations of the people
therein with respect to their future status,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Inde1 3 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. IIT, and vol. lll, chap. XIII.
14 A/32/172, annex.
15 A/32/99, annex.
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Fo11rth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 12-21.

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the New Hebrides; 17
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms the territorial integrity and national
unity of the New Hebrides;
4. Welcomes the joint commitment of the two administering Powers to independence for the New
Hebrides and urges them to continue their efforts towards the early independence of the Territory, in full
consultation with the people of the Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economy of the New
Hebrides, to continue taking steps on a priority basis
to unify the administration of the Territory and to
work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development so as to ensure that economic and
social development keeps abreast of political development;
6. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
7. Urges the Governments of France and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
continue to co-operate with the Special Committee and
to consider permitting access by a United Nations visiting mission to the New Hebrides, and to report on this
aspect to the Special Committee when it next considers
the question of the New Hebrides;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the administering Powers, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/27.

Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peopks, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of
~he Un\ted Nations relating to the Territory, including
m particular the consensus on the question adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 December 1974,1\1
17 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l ), vol. III, chap. XIII.
18 Jhid., chap. XV.
rn Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, S11pp/e111ent No. 31 (Al
96:< I), p. 117, item 23.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commillcc

Recalling also ,its resolutions 3424 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 and 31/56 of 1 December 1976,
1. Reaffirms th~ inalienable right of the people of
Brunei to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Brunei;
3. Notes once again that no progress has been
achieved so far in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 3424 (XXX) and 31/56;
4. Calls once more upon all parties concerned to
work towards the early implementation of resolutions
3424 (XXX) and 31/56;
5. Calls again upon the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, consistent with its responsibility as the administering Power,
to take all steps within its competence to facilitate expeditiously the holding of free and democratic elections
by the appropriate goVTernment authorities in Brunei,
in consultation with and under the supervis,ion of the
United Nations, in accordance with the inalienable
right of the people of Brunei to self-determination and
independence, and further calls, prior to the elections,
for the lifting of the ban on all political parties and for
the return of '111 political exiles to Brunei so that they
can participate freely and fully in the elections;
6. Notes that the administering Power has so far
not participated in the Special Committee's consideration of the Territory;
7. Calls upon the administering Power, in conformity with the provisions of the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, to extend full co-operation to
the Special Committee;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
keep the situation in Brunei under review and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/28.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to Guam, in particular General Assembly resolutions 3429 (XXX) of 8 December 1975,
3481 (XXX) of 11 December 1975 and 31 /58 of
1 December 1976,
20 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l ), vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. HI, chap. XXII.

165

Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam.
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 21
Noting the opinion expressed by the representative
of the administering Power concerning the presence
of United States military bases in the 'fterritory,
Considering that the policy of maintaining military
bases and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories which inhibit the right of self-determination of
peoples is incompatible with the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved
as a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial Territories and reiterating its conviction that the
dispatch of such missions is essential for securing
adequate and first~hand information in regard to the
conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein with
respect to their future status,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement by its people of the objectives embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of Guam, and
stressing the necessity of diversify,ing its economy as a
matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 22
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peopk of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the 'fterritory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the people, to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure
the full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to Guam;
5. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence
of United States bases on Guam should not prevent the
people of the Territory from freely exercising their
right to self-determination in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations;
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of the Territory
and to work out concrete programmes of assistance
and economic development for Guam;
7. Takes note of the attitude of the Government
of the United States regarding visiting missions and
21 lbid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras. 47-50.
2 2 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
::3/Rev.1 ), vol. III, chap. XXII.
