306

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

tions for the purpose of encouraging the progressive development of international law and its codification,
Recalling its resolution 177 (II) of 21 November 194 7,
by which it directed the International Law Commission to
prepare a draft code of offences against the peace and security of mankind,
Having considered the draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind prepared by the International Law Commission and submitted to the General
Assembly in 1954, 23
Recalling its belief that the elaboration of a code of
offences against the peace and security of mankind could
contribute to strengthening international peace and security and thus to promoting and implementing the purposes
and principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 36/106 of 10 December
1981, in which it invited the International Law Commission to resume its work with a view to elaborating the draft
Code and to examine it with the required priority in order
to review it, taking into account the results achieved by the
process of the progressive development of international
law,
Bearing in mind that the International Law Commission
should fulfil its task on the basis of early elaboration of
draft articles thereof,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the International Law Commission on the work of its thirty-seventh session, 24 in particular paragraph 43 of the report,
containing the outline of the future Code proposed by the
Special Rapporteur, and paragraphs 99, 100 and 101 of the
report containing the conclusions of the Commission,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the subject, 25
Taking into account the views expressed during the
debate on this item at the current session, 26
Recognizing the importance and urgency of the subject,
l. Invites the International Law Commission to continue its work on the elaboration of the draft Code of
Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind by
elaborating an introduction as well as a list of the offences,
taking into account the progress made at its thirty-seventh
session, as well as the views expressed during the fortieth
session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States and intergovernmental organizations
regarding the outline of the future Code proposed by the
Special Rapporteur and contained in paragraph 43 of the
report of the International Law Commission, 24 and the
conclusions contained in paragraphs 99, 100 and IOI of
the said report;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to include
the views received from Member States and intergovernmental organizations in accordance with paragraph 2
above in a report to be submitted to the General Assembly
at its forty-first session with a view to adopting, at the
appropriate time, the necessary decision thereon;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind''. Ill be con23 /bid., Ninth Session. Supplrment No. 9 !A/2693), para. '>4.
24 Ibid" fonie1h Session, SupplPm,·'11 No. JO (A.40/10)

25 A/401-!c51 and Add.1-3.
26 Sec Official Records of the Geru•ral Assembly. Fortieth Session, S1.<1h
Comm/tree, 23rd to 36th, 44th and 50th meetings; and i/,,d .. Sixth Comm1I•
ree, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendom
2 7 ibid. Thirtv-fi,urth Sessior1 Su,1plenwm No. 4' (A 0 34'4 I and , "" , l

annex.

sidered in conjunction with the examination of the report
of the International Law Commission.
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985
40/70.

Report of the Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of NonUse of Force in International Relations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976, in
which it invited Member States to examine further the
draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in International Relations 27 as well as other proposals made during
the consideration of the item,
Recalling also its resolution 32/150 of 19 December
1977, by which it established the Special Committee on
Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of Non-Use of
Force in International Relations,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 33/96 of 16
December 1978, 34/13 of 9 November I 979, 35/50 of 4
December 1980, 36/31 of 13 November 1981, 37/105 of
16 December 1982, 38/133 of 19 December 1983 and 39/
81 of 13 December 1984, in which it decided that the Special Committee should continue its work,
Taking note of the statements made by the Chairmen of
the Special Committee at its sessions in 1983, 28 I 984, 29
and 1985, 30 based on the informal working paper
presented by the Chairman of the Special Committee at its
session in 1982, 31
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the work of the session it held in I 985, 32
Taking into account that the Special Committee has not
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
Reaffirming the need for effectiveness in the universal
application of the principle of non-use of force in international relations and for assistance by the United Nations in
this endeavour,
Taking into account the suggestions of States made
during the consideration of the report of the Special Committee on the preparation at the present stage of a declaration on the non-use of force in international relations,
I. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle of NonUse of Force in International Relations;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall continue
its work with the goal of drafting a world treaty on the
non-use of force in international relations and, at the earliest possible date, as an intermediate stage, a declaration on
the non-use of force in international relations, as well as
the peaceful settlement of disputes or such other recommendations as the Committee deems appropriate;
3. Invites the Special Committee, in drafting the declaration, to take into consideration the results of work done
in the preparation of the working paper containing the
main elements of the principle of non-use of force in international relations, as well as the suggestions submitted to
1t and the efforts undertaken at its previous sessions;
4. Invites Governments to communicate their comments or suggestions on the question considered by the
Special Committee;
28 Ibid., Thmy-e1ghth Semon. Supplement No. 41 (A/38/41 ). para. 59.

29 Ibid., Thmy-mnlh SeSSlon, Supplement No. 41 (A/39/41), para. 51.

30 Ibid., Fortieth Session. Supplement No. 41 (A/40/41 ), annex.
3 I Ibid., Thmy-se,•enth SPssion. Supplement No. 41 (A/37/41 and Corr I).
para 372.
32 /Nd .. For11eth ),•sswn. Supplement No 41 (A/40/41).

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of the
importance of reaching general agreement whenever it has
significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including
participation in the meetings of its working group;
1. Requests the Special Committee to concentrate its
work in the framework of its working group;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the necessary facilities and services;
9. Invites the Special Committee to submit a report on
its work to the General Assembly at its forty-first session,
containing, inter a/ia, the concrete results achieved
through the discussion of the elements referred to in paragraph 3 above;
I 0. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Report of the Special
Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Principle
of Non-Use of Force in International Relations".
112th plenary meeting
11 December 1985

40/71. Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of
its eighteenth session, 33
Recalling that the object of the Commission is the promotion of the progressive harmonization and unification
of international trade law,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution 2205 (XXI) of I 7
December 1966, as well as all its other resolutions relating
to the work of the Commission,
Recalling also its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of I May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive
harmoniz.ation and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting the developing
countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a basis of equality,
equity and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the
well-being of all peoples,
Having regard for the need to take into account the different social and legal systems in harmonizing and unifying international trade law,
Stressing the value of participation by States at all levels
of economic development, including developing countries,
in the process of harmonizing and unifying international
trade law,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
on the work of its eighteenth session;
2. Commends the Commission for the progress made
in its work and for having reached decisions by consensus;
3. Calls upon the Commission to continue to take
account of the relevant provisions of the resolutions concerning the new international economic order, as adopted
by the General Assembly at its sixth and seventh special
sessions, and reaffirms the importance, in particular for
33 Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (N40117).
34 Ibid., annex I.

307

developing countries, of the work carried out by the Working Group on the New International Economic Order on a
legal guide on the drawing up of international contracts for
construction of industrial works;
4. Notes with particular satisfaction the completion
and adoption by the Commission of the Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration; 34
5. Welcomes the work of the Commission on the legal
implications of automated data processing on the flow of
international trade as an activity of vital importance to
States at all levels of economic development, including
developing countries, and in this connection:
(a) Commends the Commission for its recommendation on the legal value of computer records 35 which, in
conjunction with the preparatory report submitted to the
Commission by the Secretary-General, 36 aids in clarifying
the legal issues;
(b) Calls upon Governments and international organizations to take action, where appropriate, in conformity
with the recommendation of the Commission 35 so as to
ensure legal security in the context of the widest possible
use of automated data processing in international trade;
6. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the
core legal body within the United Nations system in the
field of international trade law, to co-ordinate legal activities in this field in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law,
and, in this connection, recommends that the Commission, through its secretariat, should continue to maintain
close co-operation with the other international organs and
organizations, including regional organizations, active in
the field of international trade law;
7. Reaffirms also the importance, in particular for the
developing countries, of the work of the Commission concerned with training and assistance in the field of international trade law and the desirability for it to sponsor symposia and seminars, in particular those organized on a
regional basis, to promote such training and assistance,
and, in this connection:
(a) Expresses its appreciation to those Governments,
regional organizations and institutions that have collaborated with the secretariat of the Commission in organizing
regional seminars and symposia in the field of international trade law;
(b) Welcomes the initiatives being undertaken by the
Commission and its secretariat to collaborate with other
organizations and institutions in the organization of
regional seminars;
(c) Invites Governments, international organizations
and institutions to assist the secretariat of the Commission
in financing and organizing regional seminars and symposia, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Invites Governments, relevant United Nations
organs, organizations, institutions and individuals to make
voluntary contributions to allow the resumption of the
programme of the Commission for the award of fellowships on a regular basis to candidates from developing
countries to enable them to participate in such symposia
and seminars;
8. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the Commission
for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law;
9. Recommends that the Commission should continue
its work on the topics included in its programme of work;
35 /hid. Supplement No 17 (N41J 17), ,·hap. VI. sect. B.
16 A/CN 9,265.
