S/PV.9272

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9272nd meeting

Tuesday, 28 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier/Mr. De Bono Sant Cassia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021), 2642
(2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/127)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06097 (E)
*2306097*

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

heavily damaged. It hit many areas in which refugees
and internally displaced person (IDPs) live, and in areas
with heavy war damage or in which conflict conditions
remain acute.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/127)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Ms. Rasha Muhrez, Response
Director, Save the Children.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/127, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: The earthquakes that recently
struck Türkiye and the Syrian Arab Republic have
caused unspeakable suffering for millions of people.
The Syrians affected — in both countries — were
already deep into one of the greatest humanitarian
crises of this century, after 12 merciless years of war
and conflict. To then be battered by one of the biggest
natural disasters of our times is almost beyond belief.
The earthquakes struck when their needs were highest,
when services were scarcest, when the economy was
at its lowest and when their infrastructure was already
2/26

28/02/2023

I extend once again my deepest condolences
and sympathies to those in Syria and Türkiye who
lost family members and loved ones. I grieve for the
Syrians who were participants in the political process
in Geneva and who were killed or lost family members
and friends. I grieve for all who have suffered pain and
loss, who are witness to trauma upon trauma and who
are now asking themselves how they will rebuild any
kind of future. I also pay tribute to the heroic Syrians,
across different parts of Syria, as well as the countless
non-governmental organization workers, emergency
responders and United Nations staff, who made and
are continuing to make tireless efforts under severe
conditions in the disaster-stricken areas.
The immediate priority is the emergency
humanitarian response to the earthquake to Syrians
wherever they are. My humanitarian colleagues have
been working day and night to scale up the response.
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths has
briefed the Council more than once in recent days and
will do so again today.
In support of the humanitarian imperative, I have
urged all to depoliticize the humanitarian response.
This means access: this is not the time to play politics
with crossings across borders or frontlines. This means
resources: this is the time for everybody to give quickly
and generously to Syria and remove all hindrances to
relief reaching Syrians in all affected areas. And this
means calm: this is not the time for military action
or violence.
I have carried this message to all interlocutors: to
the Task Force on Humanitarian Affairs in Geneva;
to Beirut, where I saw key donors convened by the
European Union; to Damascus, where I saw Minister
for Foreign Affairs Mekdad; to Amman, where I saw
Minister for Foreign Affairs Safadi; and to Istanbul,
where I saw the head of the Syrian Negotiations
Commission (SNC), Mr. Jamous. I have been in
contact with Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs
Çavuşoğlu and engaged with senior officials from the
Arab region, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the United
States of America and Europe. And today I have just
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9272

returned from Moscow, where I saw Foreign Minister
Lavrov yesterday.

protection needs when adults are occupied elsewhere
and many schools are shut or out of service.

Syrians in the north-west, particularly in areas
outside Government control, have expressed strong
frustrations about the international community’s
inability to provide them with urgent assistance in the
days after the earthquakes — something I have heard
from many in civil society and from the Syrian National
Council leadership in Istanbul. The tragic reality is
that an effective response was hampered partly by
challenges that relate directly to the unresolved issues
at the heart of the conflict. I have long said that the
situation in Syria is unsustainable, the status quo is
totally unacceptable and the Syrian people are acutely
vulnerable to issues not solely in their hands. It has
taken tragic earthquakes to reveal that clearly, and
the Syrian people are again the ones who are paying a
heavy price.

Secondly, I welcome the recent introduction of
earthquake-related exemptions in several unilateral
sanctions regimes, including by the United States, the
United Kingdom and the European Union, and their
efforts to ensure that their sanctions do not interfere with
the response, especially as a result of overcompliance.
We have also seen a significant amount of goodwill
and diplomatic energy with regard to Syria, in terms
of the provision of assistance directly or via the United
Nations and other relief agencies and of gestures of
condolences. Continued donor generosity with pledges
and quick disbursements in response to the flash appeal
will be vital.

But the earthquakes have also revealed another
reality. We are seeing that it is possible to work for the
common good. Notwithstanding the challenges and
failures in the early days, the steps taken in response
to the earthquakes — all temporary, all humanitarian,
but all important — have sent a clear message. Yes,
it is possible to make positive moves. It is possible to
cooperate over Syria. I see several signals in that regard.
First, we have seen remarkable goodwill shown by
many Syrians themselves, in both words and actions,
in organizing and sending relief to their fellow citizens
across front lines, irrespective of the challenges and
hardships they themselves may be facing. I am humbled
by their willingness to put politics aside. One Syrian
interlocutor rightly told us that Syrian civil society has
been on the ground and present in every house and in
every family. Let me pause to note here that Syrian
women have been at the forefront of those efforts.
And on their shoulders lies the additional burden of
calling out the particular dangers now facing women,
especially those living in public spaces that do not afford
them the privacy, dignity and security they need, and
those working to overcome perceptions that women’s
needs are luxuries that can be put aside at a time of
humanitarian crisis. At a moment of real vulnerability,
I am hearing reports of women being raped, beaten and
harassed. Women requiring post-partum care have been
denied that care, as well as appropriate places to shelter.
Girls and boys are especially vulnerable during such
distressing and confusing events and have their own

Thirdly, I welcome the decision of the Syrian
Government to open the two crossing points of Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai from Türkiye to north-western
Syria. Also notable has been the blanket approval
for cross-line operations into north-western Syria
until July, as well as other measures to cut red tape
for humanitarian access and facilitate humanitarian
financial transactions related to the earthquake
response at a preferential exchange rate.
Fourthly, let me note for the record that we saw
a relative lull in violence after the earthquake, which
can facilitate relief operations and proves that calm can
be achieved and maintained with political will. That
too was something that I stressed during my visit to
Damascus. However, I want to add that I am worried
that we have seen that calm punctuated with reports
of concerning incidents — exchanges of shelling and
mortar fire between areas under the control of the
Syrian Government, Syrian Democratic Forces, armed
opposition or the Security Council-listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham; a Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham crossline attack; reported Turkish drone strikes; an air strike
in central Damascus attributed to Israel; assassinations
in the south-west; and terrible attacks attributed to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the desert. Seeing
reports of civilian casualties from military action is
even more shocking at a time of natural disaster. We
continue to stress the importance of calm throughout
Syria. And we particularly and urgently stress to all
parties with influence that in all earthquake-affected
areas, all violence should stop immediately to enable
relief and respite for the civilian population.

23-060973/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

That is a mixed picture, but the four elements,
involving action from various sides, are the kind of
elements that we will need to build on if we are to move
beyond responding to the emergency the earthquake has
wrought and confront the challenges of resolving the
conflict itself and addressing the deep crisis in Syria.
As we move from emergency response to recovery
after the earthquake, the unresolved political challenges
will pose bigger obstacles and bigger dilemmas.
That will require navigating through one of the most
complex political landscapes on the planet — a territory
split into several zones of control; a Government
under sanctions from key donors; de facto authorities
elsewhere; more than one listed terrorist group; five
foreign armies; interlocking violent conflicts; mass
displacement; systemic human rights violations and
abuses; institutions that are degraded, corrupted or
absent; destroyed infrastructure; a collapsed economy;
growing illicit drug trafficking; grinding poverty and
skyrocketing needs. And it will require navigating those
complexities in a context in which the international
community is itself deeply divided.
Let us take inspiration from the Syrian people on the
ground who have come together against the odds during
this time to deal with their enormous challenges. The
situation today is unprecedented. It calls for leadership,
bold ideas and a cooperative spirit. A serious political
way forward will require a serious conversation among
key stakeholders to make progress on some of the
unresolved political issues of the conflict that could
block much-needed recovery after the disaster. That
will require less posturing, less rhetoric and more
pragmatism. It will require realism and frankness on the
part of the Syrian Government, the Syrian opposition
and all key outside actors. It will require firewalling
Syria from wider geopolitical disputes among key
players. It calls for a coordinated process.
I am coordinating closely with senior United
Nations colleagues regarding engagement with the
Syrian authorities and external stakeholders. I am also
continuing to reach out to those stakeholders because
we will need all the key Arab and European players and,
of course, the Astana players and the United States, to
work in a coherent effort. If all, and I really mean all,
can envisage compromise from previous positions, all
will gain. That can be done only at the political level.
I would say that an approach seeking reciprocal and
verifiable confidence-building measures, the so-called
4/26

28/02/2023

step-for-step paradigm, is more relevant now than ever
before. That dialogue was already deepening, and its
tenets of parallelism and verifiability and the issues
it was seeking to advance will be critical if we are to
make progress.
That is because — let us be honest — the earthquakes
have exposed and aggravated many of the core issues
related to resolution 2254 (2015), such as issues of
governance, sovereignty and territorial integrity, a
nationwide ceasefire, building a safe, calm and neutral
environment, the file of the detained, disappeared
and missing, the safe, dignified and voluntary return
of refugees and IDPs, many of whom have again been
displaced by the earthquakes and have nowhere to go,
and post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation, for
which the earthquakes have only created new needs.
My message to all is the same: let us respond
generously and work together to support the earthquake
emergency response. Let all those with influence work
to ensure full calm, especially in the areas affected
by the earthquake. Let us build on the steps taken
so far by all sides with further moves from all sides.
In that spirit, let us identify and advance additional
confidence-building steps from all parties to confront
the challenges of recovery after the disaster and
address unresolved political issues. Let us ensure a
fully coordinated engagement in the period ahead to
chart a political way forward.
I continue to consult widely, including with Arab
countries and other key players. I am ready to use
my good offices, develop proposals and convene the
necessary players in an effort to help to find the way
forward, consistent with my mandate under resolution
2254 (2015). We owe that to all Syrians living the
compounded nightmare, who are desperate for a
glimmer of hope.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths
Mr. Griffiths: I think that it will come as no surprise
to you, Madam President, and to Council members
that, understandably, the remarks that I will make
will significantly overlap with those of Mr. Pedersen
because of the extraordinary events of recent weeks in
Syria and, indeed, in Türkiye. It is therefore with an
apology that I will focus my remarks in this briefing
on the recent earthquakes and the response to them.
The earthquakes have had an enormous humanitarian
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

impact and, as we heard from Geir Pedersen, impacts
in other contexts, which is of the highest importance.
It is now three weeks since the earthquakes struck
Türkiye and Syria. The devastating scale of the disaster
is coming into sharper relief, but it is still not fully
clear. At least 50,000 people were killed, including
approximately 6,000 in Syria, mostly in the north-west.
Many more people were injured. Tens of thousands of
people still remain missing. We do not know if they are
alive or dead. Hundreds of thousands are homeless.
Furthermore, to add misery upon misery, the
worst-affected area was hit again by strong aftershocks
yesterday and, of course, a few days ago by another
earthquake. Additional death, destruction and damage
have been inflicted on a population already traumatized
by so many years of war and conflict.
This immense and almost unbelievable tragedy
comes at an extremely difficult time for the people of
Syria, compounding suffering in a country plagued by
12 years of conflict. Even before this most recent tragedy,
some 15.3 million people — 70 per cent of the country’s
population — needed humanitarian assistance.
Amid the harsh winter season, the earthquake
has destroyed entire neighbourhoods, rendering
them uninhabitable, as I and many others saw earlier
this month. While many Syrians, as always, have
opened their homes to others, collective shelters are
more crowded than ever. Early assessments indicate
that 5 million people in Syria require basic shelter
and non-food assistance. In many areas, four or five
families are packed into tents, with no special facilities
for older people, people with chronic illnesses or those
with disabilities. Mr. Pedersen spoke movingly of the
particular vulnerabilities and circumstances affecting
women and girls.
Hundreds of buildings are still at a high risk of
collapsing. The Governor of Aleppo spoke to me about
the very high percentage of buildings that he feared
would need to be brought down in the city of Aleppo.
Thousands may need to be demolished. Many people
are, of course, afraid to return to their homes, yet to be
certified safe.
The risk of disease is increasing amid pre-existing
cholera outbreaks. North-west Syria reports a very
high number of cholera outbreaks since the earthquake.
The prices of food, household costs and other essential
items climb higher.

S/PV.9272

Most people need humanitarian assistance.
Community tensions are mounting. But I would like to
draw our full attention, as I have before in the Council,
to the particular tragedy of the trauma that comes with
such a sudden, vicious, violent and unforgiving disaster
affecting people already in such dire circumstances.
The search-and-rescue phase of the earthquake
response is ending. We all have witnessed heroic
efforts to help victims caught beneath rubble, in northwest Syria for example, with very little assistance from
international search-and-rescue teams, which have been
able to operate elsewhere. Such moments show us that,
as Council members can imagine, international efforts
notwithstanding, the greatest heroism has been Syrians
saving Syrians. Tragically, many first responders were
victims themselves. Dozens of humanitarian workers
were killed or injured during the earthquake and
its aftermath.
As Geir Pedersen said, and many have commented,
including myself, despite a faulty start, the humanitarian
community is responding to this challenge. Since
9 February, when the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border point
was brought back into functioning, the United Nations
has sent more than 423 trucks into north-west Syria,
carrying critical food, shelter, sanitation kits and
medical equipment and supplies for at least 1 million
women, men and children. Many more deliveries are
planned in the weeks ahead as we ramp up that to the
scale that is needed and to which the people in that area
are entitled.
As I did on the day, I of course welcome the
Government of Syria’s agreement to open the Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai border crossing points for the
United Nations and its partners to deliver humanitarian
assistance to north-west Syria. As we said at the time and
before, those crossings were a vital addition. In the past
two weeks, those border crossings have already allowed
us to more quickly and efficiently get closer to see and
provide some solace to the people in need across the
north-west. Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai will facilitate the
further scaling-up of ongoing humanitarian operations,
which have continued throughout through Bab Al-Hawa
except for the three or four days of tragedy.
United Nations staff are now conducting near-daily
missions into north-west Syria to complete essential
humanitarian activities — assess gaps, support, talk to,
consult and be guided by local partners and affected

23-060975/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

populations, monitor programmes and liaise with
local authorities.
I welcome the Government of Syria’s fast-track visa
approvals. Those new procedures have allowed United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
and other humanitarian actors to surge specialized
personnel to support operations in Damascus and
affected areas of Syria.
In Aleppo, Homs, Hama and Latakia, the United
Nations is helping people in overcrowded collective
shelters and host communities, with a particular focus
on responding to gender-based violence, the trauma of
that morning and other protection risks, as I mentioned
earlier. Referral systems, in-kind assistance and
psychosocial support are among the measures being
used to help mitigate the inherent risks. We released
$40 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund to support relief operations at the outset. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
also using the Syria humanitarian fund and the Syria
cross-border humanitarian fund to funnel money as fast
as possible to front-line organizations.
The earthquake response, as we know well from
public comment and the evidence of our eyes, has not
been without challenges. The efforts to restart crossline missions to north-west Syria were delayed. We still
continue to impress on all parties the need to facilitate
timely and unimpeded access for humanitarian relief
and personnel to those areas and to open all routes to
get to all people in every way possible, as the SecretaryGeneral has publicly said. The growing demand for
critical items and their resulting scarcity, tents being
the obvious example, together with rising prices, is
straining supply chains into the region. Donors are
beginning to fly in supplies to the Turkish border and are
also crossing to Damascus and Aleppo. That is essential
and most welcome. Local markets can no longer readily
supply cross-border operations for some of the core
items, hence the need for such costly but necessary
airlifts. Critical infrastructure is badly damaged.
Machines are still needed to clear rubble. Equipment
and repairs are needed for makeshift hospitals. And we
need tools to restore access to drinking water. We all
worry about the pervasive threat of cholera in northwestern Syria and beyond.
The United Nations is working to address
unintended obstacles generated by sanctions and
counter-terrorism laws, and as Mr. Pedersen said, we
6/26

28/02/2023

welcome the licences provided by the United States,
the European Union and the United Kingdom. We
continue to work to eliminate, eradicate or go around
the overcompliance that still remains and constrains the
delivery of assistance. Sustained involvement to make
that happen remains essential. We are very pleased with
the partnership that we have had with those Member
States to improve the aim of their licences so that
nothing will be prevented from reaching those in need
and affected by the earthquake.
All those urgent efforts are necessary. An effective
humanitarian response requires sustained effort
beyond the time of great international attention, close
coordination and of course generous support. The Syria
flash appeal for three months calls for $397 million
to meet the most critical needs. The upcoming donor
conference in Brussels will be a pivotal moment for
our response in both Syria and Türkiye. Meanwhile, I
should remind the Council that the 2023 humanitarian
response plan will still require $4.8 billion to address
pre-existing needs. That is our largest humanitarian
appeal this year worldwide, and it reflects the scale and
gravity of the needs of Syria, 12 years into a conflict it
never wanted.
We know what needs to be done to provide the
people affected with dignified living conditions, and I
hope we are now doing all we can to help make that
happen. Everyone in this Chamber and at this meeting
can help to make that a reality. Rising to this occasion
is a shared endeavour. We thank those who have
responded to our appeals so far, and we look to all to do
so and to increase our support, so that in this particular
unfair, undeserved and unexpected situation the people
of Syria can at least know that the world cares for them.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Muhrez.
Ms. Muhrez: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to address the Council at this critical
time. I am speaking today both as a humanitarian and
a Syrian.
I want to start by telling the Council the story of
Maya. On the night of the earthquake, Maya spent the
night in the city at the home of Tala, her great friend and
cousin. She often slept there because it was closer to her
university, and with the electricity and fuel shortages
in her village, the commute was easier. They were both
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

so excited for their first year of university, with their
whole futures ahead of them.
When the ground shook that night, and as the
members of the family screamed for each other, it took
only seconds for them to be buried under the weight of
their whole lives, every possession they owned. Maya’s
father rushed from the village, the neighbours came,
but with only their hands they were helpless against the
crumpled steel and concrete. After 10 hours under the
rubble, Maya’s lungs gave up; she suffocated. When she
was finally pulled out, her body was still warm. She had
just died. The rescue was late, just a few minutes too
late. Maya died along with her best friend and cousin
Tala, her uncle and her aunt. Last Saturday would have
been her nineteenth birthday. Maya and Tala were
my cousins.
It was the neighbours who desperately tried to
free Maya. Using limited equipment, pickaxes and
their bare hands, families, neighbours, communities
across northern Syria were the people who freed each
other. Syrians called for help from the international
community — we all saw the pictures of the
devastation — and yet help simply did not arrive in
Syria on the scale and at the speed that were needed.
They were completely on their own in those first
hours. When much of the entire world turned its back
on Syrians, they stood by one another and saved what
was left.
Now local rescue workers are clearing the rubble.
Local organizations are providing children and their
families with shelter, blankets and mattresses, warm
clothes and food. Aid workers are using pickup trucks to
move aid and essential supplies to families in need. At
the same time, they have lost their own homes and their
loved ones. They too are grappling with the emotional
toll that the earthquakes have taken. I want to pay
tribute to Syrian communities, aid workers and friends.
Time and time again, when disaster and tragedy have
struck, they have not given up. They have not turned to
hopelessness. However, resilience has its limits.
Maya was one of millions of children who lived most
of their childhood in the most difficult circumstances.
They persevered despite dwindling resources. They
went to school hungry. They endured cold winters and
dark nights. They worked hard to secure a better future,
but without change their resilience will not translate into
a more dignified and safer future. We owe it to them to
make that change, to provide the support that they need,

S/PV.9272

now and in the future. On behalf of all children in Syria,
I am asking the Council, the international community
and all the parties to the conflict in Syria to see that
we need a new approach. Those who have survived are
in desperate need of support to piece their lives back
together. We are now in a race against time to avoid
the secondary impacts of the earthquake. Services
continue to be overstretched across the country, and
children in northern Syria are at greater risk of violence
and exploitation.
Even before the earthquake, after 12 years of
conflict, humanitarian needs across Syria were vast.
These earthquakes mean that families are more likely
to be forced to make impossible decisions for their
children, including life-altering compromises on basic
education, nutrition and health care, as well as their
children’s protection. They may even take a perilous
journey across the Mediterranean.
Many families tell us that their children have
nightmares, worrying that there will be another
earthquake. Six-year-old Samer’s leg was broken and
his head injured when his home collapsed due to the
earthquake. Now living in a camp with his family,
his mother told my team that he repeatedly tells her:
“Thank God we have no walls, so nothing will fall on
me.” Children and their families will need ongoing
psychosocial support to help them recover from their
mental scars. Obviously, they should not be left to
shoulder those challenges alone. They need our support,
and for that we need access to the affected populations.
Full humanitarian access to all those affected is now
critical. We need access from all sides and through all
avenues. Lives and futures depend upon it.
Save the Children welcomes the agreement to
open two additional border crossings and the easing of
administrative measures for humanitarian assistance
put in place by the Government of Syria, just as we
welcomed efforts made by the Council to ensure
access. We also welcome recently issued licenses by the
United States, the United Kingdom and the European
Union with the aim of easing the unintended impact of
sanctions on humanitarian assistance. Today we call for
all measures to facilitate the delivery of aid to continue.
It is time to talk about what comes next. If the
problem of access can be solved — and it must
be — then humanitarians and local organizations
will need funding to scale up their activities to save
lives and help people recover. The earthquakes are a

23-060977/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

moment to reflect on how we work in Syria. We cannot
be complicit in making Syria a country dependent on
aid. The response to the earthquake should represent
a moment to come together, put politics aside and
rethink our approach. While the aid response over the
past decade has kept children alive, is that enough? Do
Syrian children not deserve a dignified, sustainable and
hopeful future?
Now is the time to focus on recovery. We need to
support local organizations and civil society to make
meaningful changes in the support that people receive.
Schools will need to be rehabilitated and hospitals
made fit for purpose. Children need safe homes, not
tents. Their parents need jobs that pay a decent wage
and allow them to provide for their families. Without
a change in approach, simply to rebuild what has been
lost, Syrians would need to wait another lifetime.
We need new, creative approaches to meet the scale
of the challenges that lie before us all. Samer’s future
cannot consist of tents, or of moving from place to place
desperately searching for safety. It cannot be a future of
poor health care, poor education and poor life chances.
He has the right to grow up safely, to be healthy and to
go to school, as well as the right to dream and plan for
his future. Let there be no risk that Samer’s life could
be cut short, like Maya’s was.
Like so many Syrians, I have lost family, friends
and colleagues. In my most recent visit to Syria, I saw
devastation and suffering. But I also saw solidarity
and hope. I saw people who opened their doors to their
neighbours and cooked hot meals for them, splitting
food that had already been rationed. They took care of
younger children and older people. Syrians are resilient.
Let us support that resilience to help them achieve a
better future.
In the past 12 years, Syria has endured conflict,
economic crisis and now natural disaster. What more
needs to happen to make us act differently? The children
of Syria are counting on us all.
The President: I thank Ms. Muhrez for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, for their briefings on the political
8/26

28/02/2023

and humanitarian aspects of the situation in Syria. We
also listened carefully to the remarks by today’s civil
society representative, Ms. Rasha Muhrez.
The entire world was shaken by the scale of the
tragedy caused by the earthquake in the Syria-Türkiye
border zone. We were all united in expressing our
condolences to, and solidarity with, the victims’ families.
Both countries required urgent assistance — more
than 20 humanitarian flights and nearly 1,000 tons of
aid have been sent to Syria by the Russian Ministry
of Emergency Situations and the Russian Ministry of
Defence. Comprehensive support for Syrians is also
being provided through the Russian Centre for the
Reconciliation of the Warring Parties.
Security Council members concur in their
assessment that the consequences of the disaster, which
has struck several provinces in Syria, have virtually
wiped out the humanitarian gains made in previous
years. In view of the unprecedented scale of the
catastrophe and guided by a humanitarian imperative,
Damascus responded immediately and unconditionally
to the request of the United Nations humanitarian wing
by agreeing to open two additional crossing points on the
border with Türkiye for the delivery of humanitarian aid
by global Organization. We welcome such an approach
by the Syrian Government. The agreement reached
between Syria and the United Nations is fully consistent
with the guiding principles for humanitarian assistance
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182, and
therefore requires no further action through a Council
decision. Thanks to that agreement, since 9 February,
the United Nations has enjoyed full and unhindered
access via not only the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point,
as provided for in resolution 2672 (2023), but also the
newly reopened crossing points of Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai.
In addition, within the first few hours after the
tragedy, the Syrian authorities provided humanitarian
workers with blanket approvals to work across the
country. The same applies to the sending of humanitarian
convoys to areas not under Damascus’ control in the
north-west. That measure opens up vast opportunities
for the coordination of humanitarian deliveries along
internal Syrian routes, which fully complies with
resolution 2672 (2023), as well as with the position
shared by all members of the Council that it is essential
to deliver aid to those in need by all possible means.
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

However, the message of the Syrian leadership has
still not been properly acknowledged. In the two weeks
since the tragedy, due to outright sabotage by Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists, not a single humanitarian
convoy has been dispatched across the contact line.
Despite the situation on the ground and the lack of
logistical capacities and transport infrastructure,
humanitarian deliveries to the north-west of the country
from Damascus are urgently needed. That situation
is puzzling, to say the least. We are talking about
the very same militants who have taken root in Idlib,
receiving humanitarian aid in some cases and blocking
it in others. Unfortunately, they are, essentially, being
indulged by a number of delegations in the Council who
only weakly express concern about what is happening,
thus preventing the Council from giving an honest
assessment of the actions of terrorists.
If we add to that the copious evidence that Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham militants are openly appropriating
humanitarian aid entering the enclave through the
cross-border mechanism in order to then resell it to the
local population, establishing control over volunteer
humanitarian centres in the Idlib de-escalation zone
and seizing the money they receive, then the picture
before the Council is quite unpleasant.
Our Western colleagues are essentially trying to
force all of us to cover up the corruption scheme from
which United Nations-listed terrorists profit. And
since the fighters have access to none of the cross-line
supplies controlled by the Syrian Government — or at
least fewer than the cross-border supplies — they are
not interested in them. Subsequently, Western capitals
are also showing only half-hearted interest in such
supplies. My colleagues who act in such a fashion are
not only coming across in an extremely unfavourable
light, but are also undermining the future of the crossborder mechanism as a whole, which makes sense
only as an element that temporarily supplements
intra-Syrian deliveries. If entirely legitimate deliveries
from Damascus are artificially hobbled, we see no
sense in maintaining such deliveries under the crossborder mechanism, which violates the sovereignty and
the territorial integrity of Syria.
In parallel with the provision of urgent assistance
to the population of Syria, urgent attention must be paid
to the reconstruction of destroyed areas — residential,
social and communal infrastructure. That will require
impartial support from the entire international
community. Back in 2017, the United Nations assessed

S/PV.9272

the amount of funding required for the restoration of
this Arab country at $250 billion. Given the pace of
funding of the humanitarian plan for Syria over the
past few years, we can confidently assert that the donor
community either cannot or does not want to carry out
this task.
To be honest, we are struck by the cynicism of
some members of the Security Council, who are trying
to reproach us for allegedly not doing anything to help
to restore Syria, since we are not acting through the
United Nations mechanisms. We have already provided
our colleagues with statistics on what we have done and
are continuing to do bilaterally in this area. However,
they are deliberately ignoring the fact that the volume
of assistance we are providing is many times greater
than what they are allocating. We do not wish to act
through the United Nations mechanisms, primarily
because, despite all of our requests, they remain
opaque, and we cannot get basic information on the
projects being implemented.
In general, our colleagues’ attempts to expose us as
freeloaders when it comes to early recovery projects are
beneath self-respecting international players. Moreover,
the Syrian people themselves know perfectly well who
is helping them and how much they are helping.
What our Western colleagues can indeed boast of
is their efforts to preserve Syrian refugees in camps in
neighbouring countries for political reasons. They can
also boast of their suffocating sanctions, which place a
heavy burden on the shoulders of ordinary Syrians. We
urge Council members to be wary of assessments of
exemptions from the sanctions regimes. The introduction
of such exemptions is not an act of magnanimity or
a panacea for the many ills that Western sanctions
continue to bring to the Syrian people. Humanitarian
exemptions do not deserve special praise, but are
instead are the bare minimum of what the authorities
of the United States and European countries can and
must do in the current conditions. And, of course, the
question of the full lifting of unilateral sanctions is
not only not going anywhere, but, on the contrary, is
becoming increasingly relevant.
The subject of sanctions, in particular, was reflected
in the context of the consequences of the February
earthquake in the thematic review of the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia. We also look forward to the report, promised in

23-060979/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

January, of the United Nations country team in Syria on
the impact of sanctions.
The United Nations Secretariat has repeatedly said
that problems in the work of humanitarian workers
on the ground due to the so-called “overcompliance
effect” are not going away. Because of the American
Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019, even the
efforts of the United Nations to deliver a humanitarian
supply of Russian fertilizers impounded in European
Union ports to Damascus were blocked. We emphasize
that we do not have access to those fertilizers, but in
the framework of the anti-Syrian sanctions regime,
fertilizers are considered a dual-use product, which
minimizes the chances of them being dispatched.
Given that Syria faces an impending hunger crisis and
its agricultural lands are occupied by the United States,
we expect that if Washington is really committed to
humanitarian values, it will take the necessary steps to
allow the United Nations to carry out this humanitarian
operation. For the time being, unfortunately, nothing
of the sort is happening. We once again urge the
United Nations Secretariat to address the problems of
the negative consequences of sanctions against Syria
and, in particular, to ensure that this shipment of our
fertilizers is dispatched to the country.
Separately, we demand that the Secretary-General
personally withdraw his scandalous methodology
“Parameters and principles of United Nations assistance
in Syria”, which serves as an umbrella for Western
donors and de facto legitimizes their political assertions
about the inexpediency of financing infrastructure
projects in territories controlled by the legitimate
Syrian authorities.
With regard to the military-political track of the
Syrian settlement, we are forced to acknowledge that
the existing problems on the ground, such as the illegal
foreign military presence and the remaining hotbeds
of terrorism, have been supplemented by new ones in
the form of a threat of a possible military operation
in the north of the Republic, as well as the activation
of various armed groups, including because of the
release of prisoners from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.
Against that backdrop, Israel’s regular arbitrary
military actions continue. On 19 February, the Israeli
air force launched further attacks on the territory of
Syria. Several targets in and around Damascus were
attacked. One of the missiles hit a residential building
10/26

28/02/2023

in a dense urban area. As a result, five people were
killed and an additional 15 were wounded. And one of
the fragments of the Israeli missile intercepted by the
Syrian air defences landed just 300 metres from the
building of the Russian Embassy in Damascus.
We firmly condemn Israel’s use of force in these
cases, which is in flagrant violation of the norms of
international law. We urge the Israeli side to stop its
armed provocations against Syria and to refrain from
steps that could have dangerous consequences for
the entire region. We believe that continuing such a
mistaken practice is absolutely unacceptable, especially
in conditions in which many countries of the world,
including Russia, are actively helping the Syrians
to overcome the consequences of the devastating
earthquake and sending their rescue workers, medics
and humanitarian supplies to the country.
We once again recall that in order to achieve
lasting stabilization and security, both in Syria
and beyond, there must be a full restoration of the
country’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well
as Damascus’ control over the entire national territory.
Those principles underpin the agreements of the
Astana format — Russia, Iran and Türkiye — on Idlib
and the area beyond the Euphrates. Together with our
partners, we will continue to scrupulously facilitate the
achievement of sustainable and long-term normalization
in Syria and the region.
We consistently call for advancing the Syrianled and -owned political settlement process, with
the support of the United Nations, without external
interference and on the basis of respect for the principles
of the sovereignty, independence and integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
As part of that approach, we had a thorough
exchange of views with the Special Envoy in Moscow on
27 February. During those consultations, we confirmed
the need for the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), which stipulates the promotion of intra-Syrian
dialogue, including within the framework of the work of
the Constitutional Committee. In that regard, we would
like to once again note the relevance of Mr. Pedersen’s
efforts to depoliticize the Geneva platform and resume
the sessions of the Constitutional Committee, as
well as to maintain regular contact with the Syrians.
It is important to focus on those tasks and to not get
distracted by other initiatives, the added value of which
remains unclear to us.
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Wood (United States of America): I too
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths,
Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Rasha Muhrez for
their briefings.
We are now three weeks on from the deadly
6 February earthquakes that killed so many. We reiterate
our support for the response of the United Nations to all
who have been affected by this tragedy. Thus far, we
have announced $185 million in humanitarian aid for
the people of Türkiye and Syria.
We welcome the news that United Nations
humanitarian aid continues to move through the
Al-Rai, Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa crossings, and
we hope that the essential and life-saving cross-border
shipments will increase as more supplies become
available. We applaud the Syrian civil-society groups
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that have
provided such critical services across all of Syria,
especially in the north-west. However, the humanitarian
crisis in the earthquake-affected areas did not begin
three weeks ago. The need for more United Nations aid
and access, particularly in north-west Syria, has been
painfully clear for years. And today, as we begin to
grasp the devastation of the earthquakes, it is clear that
aid will be necessary well into the future.
We as members of the Security Council must all
continue to closely monitor the situation to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is able to reach those in need.
We must ensure that cross-border aid access to the
Syrian people continues without undue interference.
If that requires Council action, we must be prepared
to act. The United States reiterates its support for the
distribution of humanitarian aid through all modalities,
including cross-line modalities. We strongly support
the operational plan of the Office for the Coordination
for Humanitarian Affairs for cross-line aid to the northwest. We also call on the regime and Russia to finally
facilitate unhindered cross-line humanitarian access
to the Rukban settlement. As we work to increase aid
to all the Syrians affected, we must remain cognizant
of the troubling reports of the regime’s diversion of
life-saving aid, which has ended up for sale in markets
or in the hands of authorities seeking to benefit from
its distribution. We are also concerned about reports
of other actors diverting aid or blocking deliveries.
We call on the regime and all parties to facilitate
humanitarian operations and refrain from diverting or
politicizing aid.

S/PV.9272

We note with concern that in the wake of the natural
disaster, there are troubling reports that the Al-Assad
regime has resumed shelling in north-west Syria,
causing more damage and distress. That underscores
the need for a nationwide ceasefire and progress on the
political track. We urge the Syrian regime to cooperate
fully with Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to convene
good-faith discussions aimed at reaching a political
solution to the conflict in line with resolution 2254
(2015). The effects of the earthquake have been all the
more devastating as a result of the conditions created
by a conflict that is close to entering its twelfth year.
The situation in cities such as Aleppo is much more
challenging in the wake of the earthquakes because
many of their buildings had already been destroyed
by the Al-Assad regime, which bombed and shelled its
own citizens.
The Council is rightly seized of the humanitarian
situation, but we all know that the Council can and
should be doing more to support the political process.
The Constitutional Committee remains stalled because
of Russia’s arbitrary demands. Let us all recommit to
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process under
United Nations auspices, including through its European
headquarters in Geneva. Resolution 2254 (2015) is the
agreed-upon road map for resolving the conflict and
addressing the long-term needs of the Syrian people.
Instead of using the earthquake to distract from the
need for reform, we call on the regime to at long last
step up and generally participate in a political process
that helps all Syrians.
We know that some Council members have
suggested that United States sanctions on Syria may
be hindering the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Some have made those suggestions in good faith;
others have not. Let me make it clear that United States
sanctions on Syria target those individuals and entities
that have brutalized the people of Syria for more than
a decade. They are individuals who have tortured
Syrians, dropped chemical weapons on Syrians or stolen
from the Syrian people through rampant corruption.
United States sanctions do not target humanitarian
assistance to those in need, and we have made that
clear through our actions. Our sanctions programmes
have numerous carve-outs to facilitate humanitarian,
assistance, including disaster relief. And we have issued
several general licences to make it clear to NGOs and
humanitarian organizations that our sanctions do not
target humanitarian assistance. Moreover, we stand

23-0609711/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

ready to assist humanitarian organizations if they
perceive any hindrances in delivering assistance.
My final point concerns fertilizer donations. The
United States is not the cause of any reported delays in
Russia’s ability to deliver fertilizer to Syria, as claimed
by Russia. If Russia wants to donate fertilizer, it can
do so. Russia should work directly with the United
Nations to distribute agricultural donations within
Syria through its local partners.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I am delivering
this statement on behalf of the co-penholders of the
Syria humanitarian file, Brazil and Switzerland. Let
me first thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Rasha Muhrez,
the Response Director of Save the Children, for their
briefings and hard work. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2023/127). And we want to
once again express our heartfelt condolences to all
the victims of the earthquakes — to all affected in
Türkiye and Syria. Our gratitude also goes to all the
humanitarian actors for their tireless efforts on the
ground to ensure that aid is reaching those in need
while themselves being impacted by the tragedy, as we
heard from Ms. Muhrez.
Three weeks after the arrival of the earthquakes
and their many aftershocks, humanitarian needs in
Syria are greater than ever. People in the regions who
are directly affected are surviving with an insufficient
food supply, unsafe housing, inadequate medical
support and a high level of exposure to a multitude
of protection risks. Among them are the millions of
Syrians who had been internally displaced as a result
of the ongoing conflict. The need for food, shelter,
heating, drinking water, medicines, fuel and broader
gender-responsive protection services is high across
all regions of Syria. The earthquakes have exacerbated
existing vulnerabilities and inequalities across the
country linked to age, gender and health conditions.
It is therefore crucial for the humanitarian response
to ensure that the distinct needs of the various groups
of people are met. The risks of sexual and genderbased violence are particularly high in this context of
destruction and displacement.
We commend the efforts made by many countries
to enable humanitarian assistance in Türkiye and
Syria. We are encouraged to hear that United Nations
12/26

28/02/2023

convoys have been able to deliver aid through the three
border crossings at Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai since the 13 February understanding reached
between Syria and the United Nations. As we have just
heard, according to the Office for the Coordination for
Humanitarian Affairs, more than 400 trucks have made
such deliveries over the past three weeks. We hope that
the number of trucks loaded with humanitarian aid will
increase in the near future, if more funding is provided
for the response. The necessary conditions for the swift
and unhindered delivery of aid and essential services to
take place in a sustained and predictable way must be
ensured and maintained.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that four crossborder United Nations inter-agency missions have so
far been able to be conducted in the area affected by the
earthquakes. Such missions are important in order to get
assessments of the situation on the ground and respond
accordingly, and we hope that they can continue. It is
important to ensure that aid continues to be distributed
without major security incidents on the ground. We
urge all parties to continue to allow and facilitate rapid,
safe, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian access
in all regions of Syria. In that regard, all aid, including
through cross-border and cross-line modalities, needs
to be made available to humanitarian actors in order to
ensure rapid, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access. We call on all parties to protect the work
of humanitarian actors by respecting international
humanitarian law and ceasing hostilities, as they only
add to the suffering of the civilian population.
As co-penholders, we remain guided by the
humanitarian imperative and the needs of the people
in Syria. The consequences of such a devastating
natural disaster cannot be subject to politicization. We
encourage all Member States to increase their support
to the urgent humanitarian appeals in response to the
earthquakes, as well as the humanitarian response
plan for 2023, including the pooled funds. That should
ensure the expeditious provision of life-saving aid, as
well as the continuity of already existing programmes
and projects, such as those of early recovery. The
humanitarian situation in Syria was already worse
than ever, before this earthquake. More than a decade
of ongoing hostilities has left long-term consequences,
and 15.3 million Syrians throughout the country were
already expected to need assistance this year. That
number will now further increase. It is our duty to
help them.
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in French)
I would now like to speak in my national capacity
on the political situation in Syria.
As I just said, the earthquakes of 6 February and
their numerous aftershocks have decimated entire
communities in the north and north-west of the country.
The testimony of Ahmad, a member of a civil society
organization active in Aleppo province, illustrates that
tragic situation. He said that:
“In a few moments, everyone became a victim.
Civilians, aid workers, and even police, ambulance
and civil defence personnel, all fell victim to
this devastating earthquake. Eighty seconds was
enough to change life there.”
For those Syrians, those 80 seconds of earthquake
added to 12 years of conflict that have undermined
the political and social foundation of their country.
Switzerland thanks Special Envoy Pedersen for the
commitment he has shown since the early hours of
the earthquakes to the people affected, in accordance
with the mandate given to him by the Council. In that
connection, we welcome the two meetings of the Task
Force on Humanitarian Affairs held under his aegis on
9 and 22 February in Geneva — the headquarters of the
United Nations in Europe and of the main humanitarian
organizations involved on the ground.
Switzerland would also like to amplify the
Special Envoy’s call for a national ceasefire and to
encourage him to continue holding talks to that end
with the main regional and international actors. From
Aleppo to Al-Suwayda, from Deir ez-Zor to Homs, air
strikes, indiscriminate attacks and armed clashes are
endangering civilians across the country and seriously
hampering the achievement of a lasting peace. We
call on all the parties to the conflict to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law and to protect civilians and
humanitarian personnel.
In accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the appeal in the Secretary-General’s recent report
(A/76/890) on missing persons in Syria, Switzerland
calls for the fate of the detained and missing persons
to be fully clarified. The relatives of missing persons
are among the 15.3 million Syrians who depend on
humanitarian aid. They are among the millions of
Syrian refugees around the world, and some of them lost
additional family members during the 80 seconds of the

S/PV.9272

violent earthquake. Giving those relatives the right to
know means opening the door to a political solution,
which remains the only way out of the conflict.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3) — Ghana,
Mozambique and my own country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
informative briefings. We listened carefully to the
moving testimony of Ms. Rasha Muhrez. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the Republic of Türkiye in today’s meeting.
(spoke in English)
As we have just heard, once again, Syria is in the
throes of an unprecedented humanitarian crisis that
demands the particular attention of the Council. The
situation has become more alarming following the
6 February earthquake that struck Syria at the same time
as neighbouring Türkiye, and which was accompanied
by numerous aftershocks that have caused a heavy
human toll and untold suffering to the peoples of those
two countries, as well as colossal material damage. In
addition to the heavy loss of life, the earthquake caused
major infrastructural damage to thousands of buildings,
including schools and hospitals, some of which were
reduced to rubble, exposing tens of thousands of people
to harsh winter weather conditions and causing terrible
injuries to survivors, including children.
The members of the A3 reiterate their sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and send their
best wishes for a speedy recovery for the injured. The
Syrian population, exhausted by years of conflict and
the aftermath of the recent earthquake, needs respite.
A total of 15.3 million people — more than 70 per
cent of Syria’s population — needed humanitarian
assistance even before the earthquake. Humanitarian
and economic indicators continue to deteriorate,
basic services are collapsing, and an ongoing cholera
outbreak and climatic shocks are compounding an
already dire situation.
We also call for a strong mobilization by the
international community in support of the flash appeal
for nearly $400 million, launched by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, in order to save lives
and prevent new suffering in Syria following the

23-0609713/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

earthquake. We take note of the first announcements
of donors pledging to provide financial or material
assistance, which we consider encouraging. But we
must do more. Moreover, we note with interest that the
aid delivery operations that started on the ground on
14 February are continuing smoothly and unhindered
at the crossing points of Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai. Given that access is the cornerstone of
emergency relief, I would like to welcome, once again,
the decision of the Government of Syria to authorize
the opening of the two new crossings of Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai for a period of three months, in addition
to Bab Al-Hawa. That has facilitated an increase in
the pace and volume of the delivery of aid to Syrian
nationals in need.
We are concerned about the continuation of
hostilities in northern Syria, particularly in the
de-escalation zone of Idlib, with the persistence of
air strikes, mutual bombardments and clashes, in the
midst of a cholera outbreak in 14 governorates. Those
hostilities continue to exacerbate the suffering of
civilians, exposing them to death, injuries and further
displacement. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, a total
of 42 civilians, including four women and 13 children,
have been killed as a result of the hostilities, and at least
52 civilians, including two women and 17 children,
have been injured. We call on all the parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular by taking constant care
to spare civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of
their military operations. We reiterate our call for an
immediate ceasefire in Syria to facilitate the delivery
of aid to the victims. We urge all parties to put aside
their differences during this tragic national emergency.
The A3 commends the work of Special Envoy
Pedersen, who continues his efforts to advance the
confidence-building process step by step in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), and we reiterate our full
support to him. We hope that the ninth session of the
United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee
can be held in Geneva as soon as possible and address
the substantive challenges facing the Committee. We
are closely following the Special Envoy’s consultations
with women and civil society, which are also an
essential component of the political process and the
building of lasting peace.
Since Syrian women should participate in building
the future of their country, we encourage the Syrian
14/26

28/02/2023

Government to develop legislative and policy measures
aimed at eliminating discrimination against women
and girls in all areas of life to achieve true gender
equality. We urge all parties to respect the human rights
of women and girls.
Furthermore, we take note of the recent introduction
of earthquake-related permanent exemptions in
several unilateral sanctions regimes. We also take
note that the United Nations will continue to engage
bilaterally with relevant actors on these issues in order
to identify appropriate measures to address unintended
consequences of such sanctions, as well as operational
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
The A3 calls for the lifting of sanctions by all countries
concerned in order not to hinder relief operations for
the benefit of the Syrian population in need.
In conclusion, in the light of the current difficult
situation in Syria, this is not the time for political
calculations. The A3 calls on all stakeholders and the
international community as a whole to put the interests
of the Syrian people first and work together to bring
them relief.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Rasha Muhrez for their briefings.
We are saddened to hear that Türkiye and
northern Syria were hit by additional earthquakes on
20 February, and we extend our deepest condolences to
those affected by these series of tragic events.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
extremely dire, with the earthquakes exacerbating
the already existing crises in the country. The scale
of needs in Syria is immeasurable, with record levels
of poverty and food insecurity, a cholera outbreak and
harsh winter conditions.
Japan welcomes the agreement between President
Al-Assad and the United Nations to open two additional
border crossings into north-west Syria for an initial
period of three months. This has allowed the United
Nations to scale up its cross-border aid operation,
where it has already sent more than 400 trucks loaded
with vital assistance. All modalities, including crossborder and cross-line operations, must be utilized to
sufficiently respond to the vast humanitarian needs
in Syria. In this regard, all hostilities have to stop,
especially in the disaster-affected areas.
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to share with the Security Council that
on 24 February, Japan announced its decision to provide
$27 million in emergency grant aid for earthquake
damage in Syria and Türkiye, in addition to the
provision of the emergency relief goods that have been
already delivered. We are grateful to those working on
the ground in Syria to facilitate the smooth and timely
delivery of vital aid. We call on all parties, including
the Syrian Government, to continue taking steps to help
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
While the imminent humanitarian crisis has rightly
been at the forefront of our attention, we must not forget
that a political solution remains crucial to ending the
conflict in Syria. The humanitarian crisis cannot be
fundamentally resolved without conflict settlement.
It is encouraging to hear that Special Envoy
Pedersen and Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi continue
their tireless efforts, including through engaging with
Syrian parties and international stakeholders and
working to resume meetings of the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva. Progress in all these areas,
including on the file of detained and missing persons, is
imperative to achieve an end to the conflict by peaceful
and diplomatic means.
Some briefers referred to Syrians — women and
men — on the ground coming together and working
together for their survival. Japan urges all parties,
especially the Syrian authorities, but not just them,
to fully engage and cooperate in the same spirit of
solidarity that ordinary Syrians have shown on the
ground with the good offices of the Special Envoy
to advance a comprehensive and inclusive political
process. This remains the only viable path towards
peace and stability for the Syrian people.
The Syrian people must remain at the centre
of our diplomatic and humanitarian efforts. The
Security Council must put differences aside and work
constructively towards improving the humanitarian
situation and implementing a Syrian-led and Syrianowned United Nations-facilitated political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). After enduring 12
years of conflict, the Syrian people, especially women
and children, deserve to see a peaceful and prosperous
future on the horizon. Let us make that a reality.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the information provided by Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief

S/PV.9272

Coordinator Martin Griffiths, and for the moving
account by Ms. Rasha Muhrez, Response Director of
Save the Children in Syria.
On behalf of the Government and the people
of Ecuador, I would like once again to express our
condolences to all the victims of the earthquakes, our
solidarity with them and our deep wishes that may
overcome this difficult situation, which has tested
the response capacity of all actors in Syria and in the
international community.
We acknowledge and are grateful for the work of
Geir Pedersen, Martin Griffiths, Joyce Msuya, Ghada
Mudawi and Mike Robson, as well as that of all the
officials of the different United Nations agencies in the
field and the non-governmental organizations operating
on the front line. We also pay a posthumous tribute to the
79 humanitarian workers who died trying to alleviate
the needs of the Syrian population on the ground.
We hope that three of the lessons learned in the course
of these weeks will be analysed and make contributions
to a peaceful transition in future. The first lesson is
that, in contexts of peace and stability, the institutional
framework has made it possible to deal efficiently and
quickly with natural contingencies. Secondly, in any
scenario, the results of solidarity and cooperative work
contribute to increasing the visibility of and addressing
the most complex problems, particularly those of such
vulnerable groups as women, unaccompanied children,
people with disabilities, displaced persons, among
others. The third lesson is that this critical situation
represents an opportunity in the political arena to seek
sustainable solutions to the conflict in Syria focused
on respect for unity, independence and territorial
integrity, in accordance with the principles set forth in
resolution 2254 (2015).
Since 6 February, the Security Council has held
four meetings in which it has received first-hand
information on the worsening conditions on the ground.
We have discussed the best strategies to provide Syria
with immediate relief, and we must acknowledge that
positive results have been achieved. The opening of two
additional cross-border crossings — Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai — through which 423 truckloads of medicine,
food, water, blankets, tents and other essential supplies
have been delivered to Syria proves what can be
achieved with a little political will and genuine concern
for the people of Syria. The border crossings and crossline operations complement each other in facilitating

23-0609715/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

the provision of humanitarian assistance. The Council
should therefore support both mechanisms.
Ecuador firmly condemns the fact that amid a
situation marked by grief and insecurity, armed attacks
continue on Syrian territory — incidents that have
taken the lives of civilians and brought additional terror
to the chaos that the country is already experiencing.
We note with great concern reports from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs warning
about the increasing numbers of cases of sexual
violence in community refugee centres. We call on
the United Nations teams on the ground to implement
oversight mechanisms that can facilitate the activation
of the relevant protocols. We urge them to provide the
corresponding reports with the speed and timeliness
that those cases demand.
We also support the Secretary-General’s flash
appeal aimed at raising $397 million to meet the
humanitarian needs in the first three months. However,
we are certain that that number will increase with the
start of efforts to resettle the displaced and rebuild the
strategic infrastructure destroyed by the earthquakes.
Ecuador reiterates its intention to support initiatives
that facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance
to the most critical areas and the implementation of
Council resolutions aimed at alleviating the suffering
of the Syrian people.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): We thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for
their important briefings. We also thank Ms. Muhrez
for her touching briefing and express our sincere
condolences to her and all who have been affected by
the earthquake.
Our brother people of Syria suffered devastating
tragedy this month. After 12 years of war and a
terrible humanitarian situation, an earthquake inflicted
additional hardships, killing or injuring tens of
thousands of people, turning historic cities, emblems of
an ancient civilization, into piles of rubble and leaving
families displaced and children orphaned. And as the
peoples of Syria and Türkiye struggled to recover
and heal from the first catastrophic earthquake, on
20 February a second struck their countries, causing
more suffering for millions. We once again extend our
sincere condolences and sympathy to those affected.
During that difficult time, we have seen the spirit of
international solidarity make itself felt in support of the
Syrian people. Arab efforts have been at the forefront
16/26

28/02/2023

of that support, as we have seen from the many Arab
countries that have reached out to Syria in the past
few weeks and from the support that Arab peoples
have provided to their Syrian brothers, emphasizing
how important it is to bring the Syrian Arab Republic
back into the Arab milieu. Against that backdrop,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the United Arab Emirates made an
urgent visit to Syria and Türkiye in the aftermath of
the earthquake, where he saw first-hand the extensive
destruction and suffering across affected areas. In the
light of the current situation, I would like to highlight
the following issues.
First, we must intensify the international
humanitarian response in Syria in every possible
way if we are to reach all who are affected. In the
context, the United Arab Emirates welcomed the
Syrian Government’s decision to open two additional
crossings for a period of three months in response to the
urgent needs resulting from the earthquake, a critical
step that is enabling the transfer of thousands of tons
of humanitarian assistance across the Syrian-Turkish
border. We also welcomed Mr. Griffiths’ remarks about
the continued unimpeded delivery of aid through the
three crossings.
For its part, the response of the United Arab
Emirates to the humanitarian situation accords with
the principles of our foreign policy regarding aid to the
afflicted. To that end, we worked quickly to launch a
humanitarian operation with the aim of sending relief
and medical aid to Syria and Türkiye, including searchand-rescue teams and the provision of field hospitals.
In addition, we have allocated an aid package of
more than $200 million for both countries, including
$20 million in support of the United Nations Syria
Humanitarian Response Plan. We are also facilitating
an air bridge with more than 100 flights carrying aid
and medical support, as well as an additional air bridge
to Syria from Dubai’s International Humanitarian City
facilitating flights operated by the United Nations and
international organizations.
Secondly, we underscore the need to expedite the
removal of debris and begin the early recovery phase in
all areas affected by the earthquake and suffering from
a major shortage of basic services and lack of shelter
for the victims. That requires the provision of heavy
equipment and raw materials for restoring infrastructure
and rebuilding where there is destruction. In that regard,
we appreciate the efforts of the various relevant United
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Nations bodies in support of early-recovery projects, as
the focus should now be on the affected areas.
Thirdly, we must remain vigilant in view of the fact
that terrorist groups continue to exploit fragile situations
to achieve their goals. As we were all preoccupied with
the disastrous effects of the earthquake, terrorist groups
were working to obstruct the cross-line delivery of aid
to achieve their own narrow gains at the expense of the
Syrian people. My country categorically rejects such
dangerous practices, which seek to exploit a catastrophic
state of affairs. The current situation requires stepping
up the scale and frequency of cross-line aid deliveries
in order to meet the current needs and prevent terrorist
groups from hindering those deliveries.
We are also deeply concerned about the reported
increase in kidnappings and killings in Syria by Da’esh
over the past few weeks. We condemn the terrorist attack
killing 53 people and perpetrated in eastern Homs by
Da’esh in a reckless exploitation of the disaster.
In conclusion, while the tragic earthquake is
one of the worst natural disasters in history and will
long remain a painful memory in our minds, we will
continue to show solidarity with the Syrian people in
their dire distress.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil makes this
statement on the political aspects of the conflict in its
national capacity.
First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths for their briefings. Brazil commends their
tireless efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people after more than a decade of conflict and now the
tragic consequences of earthquakes of an unprecedented
magnitude. Last week, the Brazilian Government
announced the donation of water purifiers and seven
tons of nutritious dehydrated foods to the Government
of Syria as part of the efforts to help to address the
immediate needs of the affected populations.
We also thank the Syria Response Director for Save
the Children, Ms. Rasha Muhrez, for her moving briefing
and her insights. As Ms. Rasha Muhrez described,
children all over Syria continue to endure terrible
trauma, when they should be spared the consequences
of the hostilities. The situation of children in camps,
such as that of Al-Hol, is particularly concerning and
deserves renewed attention. In that regard, we welcome
the ongoing repatriation efforts.

S/PV.9272

The additional human suffering caused by the
earthquakes exacerbates the need for a political
solution to the conflict. Brazil’s position remains
unchanged. Only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
United Nations-facilitated political process, with
due regard for the preservation of Syria’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, can provide a lasting solution
to the conflict.
A comprehensive ceasefire is urgent. We join the
Secretary-General in his repeated calls on all parties
to exercise maximum restraint, maintain the various
ceasefires agreed and respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We condemn all terrorist activities
and recent attacks by foreign forces, which resulted in
several civilian deaths and seriously undermine the
political process.
Resolution 2254 (2015) provides a road map that
could restore Syria’s unity and sovereignty. For many
months now, we have seen no progress in relation to the
meetings of the small body of the Syrian-led, Syrianowned United Nations-facilitated Constitutional
Committee. It is our hope that, once reconvened,
members will show renewed political will and a genuine
willingness to move the process forward.
Brazil congratulates Special Envoy Geir Pedersen
on his outreach efforts to re-engage key stakeholders to
find a way out of the current stalemate in the political
process. We also commend him for his continued
engagement with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
We hope that the recent gestures of international
solidarity in the aftermath of the earthquake will
positively influence the political file so that new
perspectives for a peaceful solution can be made
possible. It is our expectation that the current
humanitarian cooperation can pave the way for further
confidence-building measures. In 2023, let us not only
hope for, but also work hard towards, a favourable
political outcome for Syria so as to bring about the
peace, stability and reconciliation so desired by the
Syrian people.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Allow me to thank Special
Envoy Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
and Director Muhrez for their briefings.
In less than two weeks, it will be 12 years since
a handful of Syrian teenagers were arrested by the
Al-Assad regime for spraying pro-democracy graffiti

23-0609717/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

in Dara’a. That sparked the beginning of the Arab
Spring protests and the brutal crackdown on protesters.
The Syrian teenagers of today have known only
war and brutality. They have seen their relatives being
arbitrarily executed or forcefully disappeared. They
have had to face imminent starvation every day, and
they know no education, health care, basic security
or freedom.
For nearly 12 years, the regime has disfigured
Syria into a land of blood, in which the aspirations of
the Syrian people for freedom and dignity have been
quelled and more than two in three Syrians require
urgent humanitarian aid, with 12 million facing
hunger — the highest number since the beginning of
the conflict.
The recent devastating earthquakes have only
increased the misery and dramatically heightened
the humanitarian needs. We strongly support the
continuation of the cross-border mandate for another
six months to secure the uninterrupted delivery of vital
aid for 4.1 million Syrians living in north-west Syria.
We welcome the opening of the two additional border
crossings to north-west Syria in response to the urgent
and drastic increase in humanitarian needs, which are
unparalleled in scale.
We continue to maintain that, in order to ensure
predictability, readiness, support, the efficient
mobilization of resources and project implementation,
we need a new resolution. That will allow for those
border crossings to provide sustained access, not just
for as long as the regime deems it suitable, but for as
long as it is needed.
The root cause of this unimaginable human tragedy
that is Syria today is political. It cannot, and will not,
be resolved without addressing the political grievances
and the aspirations of the Syrian people for freedom
and security. There is no path to peace for Syria other
than the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
A real and inclusive political transition, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and
young people, is a necessary condition for any hope of
progress and a just political solution in Syria.
We strongly support Special Envoy Pedersen in
advancing the full and comprehensive implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), including his step-for-step
approach in restarting the political process, especially
by resuming the work of the Constitutional Committee.
18/26

28/02/2023

We deplore the obstruction by the Syrian regime and
its supporters, and we call on them to drop their absurd
pretexts and allow the reconvening of the Constitutional
Committee for its ninth session in Geneva, as planned.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our strong
support for a new mechanism to clarify the fate of
detainees and missing people in Syria. That is necessary
to provide closure to nearly every Syrian family.
The profound and enduring humanitarian, political,
military, security, economic and human rights crisis in
Syria will not be resolved without a genuine commitment
to and strong support for democratic reforms and
functioning institutions, established by the people for
the people. Only a new Syria, rooted in justice, will
lead to the much-needed reconciliation, which is a
prerequisite for lasting peace and development.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Ms. Rasha Muhrez for their briefings.
We are fully committed to helping the Syrian people.
For 12 years, France has been committed to helping all
Syrians in every possible way. After the earthquake,
we released €12 million in aid and delivered 40 tons of
emergency equipment, and we want to do more.
We welcomed the efforts of Martin Griffiths for
more border crossing points to be opened. We would
not have been in the situation of having to wait seven
days if the other crossings originally planned by the
cross-border mechanism had not been closed, one by
one, since 2020 despite the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.
Unimpeded humanitarian aid must be delivered to
all Syrians in need. However, the complex humanitarian
operations in Syria persist, particularly because of the
regime, which diverts a substantial part of the aid that
passes through Damascus and siphons off funds meant
for humanitarian projects.
With regard to sanctions, they were adopted in
response to war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the regime and its supporters. European
sanctions have never prevented the delivery of
humanitarian aid to Syria. The amount of funding
allocated by the European Union and its member States
to the humanitarian response plan for Syria is proof
of that — $27 billion since 2011 at their request. In
2022, the European Commission and its member States
provided $770 million in aid.
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

On 23 February, States members of the European
Union adopted a temporary humanitarian exemption
for a period of six months. That exemption does not
mean that the sanctions were preventing humanitarian
assistance from reaching populations and responding
to their needs. It is a matter of adapting that tool to
the emergency caused by the earthquakes and to allow
non-governmental organizations to act more quickly.
I would like to reiterate the importance of the
Council remaining seized of the issue of humanitarian
aid in Syria, which remains a country at war. We
reiterate our call for a national ceasefire.
The humanitarian tragedy of the earthquake cannot,
however, make us forget the realities of the war in Syria.
The Special Envoy visited Damascus on 13 February.
Unfortunately, despite his efforts, the regime continues
to block any progress towards a lasting peace, under the
aegis of the United Nations, as defined by resolution
2254 (2015), adopted unanimously by the Council.
The earthquake is a new tragedy added to the
tragedies suffered by Syrians over the course of 12
years of war: the bombing of civilian populations,
the use of chemical weapons and the systematic use
of torture and sexual violence by the regime, which
have been widely documented by the United Nations.
Syrians are the victims of war crimes committed by
the regime and its affiliates. Before the earthquake,
the figures were already unprecedented: the brutality
of the conflict and the regime’s repression have caused
one of the largest population movements of the century;
more than 100,000 people are missing, most of them in
the regime’s prisons.
Syrians are demanding justice, because without
justice no lasting peace is possible. France will
relentlessly continue its fight against impunity; those
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be held accountable for their actions.
France’s position therefore remains firm: in the
absence of a credible and inclusive political process, we
will not abandon our basic position vis-à-vis the Syrian
regime, which must engage in a political process.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for their briefings and listened attentively to
the briefing by Ms. Muhrez.
China once again expresses its condolences to the
peoples and the Governments of Türkiye and Syria

S/PV.9272

for their grave losses in lives and property in the
devastating earthquakes.
After the earthquake first struck, the Chinese
Government immediately launched the emergency
humanitarian assistance mechanism and provided
¥40 million to Türkiye and ¥30 million to Syria. We
have expedited food assistance to Syria, to be followed
shortly by prefabricated housing worth ¥10 million.
Chinese society has broadly mobilized, with the public
making financial and in-kind donations on their own
initiative. Almost 20 non-Government emergency
response teams headed to the earthquake-stricken
areas. And China’s Red Cross Society provided the
Turkish Red Crescent and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
with emergency cash assistance and relief materials.
Moving forward, China will continue assisting Türkiye
and Syria in line with their needs in overcoming the
disaster and rebuilding their countries.
When one country is in distress, all others rush
to its rescue. Under the current circumstances,
both bilateral assistance and the United Nations
humanitarian appeal are urgently needed and should
be welcomed and encouraged. China appreciates all
parties, especially the United Arab Emirates, Saudi
Arabia and Egypt, among Arab countries, for extending
a helping hand to the Syrian Government and people,
appreciates Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Special Envoy Pedersen for visiting the areas hit by
the earthquake immediately afterwards and mobilizing
international support, welcomes the United Nations
flash humanitarian appeal for Syria for disaster relief
and hopes that assistance from all channels will be
operationalized and synergized as soon as possible.
China welcomes the Syrian Government’s decision
to open the Bab al-Salam and Al-Rai border crossings,
which are already in use, allowing more convoys into
north-western Syria to continuously deliver supplies
to the affected population. That is a positive step by
the Syrian Government to relieve people’s hardship in
the wake of the earthquake, which shows both serious,
genuine willingness to work with the United Nations
and proves the United Nations ability to solve tangible
problems on cross-border humanitarian relief through
coordination with relevant parties. Such healthy
interactions are to be encouraged.
Regrettably, the cross-line delivery of relief
supplies to north-western Syria is still impeded. We
call on all parties to put the interests of Syrians first,

23-0609719/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

maintain a constructive spirit, step up communication
and coordination, remove all barriers and fully tap into
the cross-border mechanism.
Years of illegal unilateral sanctions have
significantly worsened the economic and livelihood
crises in Syria and brought its disaster-response capacity
to its knees. The concurrent humanitarian crises of
earthquakes, a harsh winter and cholera outbreaks
have immeasurably exacerbated the humanitarian
consequences of unilateral sanctions. This month,
some countries announced a temporary relaxation in
their unilateral sanctions against Syria, which in a way
reaffirms the severity of the situation. It is our hope
that the relevant policy changes will be implemented
as soon as possible to truly unfetter humanitarian
agencies and effectively facilitate disaster rescue and
relief efforts.
It must be pointed out that, to address the
systematic harm on the Syrian economic foundation
and development capacity due to unilateral sanctions,
neither temporary measures nor partial exemptions are
enough. We urge relevant countries to immediately
and unconditionally lift all illegal unilateral sanctions
against Syria and stop artificially creating and
worsening humanitarian catastrophes.
China’s position on the Syrian political issue is
consistent and clear. The Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process is the fundamental way to resolve
the Syrian issue. China welcomes Special Envoy
Pedersen’s continued efforts, along the lines of a stepfor-step approach, to facilitate dialogue, consultation
and mutual trust among the factions in Syria.
The earthquakes, as unfortunate as they are, can
also be an opportunity to forge ahead jointly. It is
our hope that relevant parties in Syria will rise above
political divisions, build consensus faster and endeavour
to hold the ninth session of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee at an early date.
The Syrian political process cannot proceed without
a secure environment. The international community
should adopt uniform criteria, in accordance with
international law and Security Council resolutions, and
crack down on all terrorist forces in Syria with zero
tolerance. Relevant parties must stop conniving with,
covering for and politically exploiting terrorist forces.
The Permanent Representative of Syria, in his letter
dated 19 February to the President of the Security
Council, condemned the air strike by a relevant country
20/26

28/02/2023

on residential areas in Damascus on that day. China
calls again for earnest respect for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and a cessation of the illegal
presence and military activities of foreign troops in
Syria. The illegal plundering of natural resources must
also stop immediately.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me join others in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
I would like to offer condolences to Ms. Muhrez on
the tragic loss of her cousins and thank her for her
valuable insights and powerful testimony describing,
in particular, the impact of the earthquake on children
and their families.
I again want to express the United Kingdom’s
deepest condolences to all those affected by the deadly
earthquakes that hit Türkiye and Syria this month.
The United Kingdom acted immediately, providing
additional funding to first responders in northwest Syria and announcing a further $30 million in
emergency relief to the United Nations and humanitarian
partners across Syria and Türkiye and issuing a general
license exempting further aid from sanctions. That has
provided much-needed assistance, including shelter, to
thousands in freezing conditions.
We welcome the urgent efforts of the United
Nations to scale up the humanitarian response, as
well as the opening of crossings at Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai. This latest tragedy has brought into sharp focus
the importance of unhindered and predictable access,
without conditions, into north-west Syria. The Council
must continue to monitor this closely in the light of
ongoing concerns that the regime continues to divert
and interfere with aid deliveries.
Even before the earthquake hit, needs were already
at their highest-ever levels after more than a decade of
conflict, during which the Al-Assad regime has acted
with complete disregard for the well-being of Syria and
its people. We cannot allow the regime to use the latest
tragedy to avoid taking responsibility for their actions.
Just this month, the Council heard further evidence
of the regime’s criminal use of chemical weapons
against the civilian population in Douma in 2018 (see
S/PV.9255). Thousands of families are left without
answers about loved ones who have been disappeared
into Al-Assad’s prison system. At the same time, the
regime continues to project instability into the region,
including through the production and smuggling of
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

captagon. That illicit narcotic industry, worth tens of
billions of dollars, funds a luxury lifestyle for a regime
whose people, as Mr. Griffiths said, are packed into
tents in freezing conditions.
The people of Syria’s immediate need is for
humanitarian support, but they need and deserve more
than that. They need a sustainable, inclusive and just
peace. As Ms. Muhrez said, we owe that to them. The
United Nations-facilitated political process set out in
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only viable route to
deliver that peace. We welcome meaningful efforts to
progress towards that end, including important efforts
in the region. We urge the regime to engage immediately
and in good faith.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
Let me begin by thanking our briefers — UnderSecretary-General Griffiths, Special Envoy Pedersen
and the Response Director for Save the Children,
Ms. Muhrez — for their remarks to the Security
Council today. Malta is grateful for their briefings and
collective call to action as we face the new emergency
in Syria.
As we heard this morning, the acute impact of the
earthquake is still being felt throughout Syria. Right
across the country, and nowhere more than in the
north-west, the scale of the crisis exceeds what was
unimaginable less than one month ago. Water and
sanitation, shelter, fuel, food and protection are now
among the most immediate needs of the population.
Prior to this most recent catastrophe, some 15.3 million
Syrians were already in need of emergency humanitarian
assistance. Now more than ever, we must work
collectively to address the dual humanitarian crisis.
The impact of the disaster on children has been
devastating. We have heard of 1,300 schools or
temporary learning facilities in Syria being damaged
or destroyed, with educational support needed for some
6.4 million children. Unaccompanied and separated
children are in urgent need of protection and appropriate
care arrangements while family tracing and case
management take place. Families require emergency
psychosocial support to help them recover from the
horrors they have lived through. Women and girls
deserve protection and a gender-sensitive humanitarian
response. Nothing less than immediate and sustained
humanitarian assistance is what is needed now to save

S/PV.9272

lives and avoid the worst of the secondary impacts of
the earthquake.
We remain supportive of the principled delivery
of humanitarian aid to all those in need through the
most effective and direct modalities. In that regard,
Malta welcomes the opening of the border crossings at
Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai. We call for greater support
for those operations and for Member States to assist
in unlocking the supply chain challenges the United
Nations is facing, thereby allowing the aid operation
to scale up in size and speed to rapidly meet the needs
of the most vulnerable. Malta expresses our hope
that cross-line operations can also be scaled up in the
days ahead. However, we underscore the continued
importance of resolution 2672 (2023) and the additional
border crossings, the scale and scope of which cannot
be matched by cross-line operations at this time.
This crisis is yet another devastating blow to the
population of Syria. The earthquake has magnified and
exacerbated humanitarian suffering in Syria, yet we
must not forget that it is far from being its cause. Twelve
years of conflict and countless crimes committed by
the Syrian Government and parties to the conflict have
inflicted untold pain and suffering upon millions. Malta
reiterates that, even in the face of the latest tragedy, we
must remain steadfast in our calls for progress on the
political track, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Malta was dismayed to hear reports of Government
shelling in the north-west in the aftermath of the
earthquake and calls again for a nationwide ceasefire
throughout Syria. We urge the reconvening of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva and express our
support for that Syrian-owned and Syrian-led process
under the auspices of the United Nations. We reiterate
that the return of Syrian refugees and internally
displaced persons must be safe, legal and voluntary in
accordance with the criteria set out by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
We call once again for the transparent and verifiable
release of all those arbitrarily detained in Syria, as well
as for the provision of information on the whereabouts
and the fate of the thousands still missing.
In conclusion, Malta fully supports the work of
Special Envoy Pedersen and his step-for-step initiative,
and we call on Damascus to engage faithfully with
his good offices. The earthquake that occurred on
6 February in Syria and Türkiye presents a tragic

23-0609721/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

opportunity to refocus and redouble our efforts towards
ensuring a just and lasting peace for the people of Syria.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As the Syrian Arab Republic was recovering
from the aftermath of the earthquake, burying its martyrs
and racing against time to address the catastrophic
consequences of that devastating earthquake, terrorist
and Israeli occupation forces were targeting Syria and
its people. The Da’esh terrorist organization carried out
a brutal attack, killing 53 citizens and injuring others
while they were foraging for truffles in the city of
Al-Sukhna, east of Homs governorate.
Simultaneously with that terrorist aggression,
the occupying Israeli entity launched an air strike
on Sunday, 19 February from the occupied Golan,
using missiles against residential neighbourhoods
full of civilians in Damascus. According to initial
numbers, that attack claimed the lives of five martyrs
and seriously injured 15 civilians. It also destroyed a
number of civilian homes and caused material damage
to several educational centres and historical sites.
That Israeli terrorist attack was premeditated and
part of Israel’s systematic targeting of Syrian civilians
and civilian objects, including homes, service centres,
airports and seaports. Such an attack constitutes
an absolute war crime and is a gross violation of
international law and the principles and provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is an explicit threat
to peace and security in the Middle East region. The
Syrian Arab Republic called on the Security Council
to assume its primary responsibilities in condemning
those Israeli attacks and to take the necessary measures
to deter them, hold accountable and punish their
perpetrators and ensure that they are not repeated. In
that regard, Syria reiterates its call on the countries
supporting Israel in the Council, especially the United
States of America, to stop obstructing the Security
Council’s fulfilment of its mandate to end the crimes
committed by the Israeli occupation and terrorist
groups and to hold them accountable.
More than three weeks have passed since the
devastating earthquake that struck Syria, leaving
thousands of victims and injured and destroying
22/26

28/02/2023

hundreds of buildings and other infrastructure and
service facilities. The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, within its limited capabilities, continues
to make every effort to facilitate the emergency
response to the effects of the earthquake in the four
afflicted governorates.
In that regard, the Syrian Government provided
the necessary facilities and exemptions for the arrival
of humanitarian aid and relief workers through the
three Syrian airports, the Latakia seaport and the land
border crossings with Lebanon and Jordan. It granted
open approvals and facilities to the United Nations
and international organizations operating in Syria,
including by facilitating and accelerating customs
procedures, granting visas and ensuring the entry of
supplies and emergency relief workers to support
those affected.
At the same time, the Syrian Government stressed
its commitment to deliver humanitarian assistance
to all Syrians on Syrian territory, including in northwest Syria. The Syrian Government took a sovereign
decision to approve the opening of two additional
border crossings — Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai — for a
period of three months in order to deliver humanitarian
assistance to our people in that region. That decision
allowed the entry to date of hundreds of trucks carrying
humanitarian aid, which reflects the importance of the
agreement reached with the United Nations.
The Syrian Government also continued to grant
the necessary approvals and facilities to deliver
humanitarian aid from within Syria, including
organizing cross-line humanitarian missions to northwest Syria, for a period of six months, in order to provide
humanitarian assistance and to conduct humanitarianneeds assessments in that area to respond to the
repercussions of the earthquake and its aftershocks.
Syria reaffirms the importance of continuing to
implement all those measures in good faith. We reject
all attempts to politicize the humanitarian situation in
Syria, whether through orders from the operators of
the terrorist group the Al-Nusra Front/Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham to prevent the cross-line entry of humanitarian
assistance, or the scepticism and disruption practiced
by some Western countries of the Syrian Government’s
decision to allow the entry of humanitarian assistance
through two new border crossings, as well as the
allegations of those countries that assistance is being
derailed. That derailment is unconfirmed by the United
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9272

Nations and is a lie that aims to disrupt the efforts
by the Syrian Government to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to Syrians. Why have
we not heard a condemnation by those countries of
terrorist groups hindering the delivery of cross-line
humanitarian assistance?

many difficulties for international relief flights to
Syrian airports, both before and after the disaster.
Many international airlines were forced to use Beirut
Airport for fear of those sanctions, thereby incurring
additional costs and delaying the delivery of assistance
to the victims of the earthquake.

The Syrian Arab Republic once again expresses
its thanks and appreciation to all countries that stood
in solidarity with Syria and its people and promptly
responded to the needs of Syrian people facing such
difficult circumstances. That lent important support to
national efforts to mitigate the effects of the earthquake
and save many of the injured. We also express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for launching the
flash appeal to respond to the catastrophic repercussions
of the earthquake. International efforts should focus on
rebuilding infrastructure and addressing the damage to
the necessary service, health and educational facilities.
That is an urgent need when it comes to the return of
displaced people affected by the earthquake to their
regions and homes.

Second, sanctions and restrictions imposed
on public and private hospitals in Syria, including
children’s hospitals, and the preventing of international
companies from selling medicines and necessary
medical equipment to Syria exacerbated the
vulnerability of the health sector in Syria, including
during the pandemic and the earthquake.

In that regard, we express serious concern about
the low levels of funding for the humanitarian response
plan for Syria. The 2022 plan has received less than
50 per cent of pledged funding. That is why we call on
donor countries to provide the necessary funding to the
humanitarian response plan and to the humanitarian
flash appeal for Syria in order to ensure the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to all those in need across
the country.
In his latest report on the humanitarian situation in
Syria (S/2023/127), the Secretary-General reaffirms the
“importance of providing clear reassurances that
no unilateral sanctions will interfere with relief
operations benefiting the Syrian population.”
(S/2023/127, para. 81)
We are well aware that the United States of America and
the European Union will not acknowledge the extent
of the negative impacts of the unilateral sanctions they
impose on Syrians. I will therefore briefly present
some aspects that expose the inaccuracy of their claims
and prove that such unjust sanctions have a harmful
effect on Syrians and that they were indeed originally
designed for that purpose.
First, sanctions and restrictions imposed on the
Syrian air transport sector and civil aviation equipment
affected the safety of civilian passengers and caused

Third, sanctions and restrictions imposed on the
import of oil and oil derivatives to Syria have caused an
acute shortage of fuel used for heating, transportation
and electricity generation. Moreover, the illegal seizure
by the United States of oil and gas fields in north-east
Syria and oil-smuggling operations have deprived the
Syrian people of that important material and billions of
dollars in revenue.
Fourth, sanctions and restrictions imposed on the
import of power stations, power-related equipment and
spare parts have deprived Syrians of electricity for
more than 20 hours a day, on average.
Fifth, sanctions and restrictions imposed on the
import of equipment and machinery necessary for
supplying drinking water, irrigation, sterilizing and
purifying water and repairing and improving the
sewage system caused the spread of many diseases,
especially cholera.
Sixth, sanctions and restrictions imposed on the
import of heavy construction machinery and other
construction equipment to Syria weakened its ability
to address the repercussions of the earthquake and
demonstrated the urgent need for such equipment in
rescue operations and the removal of tens of thousands
of tons of debris and rubble of destroyed buildings, as
well as to build housing units for hundreds of thousands
of earthquake victims.
Seventh, restrictions and sanctions imposed on
imports of fertilizers needed for agriculture and food
production, or as a component for making them locally,
have caused irreparable damage to Syria’s agricultural
production and contributed to a sharp rise in the cost
of locally produced food. They have undermined

23-0609723/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

food security for Syrians and led to acute levels
of malnutrition.
Lastly, sanctions and restrictions imposed on
Syrian banks, including the Central Bank of Syria,
have led to the freezing or severing of financial
relations with foreign banks and have prevented them
from conducting the financial transactions necessary
for all the vital sectors that I have just mentioned. The
list goes on and on. Those are just some examples of
the negative repercussions of the United States and
European sanctions.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the efforts
needed to overcome the destructive consequences of
the earthquake are ongoing. They require heightened
international support and enormous resources, which
will be possible only when humanitarian considerations
are prioritized over political considerations, sincere
and genuine support is provided to Syria and its people,
donors fulfil their commitments and a safe and stable
environment is provided to Syrians. That requires
supporting counter-terrorism efforts, stopping Israel’s
repeated and systematic attacks, ending the illegal
foreign presence on Syrian territory and lifting the
unilateral and coercive measures imposed on the Syrian
people immediately, completely and unconditionally.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We thank
Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Griffiths for their updates and
insightful briefings.
The recent devastating earthquake in Syria has
exacerbated the country’s already dire humanitarian
situation, leading to the collapse of structures and
basic services and severely affecting people’s ability
to meet their basic needs. Given the seriousness of the
situation, humanitarian assistance must be scaled up
and provided in an impartial and non-discriminatory
manner, free of politicization and conditions, in order
to ensure that the most vulnerable individuals receive
the assistance they require. We commend the United
Nations and humanitarian agencies for their ongoing
efforts to help the Syrian people and alleviate their
suffering, especially at this challenging time. Iran
was one of the first countries to respond positively to
the humanitarian requests from Türkiye and Syria by
sending humanitarian aid, and we will continue to do
everything in our power to assist the people affected by
the devastating earthquake in their time of need.
24/26

28/02/2023

In order to address Syria’s current humanitarian
crisis more effectively, the international community
should focus on lifting the inhumane unilateral
sanctions. We must recognize that the unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Syria, which are blatant
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, have made it more difficult for the
people to meet their needs and have constrained the
ability of Government institutions to deliver basic
services and improve living conditions. The recent
exemptions for humanitarian relief are not sufficient
and are only an attempt to create the appearance of
concern. It is therefore not enough to offer words of
solidarity without taking concrete action. We call for
the immediate, complete and unconditional lifting of the
unjustified sanctions. In the meantime, the continued
plundering of Syria’s natural resources by foreign
forces, which has resulted in a severe fuel shortage
and exacerbated the humanitarian situation, must be
stopped. According to the Syrian Arab Republic, those
criminal acts have resulted in the theft of more than
$100 billion in Syria’s national resources and wealth,
primarily in the form of oil and gas.
We support the full implementation of resolution
2672 (2023), with its strong emphasis on prioritizing
early-recovery projects aimed at rebuilding critical
infrastructure, enhancing cross-line aid operations
and addressing the pressing challenge of ensuring the
supply of electricity, which is a basic requirement for all
Syrians. Such efforts will not only provide immediate
relief to the Syrian people but also lay a foundation
for sustainable long-term development. It will be
essential to carry out that work in close cooperation
and coordination with the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and in full respect for Syria’s national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We appreciate
and recognize the Government’s efforts to support and
facilitate humanitarian access to all areas of Syria. The
Syrian Arab Republic’s recent decision to open two
new crossing points to facilitate humanitarian access
deserves the Council’s respect and support.
In order to ensure a more effective political
solution to the Syrian crisis, we continue to emphasize
that a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process,
facilitated by the United Nations, is the only viable
approach to ending the crisis. Together with our
Astana format partners, we will continue to work to
achieve long-term and sustainable normalization in
and around Syria. We support the ongoing work of the
23-06097

28/02/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Constitutional Committee. In that context, we commend
the Special Envoy’s continuing efforts to facilitate the
next meeting of the Committee and welcome his recent
visit to Damascus and contact with Syrian parties.
We believe that the current procedural impasse in
the Committee can be resolved through constructive
engagement and good faith on the part of all the parties
involved. Nevertheless, we must be careful not to direct
our efforts towards initiatives that will only divert the
political process and add no value.
Terrorism remains a significant threat to Syria and
the wider region and must be addressed decisively. We
are concerned about terrorist activities in the areas
under occupation. The illegal presence of military
forces in Syria, in violation of the Charter and
international law, is the primary source of insecurity
in the country and must be stopped if we are to create
an environment conducive to a resolution of the crisis.
We strongly believe that the fight against terrorism
must be carried out in full respect for Syria’s national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence, and
without using it as a pretext to violate the fundamental
principles of international law.
In conclusion, we strongly condemn the Israeli
regime’s terrorist attack on a civilian residential building
in a densely populated area of central Damascus on
19 February. Such attacks are a grave threat to regional
peace and stability and violate international law,
international humanitarian law and the Charter. The
international community must compel Israel’s regime
to stop its repeated violations of Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the terrorist
attacks it has carried out on civilians and critical
infrastructure in Syria. We urge the Security Council
to take responsibility and explicitly condemn the Israeli
regime’s ongoing violation of the fundamental principle
of Member States’ national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which is the foundation of the Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): As this is the first time that I
am addressing the Security Council in my new capacity
as the Permanent Representative of Türkiye to the
United Nations, I would like to greet the members of
the Council and congratulate Malta on its steering of
the Council’s work for this month. I also thank Special
Envoy Pedersen, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
and Ms. Muhrez for their valuable briefings.

S/PV.9272

The people of Türkiye and its neighbour Syria are
faced with the overwhelming consequences of one of the
most devastating earthquakes in history. Our pain and
sorrow are profound. Our thoughts and prayers are with
all the victims, grieving families and millions of people
affected. I would like to take this opportunity to convey
the heartfelt thanks and appreciation of my Government
and people for the flood of sympathy and expressions
of support that we have received from the international
community, including the Council, the United Nations
and the European Union. As we try to deal with the
enormous task of addressing the many dimensions
of post-disaster emergency humanitarian assistance
and recovery in an area larger than Switzerland, the
Netherlands and Denmark combined, with about
14 million inhabitants, the continued international
support, including through the United Nations flash
appeal for Türkiye and Syria, will be crucial.
While grappling with those challenges in our own
country, we are continuing to do our best to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid to the Syrian people.
We have already repaired the roads leading to the
Bab Al-Hawa border gate, which were damaged and
rendered useless by the earthquake. We have also
made available the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai border
crossings for the transfer of desperately needed United
Nations aid faster and in greater quantities to the worst
affected areas. Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai were already
operational and open for zero-point aid deliveries by
third countries and humanitarian organizations. Since
the earthquakes, as Mr. Griffiths told us, a total of 456
United Nations aid trucks have passed through those
border crossings, delivering essential relief items to
millions of Syrians.
Maintaining a scaled-up United Nations response
through those crossings as long as it is needed will be
critically important to meeting needs in Syria in the
most expedited, effective and efficient manner. We
continue to facilitate United Nations field visits and
assess the needs in the areas affected, in addition to
ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
region by third countries. Our airspace is also open
to planes carrying humanitarian aid to Syria. On day
one of the earthquake, we announced that if need be,
we would also consider opening the Kessab border
crossing for international aid to the regime-controlled
areas through Türkiye. That remains our position.
The United Nations humanitarian flash appeal
for Syria is an important instrument by which the

23-0609725/26

S/PV.9272

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian people’s most urgent needs can be met in the
aftermath of the devastating earthquakes. It is essential
that the resources raised through the flash appeal
be channelled to the places where they are needed
most and used to alleviate the plight of the people in
the areas affected. In addition to cross-border aid,
Türkiye also continues its efforts to facilitate crossline deliveries. The first cross-line aid delivery to Ras
Al-Ayn after the earthquake — and only the second
since 2019 — was made on 26 February, transporting
medical and humanitarian aid to the region. We are
also working to facilitate cross-line aid delivery from
Aleppo to Idlib.
The devastation wrought by the earthquake has
exacerbated the suffering, despair and displacement of
the Syrian people. It has also demonstrated once again
the interrelated nature of all the components of the
Syrian crisis and has increased the urgency of creating
momentum in the political process. A sustainable
political solution meeting the aspirations of the Syrian
people can only be reached in line with resolution 2254
(2015). We need greater alignment of the positions
of all stakeholders if progress is to be achieved, and
we fully support Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts in
that direction.
As we have come to emphasize, the return of
refugees is also part and parcel of the settlement of
the Syrian crisis and should be treated as such. Along
with the political process, simultaneous steps should

26/26

28/02/2023

therefore be taken to facilitate the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of the Syrian refugees. Throughout
that process, it will remain essential to eliminate
terrorist elements such as the Kurdistan Workers’
Party/People’s Protection Units and Da’esh and to
disrupt their separatist agendas in Syria. Terrorism is
the biggest threat to the territorial integrity of Syria as
well as to peace and security in the region. Türkiye will
continue its efforts to contribute to the maintenance of
calm on the ground and to the fight against terrorism.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of February, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Malta to the
members of the Council and the Council’s secretariat
for all the support they have given us. It has indeed been
a busy month, and one in which we rallied to arrive
at a consensus on several important issues within our
purview. We could not have done it alone and without
the hard work, support and positive contributions
of every delegation and the representatives of the
Secretariat, including the technical support team and
the conference service officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing
the delegation of Mozambique good luck in the month
of March.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

23-06097
