S/PV.8051

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8051st meeting

Wednesday, 20 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Desalegn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Al Sisi
Mr. Le Drian
Mr. Gentiloni Silveri
Mr. Kono
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Sall
Mr. Löfven
Mr. Poroshenko
Mrs. May
Mr. Pence
Mr. Loedel

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Reform of United Nations peacekeeping: implementation and follow-up
Letter dated 22 August 2017 from the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2017/766)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29377 (E)
*1729377*

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
earthquakes in Mexico and the tropical storms on
the Atlantic coast and in the Caribbean
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express our sadness at the loss of life and
damage resulting from the earthquake that took place
yesterday in Mexico. The members of the Council would
like to extend their condolences to the Government
and the people of Mexico, which has suffered two
significant earthquakes in just two weeks. The Council
members would also like to offer their condolences to
all the victims of the tropical storms that have buffeted
the Atlantic coast and the Caribbean this season, and I
wish a speedy recovery for all who have been affected
by that natural disaster.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Reform of United Nations peacekeeping:
implementation and follow-up
Letter dated 22 August 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/766)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Heads of State and Government, Ministers and other
representatives here in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
I am also delighted to welcome our briefers: His
Excellency the Secretary-General; His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission; and His Excellency
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Chairperson of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Members have before them a list of speakers who
have requested to participate in today’s meeting, in
accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s rules
of procedure and the previous practice of the Council in
that regard. I propose that they be invited to participate
in this meeting.
2/35

20/09/2017

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/766, which contains the text of
a letter dated 22 August 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank this month’s
presidency of the Security Council, Ethiopia, for
being such a steadfast contributor to peacekeeping. Its
personnel are on the front lines in some of our most
challenging missions, and we are extremely grateful for
that commitment.
Today we gather to fortify this flagship United
Nations activity. Every day, peacekeepers create
conditions for lasting peace that protect civilians, such
as the hundreds of thousands in South Sudan and the
Central African Republic who have sought refuge.
Across the years and across the globe, 55 peacekeeping
operations have successfully completed their mandates.
Many political missions have done the same. Four
missions are downsizing or closing soon, their job
completed, and the strategies to ensure a smooth
transition in these situations are absolutely crucial.
Peacekeeping remains a highly cost-effective
instrument. The people of Haiti and Côte D’Ivoire will
enjoy a brighter future thanks in part to the support of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. I pay
tribute to the many peacekeepers who have paid the
ultimate price in carrying out this vital work.
(spoke in French)
Despite the evident successes, peacekeeping
operations can at times be disappointing and apparently
lacking in prospects, unable to bring decades-old
engagements to an end. This prompts us to engage in
reflection about our goals, the means with which we
avail ourselves, and our ability to implement complex
mandates and to meet multiple ambitions. Peace
operations are deployed in difficult environments
where the United Nations is at times the sole party
able and willing to act. Peace operations are subject
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to significant and perhaps overly weighty expectations
insofar as they must address urgent situations while
contributing to long-term solutions. Peace operations
often face situations of such complexity that it is
illusory to hope that a solution can be provided over the
course of a few years.
(spoke in English)
The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, whose recommendations remain at the
heart of our efforts to advance collective security,
called for four critical shifts. My reform efforts aim in
part to bring them about.
First, we must recognize the primacy of politics so
that peace operations are deployed in support of active
diplomatic efforts, not as a substitute. My proposals
for the Secretariat’s peace and security architecture
seek to strengthen the link between political strategies
and operations and between peace and security and
the development and human rights pillars of our
work. If we can do better on prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding, we can reduce the unrealistic and
dangerous demands on our colleagues in uniform.
Secondly, peace operations should be properly
equipped. It is time to fill critical gaps in technology,
transportation and situational awareness. More
mobility, better equipment and enhanced training
and intelligence will allow us to do a better job and,
eventually, with smaller numbers.
Thirdly, peace operations must embody United
Nations values. Since the earliest days of my tenure, I
have sent strong signals of my determination to stamp
out sexual exploitation and abuse. In one important
sign of progress, Member States are now certifying
prior to deployment that none of their personnel has
a history of misconduct or human rights violations,
and the Secretariat also vets certain senior personnel.
We have just appointed the first-ever victimsrights advocate, and we are taking other strong
steps to promote accountability. In keeping with an
Organization-wide plan to achieve gender parity, I am
making a push for more female officers and troops in
our operations. More women in peacekeeping means
more effective peacekeeping.
Fourthly, we must build stronger partnerships.
The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed in April, is a crucial step. Beyond their troop

S/PV. 8051

contributions, African States have assumed important
responsibilities for peace and security in the continent.
All across Africa, we are working closely with regional
and subregional partners, from the African Union
Mission in Somalia to the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) to the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Lake Chad basin. I call on the Security Council
to enhance its support, including through the clarity
of mandates and predictable funding, in particular to
the G-5 Sahel, in order to operationalize the force in
the Sahel, and to the Multinational Joint Task Force
battling Boko Haram.
Our partnership with the European Union (EU) is
also crucial, and I look forward to signing a framework
agreement with the EU and to exploring the possibility
of establishing trilateral collaborative mechanisms.
These partnerships are especially important given
the multiple tasks that are being undertaken. We now face
the needs of peace enforcement and counter-terrorism,
and the precarious environments in which we operate
require additional efforts. It is clear that peacekeeping
forces are not supposed to do peace enforcement or
counter-terrorism. We need to take advantage of the
complementarity that must exist between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations. I appeal
again to the Security Council to ensure, in that regard,
clarity of mandates and adequate funding.
(spoke in French)
In the coming months, we will advance in the
implementation of these reforms, which should enable
us to better fulfil our tasks. In the short term, I have
asked for a review of peacekeeping operations to be
conducted so as to consider how our operations under
way can better respond to the numerous challenges that
I have mentioned.
(spoke in English)
With the Security Council’s partnership and
support, we can adapt peace operations to meet both
the old and the new tests alike and to be more effective
and more cost-effective.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahamat.
Mr. Mahamat (spoke in French): It is always a
fresh honour and a privilege for us to be invited to speak

17-293773/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

20/09/2017

before the Council. Allow me first of all to express our
gratitude to all the Member States represented here.

the consequences of the crises faced by the African
continent do not affect just Africans.

I am all the more pleased to address them in that
our meeting today is being held in the framework of the
presidency of the Council under the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia. I congratulate and warmly
thank His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn,
Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, for initiating this debate on peacekeeping
operations and for having forged over many months,
along with all the other African members of the Council,
the salutary unity and consistency of our positions, as
well as for their outstanding advocacy work. We offer
them our profound gratitude in the name not only of
the African Union, but also and especially in that of the
peoples of our continent, which we always seek to place
at the heart of our action.

It is because of the fact that, irrespective of their
causes or origins, the problems in Africa first and
foremost affect Africans themselves that the African
Union has always emphasized, and assumed, its
leadership in facing up to them. But we also underscore
that the complexity of the issues and crises involved is
such that no single organization can provide the full
range of responses required. It therefore seems to us to
be both fair and timely for the international community
to recognize, through concrete decisions, the efforts of
the African Union and its member States on this matter.
It is also important to stress that ad hoc arrangements
do not allow for lasting solutions.

Today’s debate gives us a new opportunity to take
stock of and to question our shared, real and good-faith
resolve to move forward on the question of the financing
of operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union through the contributions of the United Nations.
As we see it, swift and decisive progress on this issue
is crucial to bolstering the credibility of the partnership
between our two organizations. For let us not deceive
ourselves: our many meetings and exchanges at the
institutional level, however productive they may be, as
well as our declarations of principle, will have no effect
if they are not followed up by concrete decisions and
actions by all of us.
In that regard, I would like to clearly reiterate
our resolute, ongoing determination to very quickly
arrive at a substantive draft resolution that recognizes
our contribution to the global peace and security
architecture and endorses the principle that African
Union peace-support operations that have the
endorsement of the Security Council could be supported
through United Nations assessed contributions. That is
a question of justice for us.
I often hear that the African Peace and Security
Architecture aims to provide African solutions for
African problems. However, that seems to me a narrow
interpretation of the thinking that inspired the very
doctrine that underlies the innovative tool that is our
Architecture. It seems clear to us that the problems in
Africa are not problems of Africans alone. Certainly,
the causes of those problems are not unique to Africa.
I think there is now a common understanding that
4/35

In our view, a substantive draft resolution on the
issue of the financing, through assessed contributions,
of operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union that subsequently receive the endorsement of
the Security Council would not be a mechanism that
would systematically open up access to the financial
resources of the United Nations. It is understood
that the specific decisions to be taken on a case-bycase basis by the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union on assigning the
mandates of the operations concerned will be subject
to a concerted and collaborative process of analysis,
evaluation, planning and reporting to be conducted by
our respective secretariats.
From our point of view, no relevant argument can
justify our common failings to agree, here and today, on
such a substantive draft resolution. Like all other similar
organizations, the African Union has had failures, but
it remains committed to addressing them. This is not
about our complying with a check-list imposed from the
outside. Rather, it is based on an ethical requirement
that we have set for ourselves, according to a time
frame we equally imposed on ourselves. This ethical
requirement has bearing not just on the strength of our
institutional credibility; above all, it has to do with
our people themselves, who are the very reason for the
existence of our organization.
For us, though, it is also about the need for a
convergence of views. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations should enable regional organizations,
such as the African Union, to contribute fully to the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
view of their proximity to the field, their knowledge of
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

local dynamics and their capacities to respond quickly.
That would confer additional credibility upon the
African Union by virtue of the Security Council being
the embodiment of international legality.
Without delay, we must all equip ourselves with the
means to achieve that goal for the sake of our common
interests. We must avoid opting for the easy way out of
evoking possible failings on either sides in order not
to adopt a draft resolution wisely inspired by tragic
situations we experienced several decades ago — or
even more recently, as is the case of Mali or the Central
African Republic, where we all had to react to events,
whereas we could have shown more initiative.
The African Union’s approach to the principle of
the use of assessed contributions should therefore not
be seen as a hand-out. It is not a question of charity, but
of fairness.
Let me say it again: our continental organization
remains determined to translate the commitments it has
freely embraced on financing and assuming a share of
its peace-support operations. Our efforts will continue
and intensify, regardless of the reluctance currently
displayed by a minority of actors. I believe that this is
a historical responsibility that everyone should bear as
appropriate.
I would like to conclude by urging the Council to
take decisions that encourage the outstanding progress
made by the African Union and its member States and
to pay tribute to the sacrifices made, especially when
such progress is mentioned here at the Organization.
The African Union must be given the right and the
capacity to improve and transform itself dynamically.
In addition, allow me to encourage the Council
to make a concrete and resolute commitment to the
strategic partnership between our two organizations by
adopting a substantive draft resolution on the issue of
financing peace-support operations. That would help us
to avoid validating the criticisms often levelled against
us by our real masters — the citizens of our member
States — for having spent years now making rhetorical
statements and engaging in bureaucratic processes that
quite frequently do not lead to the results expected
of us.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahamat for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramos-Horta.

S/PV. 8051

Mr. Ramos-Horta: On behalf of my colleagues who
served with me on the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO), I commend you, Mr. Prime
Minister, and the Permanent Mission of Ethiopia for
this very timely initiative. I also thank you, Sir, for the
invitation extended to me to participate today. Sitting
behind me is my colleague Ian Martin, who will be very
familiar to many members of the Security Council.
It is very gratifying to us that our report (see
S/2015/446) and recommendations were so well received
by Member States. Indeed, our report was not written
by Ivy League academics or doctoral students without
field experience. I was privileged to work with eminent
achievers with deep experience of peacekeeping and
special political missions. After criss-crossing the globe
in our consultations, our report reflected the collective
experience and recommendations of hundreds of
people from many walks of life — retired and serving
military and police officers who saw wars up-close, and
community leaders and activists who live in the midst
of conflicts.
We acknowledge the extent to which former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon embraced our
recommendations, the consideration they have been
given by the General Assembly and by the Security
Council, and the work already undertaken by the
Secretariat towards their implementation. But the
essential shifts advocated by HIPPO remain to
be achieved.
The three peace and security reviews — on peace
operations, the peacebuilding architecture and of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda — as well as the World Humanitarian Summit,
converged on the crucial need for more effective conflict
prevention and for working to sustain peace before,
during and after conflict. Last month, the Council was
reminded of HIPPO’s approach to sustaining peace
when our colleague Youssef Mahmoud contributed
to its discussion of the contribution of peacekeeping
operations to this overarching goal (see S/PV.8033). The
Council has embraced this priority, and no SecretaryGeneral has made a stronger commitment to prevention
and the necessary surge of diplomacy than has
Secretary-General Guterres. We see it reflected in his
insistence on an integrated system-wide commitment
to prevention, in the way in which he has organized
his Executive Office, in his proposals for reform of
the development system as well as of the peace and
security architecture, and in his appointment of a High-

17-293775/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

level Advisory Board on Mediation — half of whose
members are women, consistent with his commitment
to gender parity and HIPPO’s emphasis on the role of
women in all aspects of sustaining peace.
It is national leaders and stakeholders who have the
primary responsibility to prevent conflicts and engage
in mediation, and the United Nations should seek to
support local and regional prevention and mediation
partners. Our report emphasized that the United
Nations must invest in its own capacities to undertake
prevention and mediation and in its capacity to assist
others, particularly at the national and regional levels.
These core United Nations functions must, we said, be
funded under the regular budget, and not be dependent
on voluntary funding. Member States should support
the Secretary-General in these mediation efforts, both
politically and financially.
Secretary-General Ban wisely asked our Panel to
review peace operations, not peacekeeping missions
alone, and he accepted our recommendation that
the United Nations should embrace the term “peace
operations”. Our intention was not to move away
from the principles of peacekeeping, which we said
remained valid, but maintaining sharp distinctions
between peacekeeping operations and special political
missions should give way to a continuum of responses
and smoother transitions between different phases of
missions. He accepted our critique of the dysfunction
of the present departmental configuration, which has
hampered the effective design and conduct of peace
operations, but rightly left it to his successor to consider
a restructuring.
I believe that the proposals for restructuring the
peace and security pillar, which Secretary-General
Guterres has now outlined, meet the two greatest
concerns of HIPPO. The management of both
peacekeeping operations and large field-based special
political missions by the same department will enable
situation-specific responses tailored to context and
smoother transitions as those contexts evolve. The
single political-operational structure under regional
Assistant Secretaries-General that would link the two
reconfigured departments will not only overcome
duplication and rivalry, but will ensure that peace
operations are designed and managed within their
regional context and in closer consultation with the
relevant regional organizations. Our report said that
the essential shifts we outlined would not be achieved
6/35

20/09/2017

without restructuring. This reform proposal is therefore
to be warmly welcomed.
The Council has been concerned with seeing
reviews of individual peace operations carried out,
and our report itself recommended a review of longstanding missions to assess their effectiveness. We
addressed the shortcomings of the Secretariat’s
policy, analysis and strategy-development processes,
and stressed the need for a core capacity for strategic
analysis and assessment, including in the planning and
review of peace operations. We also recommended that
independent evaluations of peace operations should be
commissioned at key decision points. The SecretaryGeneral’s establishment of a strategic planning and
monitoring unit in his Executive Office is precisely the
reform that has been required to ensure better planning
and reviews — with, I hope, an independent element.
The Council’s decisions in mandating peace
operations on the basis of such planning and reviews
should always reflect the primacy of politics, and I
hope the Council will be stronger in its insistence
upon and support for the political strategies that
peace operations are deployed to pursue. While some
reviews may properly lead to reduction of resources, I
would remind the Council that both the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) and the HIPPO report emphasized that
mandates, resources, expectations and capabilities
must be in alignment if peace operations are not to be
set up for failure.
It is a pleasure to recall in the presence of
Secretary-General Guterres and Chairperson Mahamat
the emphasis our report placed on partnerships with
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
(AU), and to warmly welcome their signature in April
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security.
I reiterate here today HIPPO’s support for flexible,
sustainable and predictable funding for the AU peace
operations that the Council authorizes, and for the use
of United Nations assessed contributions on a case-bycase basis. I emphasize too our belief in the importance
of United Nations regional offices as forward
platforms for conflict prevention in partnership with
regional actors, of which the successful efforts early
this year to resolve the crisis in the Gambia were an
excellent example.
In arguing for an essential shift to field-focused
administration, HIPPO presented the distinct needs
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the field. We know that the Secretary-General,
coming to Headquarters from a field agency, fully
intends his management-reform proposals to provide
the delegation of authority that is absolutely essential
to those who provide the services to the field and to
expedite service delivery and recruitment. From the
HIPPO perspective, both the changes in management
and policy and the operational support that is proposed
to be provided to both Headquarters and the field by
a single department must be rigorously assessed as to
their impact in the field. We urge Member States to take
whatever decisions are required to fully support such
a delegation.
HIPPO’s advocacy of an essential shift towards
more people-centred peace operations has been widely
quoted, and should be taken to heart by the leadership
of every peace operation. Critical for the moral
credibility of a peace operation is effective action to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. The SecretaryGeneral has given the leadership required and has gone
far beyond the recommendations we made in 2015.
We urge Member States to enter into the compacts
he proposes.
In conclusion, in the course of 40 years — when
I first came to the Council, I was 25 years old, the
youngest person in the Chamber — today, as I survey
the Chamber, I seem to be the oldest — starting as an
innocent and romantic believer in the promises and
possibilities of the United Nations, I have seen the
best — when it lived up to the expectations of the people
it deployed to protect — but also shocking betrayals on
other front lines. I have engaged with United Nations
personnel in my own country and in remote outposts
where dedicated field staff have to bear the indifference
of Headquarters, whose envoys descended on us, when
I was in the field, to evaluate the mission, yet things
stay the same. The United Nations can do better. The
Council can do better. I trust that today’s debate will
mark a significant step on the road to the improvements
that the High-level Panel has marked out.
The President: I thank Mr. Hortas-Ramos for
his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/781, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Algeria, Australia,
Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the

S/PV. 8051

Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the United States of America, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
unanimously adopted as resolution 2378 (2017).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia.
Let me start by expressing my appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for his remarks and his
efforts to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping.
We also thank Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for being here
with us today and for his commitment to enhancing
the United Nations-African Union partnership. We are
also grateful to President José Ramos-Horta for joining
us and for his insightful briefing on where we are in
terms of the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
operations two years after the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, which he chaired. presented
its report (see S/2015/446).
Ethiopia welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2378 (2017), and we thank all the
member of the Security Council for their inputs and
contributions during the negotiations. We also thank
all those members that co-sponsored the resolution in
a demonstration of their commitment to strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping as one of the important

17-293777/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

tools in the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.
The adoption of this important resolution has
particular significance for Ethiopia as one of the
leading troop-contributing countries to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Our contingents were among
the peacekeepers deployed in the early days of United
Nations peacekeeping. They were also among the
peacekeepers deployed in the Congo to stabilize the
country in the early days of that country’s independence.
Ethiopian peacekeepers also played an important role
in the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide and the civil
war in Liberia. More than 8,000 Ethiopian peacekeepers
are serving today as Blue Helmets in Darfur, Abyei
and South Sudan. Ethiopia takes pride in its important
role in United Nations peacekeeping, and today we
are pleased to have made a modest contribution to
advancing the reform of United Nations peacekeeping
by proposing the resolution we just adopted.
We are meeting here today two years after major
reviews were conducted focused on the United
Nations peace and security architecture, as well as
two years after the holding of the leaders’ summit
on peacekeeping. We therefore hope that this debate
will afford us an opportunity to reflect on how far we
have come in undertaking a reform of United Nations
peacekeeping and to chart the way forward. I am glad
to highlight four points in that regard.
First, we believe the Council has a key role in
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping, as its
mandates authorizes the missions’ deployment.
Therefore, adequate implementation and follow-up by
the Council of United Nations peacekeeping reform,
in accordance with existing mandates and procedures,
is extremely important. We welcome the decision
by the Council today to entrust its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations with reviewing reform
initiatives, in close cooperation with other Member
States, including troop- and police-contributing
countries and host countries.
Secondly, as much as United Nations peacekeeping
reform is important, the Council has not held a
dedicated debate to discuss this issue comprehensively
and assess the progress made. That is why we welcome
the decision to hold this annual debate on the basis
of a comprehensive annual briefing by the SecretaryGeneral. It is also essential that the discussion take
place at this time of the year, when world leaders gather
8/35

20/09/2017

in New York for the opening of the General Assembly’s
annual session, in order to keep peacekeeping reform
high on the agenda.
Thirdly, we all know that the environment under
which many peacekeepers operate has dramatically
changed, but peacekeepers are not equipped with the
necessary capabilities to carry out their mandates and
protect civilians while also ensuring their own safety
and security. That is why, two years ago, a number
of commitments and pledges were made to address
this issue. We welcome the updates provided by the
Secretary-General to the Security Council as part of this
comprehensive briefing on the continuous efforts made
in filling the existing gaps in terms of force-generation
and capabilities and other relevant aspects necessary for
peacekeeping to effectively and appropriately respond
to peace and security challenges.
Fourthly, we appreciate the Secretary-General’s
initiative to reform the United Nations peace and
security architecture, both in the Secretariat and in the
field. It is important that the Council send a political
message to the Secretary-General welcoming his reform
efforts. We believe that his continuous engagement
with the Council and the General Assembly’s various
intergovernmental committees will be very important
in moving the reform process forward.
Last but not least, enhancing global and regional
partnerships is one of the most important pillars of
reforming United Nations peacekeeping. Given the
current global security dynamics, the United Nations
cannot handle new and emerging peace and security
challenges alone, and forging effective partnerships
with a regional and subregional organizations is the
most sensible and logical thing to do. Tht has already
been well recognized, but what matters at this stage
is taking practical steps in that direction, in the spirit
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
including through the sharing of burdens.
Let us be frank: there is a great deficit on this issue,
and it is high time that the contributions and sacrifices
of United Nations peacekeepers and of those deployed
after having been authorized by the Security Council
be acknowledged in an earnest and meaningful way. It
is encouraging to note that the Council has expressed
its intention to give further consideration to practical
steps that can be taken and to the necessary conditions
to establish the mechanisms through which African
Union-led peace support operations authorized by the
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Security Council and under its authority under Chapter
VIII of the Charter could be partly financed through
United Nations-assessed contributions on a case-bycase basis.
Our hope and expectation was that the Council
would go further than that. What Chairperson Mahamat
just told us today encapsulates the sentiments in Africa
on this important issue. Nevertheless, we understand
the dynamics in the Council and we will continue to
engage with members to make progress on this issue,
while building on what has been agreed to today. We
believe this is not only fair and appropriate; it is also in
the best interest of our collective security.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall,
President of the Republic of Senegal, to take the floor.
President Sall (spoke in French): I would
genuinely like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting on implementing the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peacekeeping Operations.
Peacekeeping missions are often deployed in
hostile environments, where armed and extremist
groups target our peacekeepers — not to mention the
lack of cooperation from certain host countries. Too
often, current missions are going beyond the strict
peacekeeping security framework and taking on
aspects such as economic and humanitarian assistance,
protecting human rights, providing assistance to
displaced persons and even refugee management within
host countries. The recommendations set out in the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Panel, as well as those
in the subsequent report (S/2015/682) of the SecretaryGeneral, call for bold measures whose effective
implementation should allow peacekeeping operations
to enter a new phase in accomplishing their missions. I
would like to congratulate Secretary-General António
Guterres for his resolved determination in advancing
the agenda on peacekeeping operations reform.
I would now like to focus on the relationships
between stakeholders. I believe that the Security
Council should strengthen its cooperation with
countries neighbouring conflicts as well as with
regional and subregional organizations — specifically
with the African Union. With that in mind, the eleventh
annual joint consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,

S/PV. 8051

which this year took place in Addis Ababa on 7 and
8 September, should help to further harness the benefits
of that dynamic of cooperation. To that end, defining
the mandates of operations should, from now on, be
based on objective and complete information. Before
any forces are deployed, we must first conduct a frank
and clear assessment of requirements, in particularl
with regard to resources and equipment.
I would like to focus on the example of the
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which we are all familiar with. It is
currently the United Nations most deadly mission, with
peacekeepers being killed throughout the year. Imagine
what MINUSMA would be like without the presence of
the French forces of Operation Barkhane, which took
on the baton of responsibility in January 2013. Despite
the presence of 10,000 Blue Helmets in Mali, today
our soldiers still face unsafe circumstances. Sahel
countries and the African Union have frequently called
for the strengthening of the mandate, to make it more
robust and, accordingly, to provide United Nations
forces with the equipment required and clear missions.
As we know, it is not always a matter of maintaining
peace, as sometimes we have to impose peace to save
human lives. We cannot do that against well-equipped
hostile forces. Therefore, I think that the very nature of
peacekeeping mandates must evolve to avoid spending
endless amounts of money — with the outcome, as we
just heard from the Chair of the Panel, being ineffective.
Another key issue that the Security Council must
address is that of strengthening triangular discussions
among the Security Council, the troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in order to foster a spirit
of partnership, cooperation and mutual trust. In terms
of regional offices, I think the Chair is correct in
saying that preventive diplomacy should be prioritized.
Therefore, we must boost the quality of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. In my
view, they should be respected persons who are able
to speak directly with the Heads of State of the region
concerned. Whatever the case, we need thinking on
this issue. In fact, I think it is not simply a matter of
United Nations officials, but also of having people in
place who can have influence on Heads of State, since
it is the Heads of State who can get those responsible to
get things done.
As Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, Senegal has contributed to the undertaking
of implementing the recommendations of the report of

17-293779/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report, by organizing thematic discussions to support
stakeholder dialogue. Similarly, along with the United
States of America, Senegal co-initiated resolution 2320
(2016), on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, which served to launch a
consultation process between the two organizations
to define the modalities and mechanisms to enable
effective management of the issue.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
commitment to peacekeeping missions. It is laudable
that, through resolution 2154 (2014), the Security
Council commemorated the Senegalese presence
by establishing, on 8 May 2014, the Captain Mbaye
Diagne Medal for Exceptional Courage, to honour
United Nations military, police, civilian and associated
personnel who have endured extreme danger in the
service of humankind and the United Nations.
The professionalism of our troops also depends
upon their ability to refrain from any act of misconduct
that could tarnish the image and reputation of the
United Nations.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, President of Arab Republic of
Egypt, to take the floor.
President Al Sisi (spoke in Arabic): It is my great
pleasure to participate in this Security Council meeting
organized by Ethiopia on the issue of peacekeeping
operations. At the outset, I would like to welcome
the adoption of resolution 2378 (2017), on the issue of
peacekeeping reform, as a step towards enhancing the
United Nations peace and security architecture.
Egypt was among the very first countries to
contribute to peacekeeping operations, having
participated in the first-ever mission, deployed to the
Congo in 1960. Today Egypt ranks seventh in the top
10 troop-contributing countries. We have participated
in 37 missions, with a total contribution of 30,000
uniformed personnel, since we began participating in
peacekeeping operations across Asia, Africa, Latin
America and Europe.
Over the past decades, Egypt has responded to
peacekeeping needs and has never refrained from
participating — even in the most complex security
situations — while maintaining the training, readiness
and capability of its troops as a top priority. Furthermore,
our compliance with the highest standards of conduct
10/35

20/09/2017

and discipline and zero tolerance for any form of
misconduct is considered exemplary. Egypt has also
contributed significantly to building regional capacity,
in particular in the African and Arab regions.
As we welcome today’s resolution on peacekeeping
reform, we hope that it will be the first of many steps
to ensure effective United Nations peacekeeping, while
focusing on addressing technical and operational gaps,
in order to include a comprehensive approach that aims
to prevent conflict and sustain peace. In that regard, the
role of peacekeeping and decision-making needs to be
further articulated. In that connection, I would like to
highlight the following points.
First, without prejudice to the significance of
peacekeeping as the most important tool for maintaining
international peace and security, it should not be the
only tool to be deployed. Peacekeeping should not be
an alternative to preventive diplomacy, mediation,
peacebuilding efforts or any other political, economic
or social tool for addressing the root causes of conflict
and ensuring social cohesion. Peacekeeping should not
be the initial reaction to every conflict.
Especially over the past three years, Egypt has
repeatedly called for a new strategic approach that
includes comprehensive, pragmatic political and
programmatic plans, as well as adjusting mandates
according to political and operational developments
throughout the lifecycle of conflict. Such an approach
is in line not just with the vision of a number of Member
States, but also with the Secretary General’s vision.
I take this opportunity to commend the SecretaryGeneral on his efforts to revitalize the tools at the
disposal of the Secretariat, including its political tools.
Those efforts must be commended and supported.
Egypt believes that such a strategic approach
is crucial in addressing the complex challenges and
consequences of armed conflicts. Most notably, that
includes the weakening of State institutions, the ability
to provide basic services, the breakdown of the social
fabric and other challanges. In addition, that approach
is also crucial given the direct relationship between
conflicts and the threat of terrorism and organized
crime, as well as other threats and challenges to peace
and security.
Secondly, Egypt has always called upon the
international community to prioritize its efforts to
resolve conflicts rather than simply manage them,
which has been the status quo for decades with no
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

potential for a political solution. Unfortunately, this is
very much evident in conflicts in the Arab region and
the African continent, where we witness relapses due
to unresolved political, social and economic causes. In
that context, I would like to echo the conclusions of the
2015 reviews of the United Nations peace and security
architecture, which emphasized the primacy of political
solutions as the basic task for both peacekeeping and
special political missions.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must not substitute
the role of Governments and host State institutions.
Peacekeeping operations must not become trusteeship
mechanisms, rather, they must provide an enabling
security and political environment for nationally
owned reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts in line
with the priorities of those States and communities.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that any
attempts to impose templates of political systems that
have proven successful in countries thousands of miles
away have repeatedly failed. Instead, we must take into
account the political, cultural and social specificities
of every country in order to ensure the success of our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
Along the same lines, I would like to highlight the
important and central role of peacekeeping operations
in the protection of civilians. However, that role must
not override the responsibility of the host country to
protect its nationals. Peacekeeping operations should
instead focus on building host State capacities. In
that regard, Egypt believes that it is imperative that
the mandates of United Nations missions mirror the
priorities and specific needs of those countries.
Fourthly, allow me to be frank. Attempts to
monopolize mandate-formulation by some Member
States without taking into account the concerns of
troop-contributing countries does not aid the success of
peacekeeping missions. In fact, the absence of meaningful
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries is detrimental to the implementation of their
tasks, in view of the lack of a common understanding
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop-contributing countries. Therefore, I call upon
the Security Council to support the establishment of an
effective and institutionalized triangular consultative
mechanism among the three stakeholder — the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries — which would reinforce agreement on
common objectives when drafting or renewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8051

Lastly, it should be undoubtedly clear that the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security falls upon the Security Council.
However, we must also recognize the vital role of
regional organizations in conflict zones, as stipulated
in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. More
specifically, I would like to highlight the role of the
African Union, which represents a successful model
for partnership with the United Nations. The rehatting
of African Union operations into United Nations
operations and the success of hybrid operations
conducted by both organizations underscore the central
role of the African Peace and Security Architecture in
conflict resolution, not just conflict management, on
the African continent.
That partnership and cooperation could be further
developed and utilized based on the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and the African
Union. That is particularly relevant at a time when the
United Nations is attempting to optimize the use of its
resources. To that end, I would like to emphasize the
importance of implementing the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which was signed in April.
Moreover, the United Nations must also develop
its partnership with other regional organizations
and contribute to enhancing their effectiveness in
responding to regional conflicts by developing their
mediation and early-warning tools and cooperating with
them to deploy observers and peacekeeping missions,
if required. In that regard, I would like to highlight
the potential role that the League of Arab States could
play in support of promoting peace and stability in the
Arab region.
In conclusion, as one of the top troop- and
police-contributing countries, Egypt is committed to
continuing to play its regional and international role in
addressing challenges to peace, security and stability
through its active participation in international and
regional organizations and its robust contributions to
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Petro Poroshenko, President of Ukraine, to take
the floor.
President Poroshenko: First of all, I thank you,
Mr. President, for making this summit possible. It is
only fair that this seminal meeting is taking place during

17-2937711/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Ethiopia’s presidency of the Security Council — a
nation with an outstanding peacekeeping record.
It is undoubtedly true that, to be up to speed
with an unpredictable world, the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour badly needs reform, as does
the whole United Nations system. That is why it is high
time to assess the current state of play, ongoing reform
efforts and prospects for United Nations peacekeeping.
I sincerely hope that this debate, along with resolution
2378 (2017), which we just adopted, and which Ukraine
co-sponsored, will contribute to this vital exercise.
I must admit that, since the latest discussion of
this issue, at the leaders’ summit on peacekeeping in
2015, the world is becoming less and less safe. War and
aggression are spreading, while peace and goodwill
are in retreat. Our Organization, which was created
to secure peace and stability in the world, cannot
afford to stand aside. It must be proactive, as outlined
in the reviews of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding capabilities, which regrettably remain
under-implemented in practice. In that light, we welcome
and fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General
to develop and implement a robust, comprehensive
United Nations reform agenda that rightly focuses on
strengthening the United Nations peace and security
architecture. I see a number of essential ingredients for
success in that regard.
The first is a truly proactive role for the SecretaryGeneral in carrying out his responsibilities as set out in
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations.
No less important is the task of protecting civilians,
which has evolved into an integral part of peacekeeping.
Due attention should also be given to securing
proper funding and sufficient capabilities, including
aviation assets, advanced intelligence and modern
technologies. Moving from traditional peacekeeping to
cost-effective smart peacekeeping is long overdue.
Last, but not least, I commend the initiative of the
Secretary-General to eradicate the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse, which continues to overshadow
United Nations peacekeeping achievements. As
a responsible Member State, Ukraine signed the
relevant compact with the Secretary-General. We look
forward to its early implementation across United
Nations operations.
I am proud that Ukraine has been a strong partner
of the Organization in peacekeeping activities for
12/35

20/09/2017

many years. Ukrainian Blue Helmets have participated
in United Nations operations throughout the world.
In many cases they were indeed instrumental in
reaching peace, from the Balkans to Africa. Ukraine’s
involvement in United Nations peacekeeping did not
wane even at the height of the armed attack on my
country by the Russian Federation. But today we, too,
need the peacekeeping shoulder of the United Nations.
As the Council is well aware, in 2014 Russia
unleashed an armed aggression against Ukraine and
occupied part of our territory. Russia’s mantra that “we
are not there” does not hold water. It is an undeniable
fact that Russia creates, leads, controls and sponsors
terrorist operations in Donbas. Here is further evidence:
these are the identification cards of Russian officers
and soldiers, some of whom are in Ukrainian prisons
for their illegal occupation of Ukrainian land.
The three-year-long Russian aggression has cost
Ukraine more than 10,000 lives, with over 25,000
wounded and about 1.8 million internally displaced.
In order to restore peace in my country, back in the
spring of 2015 I officially requested that the President
of the Security Council initiate the appropriate
procedure for the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Ukraine. It has since gained
additional urgency.
The situation is not getting better in the Donbas
region, despite repeated ceasefire initiatives. Ordinary
people continue to suffer. The human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine recorded 169 conflict-related
civilian casualties in the period from mid-May to
August 2017, leaving 26 dead and 135 injured. Just
think of this number — this is happening in the twentyfirst century, in the heart of Europe. People’s right
to life, liberty and freedom of speech continue to be
violated on a daily basis. They can be killed for going
to the wrong church, speaking in the wrong language
or simply for disagreeing. If tragedy of this scale does
not warrant a United Nations peace presence, then
what does?
In that regard, I would like to reiterate my request
to the Council to deploy peacekeepers in Donbas. We
need to move forward on this track, the sooner the
better. I therefore welcome the start of exchanges among
Council members on the way forward. Ukraine is ready
to participate constructively. At the same time, I must
reiterate that the road to efficient peacekeeping — and
eventually to the settlement — lies in the unconditional
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

withdrawal of all foreign military personnel and
mercenaries and their weapons and equipment
from Ukraine.
Moreover, reliable international control over the
temporarily uncontrolled part of the Ukraine and
Russian State border should be secured. That is key,
as there can be no success in bringing peace to Donbas
without preventing Russian troops, arms, equipment
and mercenaries from continuing to infiltrate Donbas.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations should restore justice, rather than freeze
the conflict and cement the occupation. Justice would
be to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty over its territory.
Justice would be to make sure that no one can take away
Ukraine’s freedom. While designing such a mission,
all United Nations peacekeeping principles should
be observed. We will insist upon that throughout the
negotiation process, no matter how long it takes.
Let me also reiterate our invitation to the SecretaryGeneral to exercise his authority under the Charter of
the United Nations and send a technical assessment
mission to Ukraine. Based on the mission’s analysis,
possible options for a United Nations political and
security presence in Donbas should be elaborated and
presented for further consideration by the Security
Council. We expect such a mission to analyse and
assess the overall situation on the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that
peacekeeping remains one of the most effective
instruments to make our world safer and to secure
peace. In that regard, let me underscore Ukraine’s
unwavering commitment to the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-President of the United States of America.
Mr. Pence (United States of America): It is a great
honour to be with the Security Council today in the midst
of the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
As we gather at this historic Assembly, I know
all of our hearts are with the people of Puerto Rico as
they face Hurricane Maria and its aftermath, as well
as with the people of Mexico City. Even now, as first
responders and families seek to save the lost and find
those that are injured in the midst of the earthquake that
has now claimed more than 200 lives, our hearts and
our prayers are with the people of Puerto Rico and the
people of Mexico as we gather.

S/PV. 8051

We are here today to discuss what I believe is the
most important mission of the United Nations: keeping
the peace. Let me begin by thanking Ethiopia for
introducing resolution 2378 (2017), on peacekeeping
reform. It was my honour, as Vice-President of the
United States, to cast a vote in favour of the resolution.
As President Trump said yesterday in his historic
address to the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3), just
as each of us should always put our country first, we
will always put America first. But as his words and, I
hope, our presence here attest, America first does not
mean America alone. As the President said, we will
forever be a great friend to the world. It is because of that
commitment that he sent me here today to the Security
Council to reiterate our call for fundamental reforms
of United Nations peacekeeping and our determination
to see this institution do even more to keep the peace
across the wider world.
President Trump and I firmly believe that the United
Nations must act to make its peacekeeping operations
more efficient, more effective, more accountable and
more credible. Ambassador Haley previously laid out
the United States principles for peacekeeping reform,
and we are all familiar with them. Peacekeeping
missions must support a political solution and have
the consent of the host country. Its mandates must
be realistic and achievable. Every mission must have
an exit strategy. And United Nations peacekeeping
missions must adjust to progress and failure. In short,
when a mission succeeds we should not prolong it; when
a mission underperforms we should restructure it; and
when a mission consistently fails to fulfil the mandates
of the Council, we should end it.
We urge the United Nations to analyse all
peacekeeping operations in the light of those principles
so that missions most effectively advance peace across
the wider world — after all, keeping the peace is at
the heart of the United Nations mission. The very first
words of the Charter of the United Nations are “to
maintain international peace”. Just yesterday President
Trump challenged this great body to rededicate itself
to that noble goal, and I do so today on behalf of our
nation before the Security Council.
History records that the United Nations was forged
in the fading embers of the Second World War, the
most destructive conflict in the history of the world.
The United States of America, with our allies, emerged
victorious, but in that victory we vowed to come

17-2937713/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

together to prevent dictators and demagogues from
ever threatening the peace that we had won through
our shared sacrifice. As President Harry Truman told
us then, it was not sufficient to merely check madmen
who would plan world domination, but rather to bring
together again “a mighty combination of nations
founded upon justice for peace”. And so we founded
this great body, the United Nations.
That was the rallying cry of the United Nations in
the twentieth century, and so it must be again in the
twenty-first century.
But keeping the peace requires more than
peacekeeping; it requires action and the unwavering
resolve of every country represented here today. For as
President Trump observed yesterday, we are once again
confronted “by those who threaten us with chaos, with
turmoil and terror”, who seek to undermine sovereignty,
prosperity and security — all of which the President
called the “pillars of peace”.
In Eastern Europe, Russia continues to compromise
the sovereignty of its neighbours as it seeks to redraw
international borders by force. Radical Islamic terrorism
continues to beset nations, with barbarous attacks in
Barcelona, Paris and London. In the Middle East, the
world’s leading State sponsor of terrorism continues to
flout the spirit of the Iran deal, destabilizing the region
and brazenly threatening the security of sovereign
nations. And as the world has seen in just the past few
days, a depraved regime in North Korea is relentlessly
pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles and
now, as the President said, “threatens the entire world
with unthinkable loss of human life”.
The United States is grateful to see the Security
Council unanimously adopt resolutions 2371 (2017)
and 2375 (2017), which impose tough new sanctions
on the North Korean regime. But to be clear, the
United States of America will continue to bring the
full range of American power to bear on the regime in
Pyongyang. We will continue to marshal economic and
diplomatic pressure — ours and from countries across
the world — to demand that North Korea abandon
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. As the
President said yesterday, the United States has great
strength and patience, but all options are on the table.
If we are forced to defend ourselves or our allies, we
will do so with military power that is effective and
overwhelming. We call on the United Nations and the
14/35

20/09/2017

Security Council to do more to keep the peace — much
more — and confront the threat posed by North Korea.
Finally, to keep the peace most effectively, this
organ must have the credibility to pursue peace by
advancing the cause of human rights. It is no coincidence
that some of the most dangerous regimes in the world
are also some of the worst abusers of human rights. In
Iran, North Korea and other despotic regimes, we see
a truth of history borne out once again — those who
subvert the freedom of their people at home undermine
sovereignty and security abroad.
The United Nations is bound by its Charter to
foster international cooperation in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all. That was the purpose under which the
United Nations Human Rights Council was formed,
but the truth is the Human Rights Council does not
deserve its name. As we look at the membership of the
Council today, we see nations that betray those timeless
principles upon which the Organization was founded.
Today the Human Rights Council actually attracts and
welcomes many of the worst human rights violators in
the world.
A clear majority of the Human Rights Council
members failed to meet even the most basic human
rights standards. Cuba — an oppressive regime that has
repressed its people and jailed political opponents for
more than half a century — sits on the Human Rights
Council. Venezuela — a dictatorship that undermines
democracy at every turn, imprisons political opponents
and, as we speak, is advancing policies that worsen
deprivation and poverty and are costing the lives
of innocent men, women and children — sits on the
Human Rights Council.
The Security Council must reform the Human
Rights Council’s membership and its operation. As to
its operation, I think of what President John F. Kennedy
warned more than 50 years ago — that the United
Nations must not become “a forum for invective”.
Unfortunately, today the Human Rights Council has
become exactly that, and particularly the Human
Rights Council has become a forum for anti-Semitism
and invective against Israel.
The Council’s agenda item 7 actually singles out
Israel for discussion at every single meeting — something
no other country must endure. As evidence, the Human
Rights Council has adopted more than 70 resolutions
condemning Israel, while largely ignoring the world’s
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

worst human rights abusers. It is, as President Trump
said yesterday, “a massive source of embarrassment”,
and we call on the Security Council and the entire
Organization to immediately embrace reforms of the
membership and practices of the Human Rights Council
and end the Council’s blatant bias against our cherished
ally, Israel.
Under President Trump, the United States of
America is firmly committed to the cause of human
rights because we are committed to keeping the peace.
Keeping the peace requires more than peacekeeping;
it requires action and reform, and it also requires a
willingness to call out senseless attacks on innocent
people around the world. At this very moment, in
South-East Asia we see heartbreak and assaults on
human rights and innocent civilians that are ultimately
endangering the sovereignty and security of the entire
region. In recent weeks, the people of my country
and the wider world have witnessed a great tragedy
unfolding in Burma, with the Rohingya people.
Recently, Burmese security forces responded to
militant attacks on Government outposts with terrible
savagery, burning villages and driving the Rohingya
from their homes. The images of the violence and its
victims have shocked the American people and decent
people all over the world. And now we are witnessing
a historic exodus. Over 400,000 Rohingya, including
tens of thousands of children, have now been forced to
flee from Burma to Bangladesh, with more following
every day.
Yesterday, Secretary of State Tillerson discussed
Rohingya refugees with Aung San Suu Kyi, and urged
the Burmese Government and military to facilitate
humanitarian aid and confront the allegations of human
rights abuses. While we welcome Suu Kyi’s comments
that returning refugees have nothing to fear, the United
States renews its call on Burma’s security forces to
end their violence immediately and support diplomatic
efforts for a long-term solution. President Trump and I
also call on the Security Council and the United Nations
to take strong and swift action to bring that crisis to an
end and give hope and help to the Rohingya people in
their hour of need. Unless the violence is stopped, which
justice demands, it will only get worse, and it will sow
seeds of hatred and chaos that may well consume the
region for generations to come and threaten the peace
of us all.
As I said, keeping the peace requires more than
peacekeeping; it requires action, courage, conviction.

S/PV. 8051

And so the United Nations must be prepared to do
more, for as President Trump said yesterday:
“If the righteous many do not confront the wicked
few, then evil will triumph. When decent people
and nations become bystanders to history, the forces
of destruction only gather power and strength.”
(A/72/PV.3, p. 11)
Let us therefore rededicate ourselves to the mission
upon which this organ was founded. The first words of
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations — “to
maintain international peace” — must again be our
lodestar, our ideal and our aspiration. Through reform
of our efforts and reform of this institution, through
renewed courage to speak and act whenever and
wherever the inalienable rights of innocent people or
the peace of the world are at risk, we will create, as
our President said, “a more safe and peaceful future for
all people”.
As the world witnessed yesterday, our President is
a man of deep conviction and faith — faith in God and
faith in the boundless capacity of peoples and nations
founded on peace and justice to improve the world. My
prayer today is that this institution might mirror that
conviction in renewed ways, in the faith that, as we
make every effort to pursue peace, the God of peace
will guide us and bless us, today, tomorrow and always,
for this generation and our posterity.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Stefan Löfven, Prime Minister of Sweden, to take
the floor.
Mr. Löfven (Sweden): I want to thank Prime
Minister Dessalegn for inviting us to this very important
event. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
leadership, including his inspiring intervention at the
General Assembly yesterday (see A/72/PV.3) and in the
Security Council today. I thank as well Chairperson
Mahamat and Mr. Ramos-Horta for their briefings.
Few things inspire me more than the energy and
enthusiasm, knowledge, will and determination of our
younger generations. Zaida Catalán, a Swedish United
Nations expert, had all of that. She dedicated her life
to helping others. Earlier this year, at the age of 35, she
and a fellow expert, Mr. Michael Sharp of the United
States, were killed while on a United Nations mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women and
men from countries all over the world have made many
sacrifices in the line of United Nations duty. Some have

17-2937715/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

lost their lives. I would like to take this opportunity,
here in the Security Council, to honour Zaida’s memory
and the memory of all those who have lost their lives in
the service of peace. We also wish to offer our deepest
sympathies to their families.
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and of our pledge to leave no one behind
illustrates the potential of multilateral cooperation. The
joint resolutions on sustaining peace, adopted by both
the Council and the General Assembly, compel us to
prevent and address violent conflict.
Those commitments must guide our work. We
must do everything in our power to prevent outbreaks
of violence, mass atrocities and armed conflict; to
ensure that refugees do not risk their lives making
unsafe journeys; to ensure that the current levels of
humanitarian suffering — the worst humanitarian
crisis since the creation of the United Nations — are
never experienced again. That is because only people
who feel safe and secure will have faith in the future
and contribute to the advancement of their societies.
Now more than ever, we need to come together for
peaceful and sustainable development instead of going
at the task alone and increasing tensions and divisions.
Identifying, addressing and preventing the risk of
conflict must be front and centre of all our efforts.
For seven decades, United Nations peacekeeping has
been instrumental to promoting peace and providing the
conditions necessary for political solutions. We need the
political will, courage and ability to adapt peacekeeping
so that it can remain relevant and adequately resourced
and serve as a means to support political processes and
solutions. That is because achieving and sustaining
peace will always require political solutions, no matter
how effective our missions are in themselves. Let
me mention three dimensions that I believe need to
underpin United Nations peacekeeping in the twentyfirst century.
First, we must address emerging threats and tackle
the root causes of conflict. Drivers of conflicts are
often transboundary and complex. Many of the crises
that the world is facing have come about not because we
failed to see them coming — on the contrary, the signs
of exclusion, marginalization, human rights violations
and political, social and economic inequality were
there — but because we failed to respond early enough
or quickly enough. However, prevention means that
not only must we choose to heed the warnings when
16/35

20/09/2017

they come, but that we must invest in peaceful societies
in order to avoid the drivers of conflict emerging in
the first place. We must address the toughest issues
and find responses that may need to be unique to
each setting, yet broad in scope. A renewed focus on
preventing violent conflict and sustaining peace are the
expressed priorities of the Secretary-General. We, the
Security Council, should whole-heartedly support him
in his endeavour.
Let us recognize the role of peacekeeping in that
regard. More than 118,000 military, police and civilian
personnel — Blue Berets and Blue Helmets — are
currently serving in 16 peacekeeping operations, from
Haiti in the West to Jammu and Kashmir in the East. We
thank the women and men in peacekeeping missions for
the work they do every day on our behalf. Peacekeeping
and prevention can, should and must go hand in hand.
Secondly, we need stronger partnerships. Combining
the efforts of the United Nations for peace with those
of regional and subregional organizations is crucial for
success. The partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) is of particular importance.
I commend the new partnership framework signed
earlier this year. The African Union and its member
States are assuming an ever-greater responsibility
for peace and security. If we want that partnership to
achieve its full potential, we must ensure sustainable
and predictable financing, as well as clear and clever
cooperation on the ground.
I would also like to highlight the importance of the
European Union (EU) as a committed and contributing
partner to the United Nations. The Treaty on European
Union enshrines the core principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. I hope that the partnership between
the EU and the United Nations can be developed
even further. I hope for the same with respect to the
trilateral relationship between the EU, the AU and the
United Nations.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping should
evolve on the basis of evidence and lessons learned.
The experience we gain from our contributions can
help to improve and develop United Nations missions
in order to make them fit for purpose. Seventy years
of peacekeeping have taught us about the need for
the full, equal and active participation of women.
Sweden constantly seeks to increase the number of
women taking part. We have so much more to do. We
have learned about the need for realistic, flexible and
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

properly sequenced mandates. The United Nations
system is at its best when it works together as one in
countries in conflict, using every tool available to
ensure lasting peace.
With Sweden’s largest current force contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, we are seeking to
develop our toolbox by focusing on intelligence.
Intelligence and information are key to protecting
United Nations peacekeepers and civilians alike, and
they underpin informed and strategic decisions. We are
learning to work smartly and to pool our resources. We
have painfully learned that peacekeepers must do all
they can in order to protect civilians under imminent
threats. Additionally, we have learned that there must
be nothing but full adherence to the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Since 1948, more than 80,000 Swedish women and
men — troops, police and civilians — have participated
in United Nations peace operations, primarily in Africa
but also in other parts of the world. They have worn
their United Nations helmets in deserts, dirt, dust and
danger. We see their Blue Berets in Cyprus and the
Congo. That has come at a price. Yet our commitment to
peacekeeping will not falter. It is not weakened despite
the tragic loss of Zaida Catalán and many others.
Rather, we owe it to them and to humankind to succeed.
I would like to conclude with the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, a great leader
who lost his life while serving us at the United Nations:
“Only they who keep their eyes fixed on the far horizon
will find the right road.”
We all know the right road to take. As national
leaders and members of the Council, we must choose
peace, invest in peace and deliver peace.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Paolo Gentiloni Silveri, President of the Council
of Ministers of the Republic of Italy, to take the floor.
Mr. Gentiloni Silveri (Italy): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacekeeping reform. I also want to thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat and Mr. José Ramos-Horta for their
briefings, and to commend Ethiopia for resolution 2378
(2017), which we adopted a few minutes ago.
I think that the issue not only involves the role
of the Security Council in maintaining international

S/PV. 8051

peace and security, but also the role and the reputation
of the United Nations. The sustaining peace agenda
stresses the need for a holistic approach that covers
the United Nations pillars of security, human rights
and development. Secretary-General Guterres went
even further with his vision of the peace continuum,
with a firm conviction that long-lasting peace can be
pursued only by adopting a multidimensional approach
across the whole cycle of peace, from prevention to,
when necessary, peacekeeping, and from post-conflict
recovery to inclusive national reconciliation and
sustainable development processes. We are now called
upon to put concrete actions in place so as to effectively
implement that approach. As a global security provider,
let me highlight Italy’s commitments in that regard.
We are very proud to be the primary contributor
of Blue Helmets among the Group of Western
European and other States, as well as one of the most
generous financial supporters. We are committed to
current United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Lebanon, where we have deployed approximately 1,100
peacekeepers, as well as in Kosovo, Cyprus and Mali.
In addition, Italy has provided capabilities to the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System
in terms of maneuver units that are complemented by
the provision of quality training for United Nations
peacekeepers, based on highly professional and ethical
standards. We deem it essential that a zero-tolerance
policy be applied against Blue Helmets who have
committed sexual violence. It is not only a matter of
fully respecting fundamental human rights, but also
one of United Nations credibility.
The implementation of the sustaining peace and
peace continuum approaches cannot rely solely on the
efforts and commitments of Member States. The Charter
of the United Nations also already recognizes the key
role of regional organizations, which the Council fully
acknowledged as an important resource to provide local
solutions to local problems. In that context, let me once
again welcome the recent initiative by the Group of Five
States for the Sahel and its newly established Force.
The reports and the agreement signed between
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission constitute a significant
step forward and mark the beginning of a strategic
partnership between the two organizations, thereby
paving the way for a broader approach. Today, African
problems are our problems. To concretely ensure
effective operational cooperation, we are in favour of

17-2937717/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

exploring the use of assessed contributions for African
Union peacekeeping missions. I would also like to stress
that it is important to ensure that the appropriate set of
requirements for troop quality, training, equipment and
high accountability standards is met.
In that regard, Italy is ready to provide its full
support through our Carabinieri and defence forces in
countries ranging from Somalia to Afghanistan, Iraq to
Libya and in the Sahel, the Arab Gulf, the Balkans and
Eastern Europe. Wherever our assistance is required,
we spare no effort in capacity-building across the board,
from border security to election security and from
justice and correction practices to fighting organized
crime and trafficking.
We also pay attention to the capacity-building
of peacekeepers, so that they can face emerging
challenges, such as frequent attacks on cultural heritage.
In that regard, let me just quickly remind the Council
of our Unite for Heritage Task Force, established in
cooperation with UNESCO — an endeavour rooted in
our common cultural identity that also resonates with
the Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2347
(2017), on protecting cultural heritage in conflictaffected areas.
We must ensure that the commitments that we have
undertaken in support of peacekeeping are effectively
implemented. Budgetary and financial considerations
are very important aspects. However, we must avoid
prioritizing cost considerations over the effectiveness
of peacekeeping missions. That should be our main goal
if we are to be committed to a long-term solution, as it
is a matter that could jeopardize the credibility of the
Council. We need to demonstrate to the international
community the Council’s capacity to rapidly and
effectively respond to current and new international
challenges and threats to international peace and
security. It is not an easy task, but it is our primary duty,
as established in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now invite The Right Honourable
Mrs. Theresa May, Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, to take
the floor.
Mrs. May (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Prime Minister Desalegn, for convening this debate
and coordinating resolution 2378 (2017), on an issue
of great importance to the United Kingdom. I am
pleased to see its unanimous adoption. I thank our
briefers — Secretary-General Guterres, His Excellency
18/35

20/09/2017

Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat and His Excellency Mr. José
Ramos-Horta.
The Secretary-General has made the reform of
the United Nations approach to peace and security
a priority, and rightly so. The Security Council has
a solemn responsibility that we must uphold. The
Secretary-General has called for the United Nations to
become more coordinated in its approach to conflict,
while seeking to prevent outbreaks of violence before
we are forced to send in peacekeepers. I share the
Secretary-General’s vision for sustaining peace and
fully support the steps he is taking to deliver it.
For our peacekeepers to succeed, we must have
a clear political strategy for resolving conflicts. For
no matter how bravely our peacekeepers fulfil their
mandate, peace will come about only when we get the
politics of conflict right. I am therefore encouraged that
resolution 2378 (2017) recognizes the vital political
role of the Council and of the Secretary-General’s good
offices in resolving conflict.
However, politics do not stop with the peacekeeping
mission on the ground. Just like peacekeepers, the
Council must be willing and capable of discharging its
duty. Too often we are in deadlock and unable to act.
Too often we cannot agree to give a strong message of
condemnation when our resolutions are not implemented
by States. The Council’s own performance in responding
to the situation in South Sudan, where there has been
conflict for five out of the six years the country has
existed, has been found wanting. Therefore, just as we
want to monitor the performances of our peacekeeping
missions, we should monitor our own performance too.
The United Kingdom is proud to be a champion
of peacekeeping reform. In September 2016, in
London, we held the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Meeting, a landmark event with
a communiqué signed by 64 countries, which set out
a path to better peacekeeping. As we look ahead to
the next such meeting, to be held in Vancouver in two
months’ time, we must concentrate on delivering the
vision we agreed upon in London and continue the
progress made since the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations issued its report (see S/2015/446),
two years ago. We want to see better planning of
peacekeeping missions, more pledges of the personnel
and equipment that the United Nations needs, and
stronger performance by peacekeepers on the ground.
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I am delighted to see those points reflected in this
resolution, and will cover each of them in turn.
First, with regard to better planning, to plan our
missions effectively, we must be clear-sighted as to
what they are there to achieve so that we know when
we are making progress and when it is time for the
mission to go. That requires the different parts of the
United Nations — peace and security, development
and humanitarian — to work as one to build a shared
understanding of the situation and coordinate our efforts
to resolve it. When the circumstances on the ground
change, we must be agile in reviewing our missions and
adapting them quickly.
Secondly, with regard to more pledges, collectively
we have generated over 80 new pledges of personnel
and capability in the past two years. That is fantastic,
but pledging is only the first step. We must all turn
those pledges into troops on the ground. In early
July, United Kingdom troops officially opened a field
hospital in Bentiu, South Sudan. In doing so, I am
proud that delivered on our pledge to double the number
of British forces deployed in United Nations missions.
That required patient and determined effort, delivered
hand in hand with our colleagues in the United Nations.
Pledges are crucial so that the United Nations can
always deploy troops on basis of who is best for the job,
not just who is available for the job. The quicker that we
all turn those pledges from words spoken around a table
into real women and men on the ground, the quicker
we realize that goal. I am glad that this resolution
reinforces that.
Work is also under way to improve strategic
force-generation. As we reform peacekeeping into just
mandates, we need to be sure that we have the right
troops with the right capabilities at hand and ready to
deploy. That is why the United Kingdom and France
will hold a debate on this very issue next month.
I am also pleased that the resolution recognizes
the vital role that women play in peacekeeping, as well
as our commitment to double the number of women
serving in peacekeeping by 2020. At the London
Ministerial Meeting, we reaffirmed that goal and
agreed that 15 per cent of all military observer and staff
officer roles should be filled by women.
Thirdly, with regard to stronger performance,
I salute what United Nations peacekeepers have
achieved in often horribly difficult circumstances,

S/PV. 8051

and I pay tribute to those who have lost their lives. We
ask a lot of them. We must give them every chance to
succeed through high-quality training, functioning
equipment and capable and decisive leadership. But
when those standards are not met, we must also have
accountability. The huge contribution made during
peacekeeping’s 70-year history is undermined with
every failure to protect civilians and every instance of
sexual exploitation and abuse. This resolution breaks
ground by calling for the collection of performance data
so we can better monitor peacekeeping performance
and evaluate success. Let me be very clear: sexual
exploitation and abuse cannot continue to happen. We
fully support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and the
Council’s resolution 2272 (2016). That is why I joined
the Secretary-General’s circle of leadership and the
United Kingdom signed the Voluntary Compact against
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
I would like to conclude by recognizing the
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in delivering
lasting peace on the African continent. A secure
funding arrangement for African Union-led operations
can help us to achieve that goal. Resolution 2320 (2016)
and the African Union’s commitment to fund 25 per
cent of AU peace-support operations provide a basis for
us to work towards part funding on a case by case basis
by the United Nations. I welcome further discussion to
establish the role of the Council in deploying and ending
peace operations and ensuring that we achieve common
performance, conduct and financial management
standards across all United Nations and AU operations.
We must also find a creative solution to ensure funding
for the African Union Mission in Somalia on secure
basis, beyond 2018. All options should be on the table
so that the Council can make an informed decision that
is acceptable to all.
I thank all delegations for the vital contribution their
countries have made to United Nations peacekeeping.
I again thank Ethiopia for organizing this debate, and
our briefers for addressing it. Together we can deliver
better peacekeeping, and this resolution is an important
step in that direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of China.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ethiopia for initiating today’s

17-2937719/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

20/09/2017

debate. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Chairperson Faki Mahamat and Chair Ramos-Horta for
their briefings.

intensify cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU in conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2378 (2017). United Nations
peacekeeping operations are facing many new
challenges and problems. China supports reasonable
and necessary reform to make peacekeeping operations
better able to fulfil their mandates. In that connection,
we would like to make the following points.

Secondly, we must strengthen support for capacitybuilding. In response to the African Union’s aspirations
and needs, the United Nations must help with
capacity-building and assist the AU in establishing
permanent forces, rapid response forces and an earlywarning mechanism.

First, the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations are the cornerstone of peacekeeping.
Basic norms governing international relations, such as
sovereign equality, non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other countries and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, together with the guiding principles for
peacekeeping operations arising therefrom, must
always be strictly observed.
Secondly, the pursuit of a political settlement
should remain central to peacekeeping. The political
and peaceful settlement of disputes is enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Peacekeeping operations
should always serve that objective and follow sound
planning in the light of the actual circumstances of
host countries.
Thirdly, the establishment of a solid partnership
is fundamental to peacekeeping. It is necessary
to motivate host countries and troop- and fundcontributing countries, fully leverage the role of
regional and subregional organizations, and forge
closer partnerships.
Fourthly, the reform should facilitate sustainable
development, which is vital to peacekeeping. It is
important that peacekeeping reform help foster a
safe and stable environment in host countries that
is conducive to sustainable development and the
elimination of poverty and other root causes of conflict.
In recent years, some African countries have
encountered challenges in their efforts to maintain
national peace and security. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular, should
comprehensively enhance peacekeeping cooperation
with the African Union (AU). We believe that efforts
must be focused on the following aspects.
First, we must enhance political support. We must
support African countries in resolving African problems
independently and in an African way. We must also
20/35

Thirdly, we need to scale up financial support.
China supports the African Union’s proposal on
financing for peacekeeping and calls upon the Security
Council to come up with a concrete method, as soon
as possible, to support independent AU peacekeeping
operations in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017).
China has always firmly supported, and actively
participated in, United Nations peacekeeping
operations. China is a major troop-contributor and
the second-largest financial contributor. We have
deployed approximately 35,000 troops and 2,700
police to peacekeeping operations. At the 2015 leaders’
summit on United Nations peacekeeping, President
Xi Jinping put forth new proposals to strengthen
peacekeeping operations and announced a host of
important measures that China would take to support
peacekeeping operations. We Chinese always honour
our promises. China has formed an 8,000-strong standby
peacekeeping force and a permanent peacekeeping
police unit, provided training to over 800 peacekeepers
from the United Nations and relevant countries, and
has deployed its first helicopter unit for United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa. China is actively
disbursing $100 million in military assistance to the
AU. We have identified support for peacekeeping
operations as a priority for the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund.
Peace is hard to achieve and even harder to keep.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and
the largest developing country, China knows full-well
the value of peace. We will continue to work with
other peace-loving nations to give concrete support to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and to African
countries. Together let us strive for lasting peace on
our planet.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate
Ethiopia on having assumed the presidency of the
Council for this month and echo others in welcoming
Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn as President
during this important debate. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Guterres; the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat; and President Ramos-Horta for their
insights in connection with a new trajectory for United
Nations peacekeeping.
This new road map of proposed reforms, aimed at
responding effectively to volatile and multiple old and
new conflicts, will promote the three founding pillars
of peace, development and human rights, with politics
and prevention as key priorities.
Kazakhstan fully supports the significant shift
from conflict resolution to prevention and sustaining
peace, together with structural changes and a new
configuration of United Nations entities. These
suggested changes are aimed at bringing about better
working methods and a better culture and ethos than
those prevailing throughout the peacekeeping chain
from Headquarters to the field.
The use of United Nations diplomacy, mediation
and good offices, in partnership with the efforts of
regional organizations such as the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Arab League,
will have far-reaching effects.
Kazakhstan is of the view that the new reforms must
ensure that the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
are upheld together with that of statehood, which must
be preserved. At the same time, States are obliged to
fulfil their legal, moral and political responsibility to
ensure the protection of civilians.
New peacekeeping and peacebuilding approaches
require clear and achievable mandates, with qualified
staff, equipment and resources for peacebuilding
work. Moving away from mere military arrangements,
the focus has to be directed towards more coherent
programmes and new partnerships to reduce costs
and lower the overhead expenditures of peacekeeping
operations through intergovernmental support. The
Council should work closely with the Peacebuilding

S/PV. 8051

Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund for sustained,
predictable long-term funding, so that new reforms
can take hold in a context of a strengthened securitydevelopment nexus.
The Security Council and the Secretariat must
interact with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations system and
other partners, including regional organizations, for
more informed decision-making. Other important
stakeholders in this process are international and
national partners, including humanitarian aid agencies
and civil society.
The deployment of regional forces has proved
effective, as illustrated by the hybrid missions of the
United Nations and the African Union. Successful
examples include the Multinational Joint Task Force,
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Regional
Protection Force, because of their familiarity with the
local terrain and militia tactics. Such cooperation should
be strengthened on many other fronts, as indicated
in the 19 April 2017 United Nations-AU partnership
agreement. Collaboration with regional structures
also facilitates concerted action against terrorism,
organized crime, human trafficking and refugee and
migration flows.
Reforms also mean holding United Nations staff
accountable to the highest standards of integrity and
discipline so as to prevent misconduct. In this regard,
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse must be strictly enforced. To demonstrate its
national commitment to this goal, Kazakhstan has
endorsed and signed the Global Compact.
The use of modern technologies, reconnaissance
assets and forces in peacekeeping missions is necessary
to improve the security and safety of United Nations
personnel, humanitarian actors and civilians. However,
judicial and legal considerations have to be taken
into account.
Simultaneously, integrating gender- and youthsensitive analyses, as well as encouraging both
groups in the context of the planning, implementing,
evaluating and mission drawdown of all operations,
will definitely yield successful results. More women
need to be deployed in peacekeeping operations, with
gender expertise in every mission component.
Kazakhstan is highly committed to peacekeeping
and will continue to send well-qualified military

17-2937721/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

observers, augmenting its contribution annually.
Kazakhstan is currently preparing its peacekeeping
unit, building upon the valuable experience gained
during Operation Iraqi Freedom, a decade ago. As an
emerging troop-contributing country, we are constantly
increasing our level of preparedness, as confirmed by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Kazakhstan has established its own peacekeeping
training centre, KAZCENT, which has already been
acknowledged as meeting international norms. We
conduct courses on a regional basis and will strive to
obtain the status of a regional centre. In that connection,
may I take this opportunity to thank all of our partners
for the tremendous support we are receiving.
Finally, as Kazakhstan prepares for greater
practical engagement in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping, not only do we fully endorse the
proposed reforms, but we also commit to implementing
them in cooperation with the United Nations and other
stakeholders so as to achieve all that we envision.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. Prime
Minister, for having convened this debate on an issue
that you know to be so important to my country. The
issue of peacekeeping reform comes in response to
two requirements that are more important than ever
before: on the one hand, the need for results, so as to
respond to the growing complexity of crises and the
expectations of peoples, and, on the other, the need
for resources in a world in which they are limited and
in which effectiveness is no longer just an option but
an imperative.
This twofold requirement can be seen in all
areas of public action, but the Charter of the United
Nations conferred upon us a unique responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This responsibility creates immense expectations and
requires that we commit to ceaselessly analysing our
actions; our capacity to address crises; our successes,
because they do exist; and our limitations.
Here I will not resort to facile criticisms of
peacekeeping to the effect that it is useless, ineffective
and too costly, for we must not overlook the considerable
progress that has been made in recent years or the reality
that United Nations peacekeeping operations often are
22/35

20/09/2017

the sole guarantors of a minimum level of security and
a minimum level of civilian protection.
Here I wish to pay tribute to the 120,000 military,
police and civilians who are deployed throughout the
world in difficult theatres of operations and who daily
serve on our behalf as messengers and actors for peace.
However, we must also pay attention to criticism.
We must not underestimate it; it must be our compass for
tirelessly seeking better responses. It is this constructive
criticism exercise that must enable us to move towards
more effective and efficient peacekeeping, strengthen
what we can do better, change what we can do differently
and stop what we do not know how to do.
It can be difficult, in certain theatres, to see an
end to peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been deployed in that
country for 18 years, and prospects for withdrawal
remain remote. In South Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, which was created to support
the emergence of the youngest State in the world, now
faces a civil war and a humanitarian crisis that it is
having great difficulting addressing. In Mali, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which was deployed to stabilize a
country facing terrorist threats, has the sad record of
being the deadliest United Nations operation.
This simple list shows the limits that we have
reached. The United Nations has become the answer to
all ills, and it is expected to deal with, at the lowest
cost possible, the full spectrum of crises and ensure the
protection of civilians, stabilization, security, justice,
reintegration, human rights, humanitarian assistance
and support for the political process. This is no
longer tenable.
The other obstacle is the temptation to substitute,
in cases where peacekeeping has been established by
importing solutions from outside. We thought that by
deploying 10,000 or so soldiers in support of a peace
agreement we could settle conflicts for good. We have
now seen the limitations of that approach in South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A
massive peacekeeper presence no longer guarantees
that we will be able to have a decisive influence on
the choices of the stakeholders involved in a crisis or
conflict. With that in mind, I believe that it is time to
update our way of thinking and consider two avenues.
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

First, we must strengthen States’ capacities, also
known as reforming the security sector. The fact that it is
so often discussed without actually being accomplished
has made the term something of a bogeyman. However,
if supported by a credible political process, it is key to
achieving sustainable security. We must acknowledge
that we have not succeeded in that area. We must
continue to reflect on it and come up with new responses
so as to better engage and involve host countries and
those that are the most affected in taking charge of
their own security. That was what we were hoping for
in supporting the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), five States that are dealing with the
threat of terrorism and every kind of trafficking and
that have decided to overcome their differences, pool
their limited resources, coordinate their efforts and
take joint action. They are also some of the poorest
countries in the world, facing a threat that concerns
us all. We therefore have a collective responsibility to
support them. That is the first avenue — strengthening
State capacities.
The second concerns more generally the importance
of finding the tools best adapted to evolving threats
and complex crises, such as President Macky Sall
referred to earlier. Today in Mali we are dealing with a
paradox. On the one hand, we have the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), established under Chapter VII,
which has considerable resources but no mandate
to combat terrorism, for reasons with which we are
familiar. On the other hand, there is the Force conjointe
du G5 Sahel, which has a mandate to counter terrorism
but few if any resources, and must plead for support
from its partners without any guarantees or visibility.
That is not good enough, and if granting MINUSMA a
counter-terrorism mandate is not the solution, we must
come up with something else.
Of course, as has been pointed out several times,
the United Nations does not have a monopoly on
crisis management. The European Union and the
African Union and its subregional organizations have
become key players in settling crises. We must make
better use of the added value of all of them to ensure
a coordinated, committed response. We must reinvent
the linkages among those tools. In that regard, I can
only echo the Secretary-General’s analysis and the
paths that he highlighted in his opening address to the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3). We must all focus

S/PV. 8051

on our core tasks and, to that end, we must find ways to
help our regional partners become more effective.
In the past 12 months the United Nations and the
African Union have worked hard to come up with
meaningful options for an African response to the
security challenges facing the continent. Some issues,
including the critical one of financing, are still pending
and must be refined. I can hear the reluctance and even
hostility to this on the part of some, but I firmly believe
that that is where the future lies. I am aware of the
major efforts that the African Union has undertaken,
and France stands ready to work together with our
African partners to fulfil the commitments made in the
Security Council, when the time comes.
I would like to assure the Council of France’s
support for its efforts regarding the topic that brings
us together today. France will remain committed to
working for more effective peacekeeping for the benefit
of the world’s most vulnerable peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Mexico for the destruction and loss of human life
caused by the terrible earthquakes.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
the Chairperson of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for their briefings on today’s topic.
We welcome Ethiopia’s initiative in holding a meeting
on reforming United Nations peacekeeping.
In June 2014, the Russian Federation, as President
of the Security Council that month, held an open debate
on the same subject (see S/PV.7196). Even then it was
evident that United Nations peacekeeping activities
needed to adapt to present-day and international
realities. Since that time, a great deal of work has
been done. We have had reports from the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and several
reports by the Secretary-General, and reform of the
peacebuilding architecture is under way. However,
there are new tasks in the area of peacekeeping that
will require comprehensive discussion both among
Member States and in the Secretariat, with the aim
of developing consistent and balanced approaches,
dealing with the fragmented nature of the political and

17-2937723/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

legal foundations, crafting corresponding doctrines
and the timely drafting normative documents based on
the analysis of accumulated experience.
Russia’s principal position is that to settle any
conflict we must first use political methods with
an emphasis on national dialogue, and that helping
to establish the right conditions for that should be at
the forefront of peacekeeping operations. The first,
founding principle of United Nations peacekeeping
is as valid as it has always been — that Blue Helmets
can be deployed only with the consent of the parties to
a conflict.
The second pillar of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is impartiality. It is absolutely unacceptable
for peacekeepers to side with any party to a conflict
under any pretext. Our attitude to strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping missions is one of extreme
caution. Our peacekeepers can use force only in selfdefence and to protect their mandate. The experience of
giving peacekeepers additional authority, for example
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Mali, has
so far not convinced us that the results on the ground
justify the increased casualties among peacekeepers in
operations involving force. If we are to retain the option
of robust mandates, they should be extremely carefully
calibrated to specific situations.
We welcome the ongoing thought process in the
Secretariat with regard to peacekeeping reform. The
Secretary-General has a certain degree of leeway in
administrative decisions, including on organizational
changes in the structure of the Secretariat and United
Nations missions. However, where the political
aspects of peacekeeping are concerned, any changes
must be approved by the relevant intergovernmental
body, and that applies particularly to sensitive issues
touching on State sovereignty. A recent trend, actively
promoted by the Secretariat and a support group from
among certain States, is that of so-called intelligence
in peacekeeping. Of course, peacekeeping operations
consist first and foremost of military units deployed
in regions where there are security threats, and in that
case they certainly cannot manage without appropriate
reconnaissance of the area, but even here there remains
the important question of how the information received
will be controlled and its confidentiality maintained.
However, we will not accept any attempts to
interpret such intelligence broadly or apply it flexibly.
Any transfer of data regarding the operational activities
24/35

20/09/2017

of any peacekeeping mission can occur only with the
consent of the host Government, and only for the
clearly defined, limited, legitimate goals of ensuring
the security of peacekeepers and the protection of
civilians, an approach endorsed by Member States
when they approved the report (A/70/19) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We believe
that it would be unacceptable to interpret arbitrarily the
mandates given by Member States to the Secretariat.
It would undermine the authority of the United
Nations and have an adverse impact on the conduct of
peacekeeping operations.
One very important factor in the maintenance
of international peace and security is a genuine
partnership among the members of the international
community. We welcome the efforts of the regional and
subregional organizations that are operating in areas
under their jurisdiction in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We note
the significant achievements of the African Union in
establishing a continent-wide architecture for peace
and security. We firmly believe that only the proactive
efforts of Africans themselves will make it possible to
resolve conflicts on the continent.
We call on all States to help to ensure that African
countries play a principal role in determining ways to
establish peace and security, in line with the principle
that they themselves have established of African
solutions to African issues. African countries not only
have to deal with domestic problems and conflict but are
also facing an unprecedented surge in terrorist activity
that has increased sharply as a result of adventurist
military actions in the Middle East and North Africa.
The flood of arms and munitions flowing through
Libya southward to Mali, the Niger and Chad has created
numerous terrorist threats in the Sahara-Sahel region.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has ramped
up its cooperation with Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb. In northern Mali and the Niger,
Al-Mourabitoun has launched activities in an attempt
to unite every extremist group in Mali, the Niger and
Mauritania. Al-Shabaab remains active in Somalia.
Russia has continued to advocate for more effective
assistance to African countries in building their
capacity to combat terrorism. We stand ready to share
our experience in counter-terrorism with our African
partners. Hundreds of African peacekeepers and police
are trained every year in Russian educational facilities.
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

African countries are raising the question of material
and financial assistance for their efforts in maintaining
international peace and security, including as part of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, and we are ready to work to arrive at
mutually acceptable agreements.
There are also prospects for cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), an opportunity
predicated on the Russian initiative to establish a United
Nations mission in south-eastern Ukraine to protect the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, with
the goal of facilitating strict and full implementation
of the Minsk agreements on resolving the crisis in
Ukraine. As we know, those agreements were approved
under the Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2202 (2015), and it would not be a good idea to retreat
from them.
Peacekeeping is one of the key areas of United
Nations activities and has enormous practical
significance for the lives of millions of people. Every
Member State contributes to it, particularly the troopcontributing countries. We call for all shared issues
pertaining to peacekeeping to be discussed in forums
dedicated to them, such as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee. I
believe that synergistic efforts at the General Assembly
and Security Council will enable us to better preserve
the universal nature and unique legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Kono (Japan): It is a great pleasure for me to
be here in the Security Council today to discuss the
challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping and its
reform. I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, for his
initiative in hosting today’s meeting, and to His
Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres for his
leadership of United Nations peacekeeping reform.
Peacekeeping is a noble and lofty effort and one
that the United Nations has led for decades in order to
maintain international peace and security. Under the
banner of contributing proactively to that goal, Japan
has made every effort to achieve peace and stability
in the international community, and United Nations
peacekeeping has unquestionably been an indispensable

S/PV. 8051

part of our efforts. In 2015, we enacted a series of laws
on peace and security to enable our country to further
contribute to the diverse activities of United Nations
peacekeeping. This year also marks the twenty-fifth
anniversary of our International Peace Cooperation Act.
During the past quarter century, Japan has dispatched
more than 12,500 personnel to 27 missions, including
in Cambodia, the Golan Heights, Timor-Leste and
Haiti. Most recently, in the longest deployment period
to date for Japanese peacekeepers, we sent engineering
units to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for five years. They repaired approximately
260 kilometres of roads and developed 500,000 square
metres of land. Japan will continue to dispatch staff
officers to UNMISS headquarters and contribute to
establishing peace and stability in South Sudan.
With regard to today’s topic of United Nations
peacekeeping
reform,
Japan
fully
supports
implementing and following up on reform efforts
with the aim of making United Nations peacekeeping
more effective and efficient. Resolution 2378 (2017),
which we adopted today, will be a powerful engine
for advancing our reform efforts, and one that Japan
strongly supports and will work to implement. Among
the many areas requiring reform, I would like to
emphasize the importance of training and building the
capacity of United Nations peacekeepers. Well-trained
and skilled peacekeepers are essential to ensuring
effective and efficient peacekeeping operations, and we
need to fill the gap between the demands on the ground
and peacekeepers’ current capabilities and equipment.
Japan has been a strong United Nations partner in
developing the United Nations Project for African
Rapid Deployment of Engineering Capabilities, which
has been conducted in Kenya since 2015. Under that
partnership, some 80 Japanese Self-Defence Forces
personnel have been dispatched as instructors to train
130 engineering service members from five East
African countries.
Since more than half of United Nations
peacekeeping missions are deployed in Africa, we
believe that cooperation between them and African
Union peace support operations is critical. Japan will
continue to promote human resources development for
social stability in Africa, which is one of the priority
areas of the Nairobi Declaration of the sixth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development. In
partnership with the United Nations and major troopcontributing countries of Asia and Africa, Japan will

17-2937725/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

further enhance capacity-building in the countries of
the Indo-Pacific region. I would also like to stress that
it is important for the United Nations and its Member
States to coordinate their capacity-building activities
in a coherent manner. At a meeting that Japan hosted
last month, in which officials from more than 30
countries participated, the need for such coherence in
coordination was widely recognized.
The Secretary-General’s report on a mechanism to
fill the gap between force generation and capabilities
will be submitted to the Security Council within 90 days
of today’s adoption of resolution 2378 (2017). I hope
its recommendations will be based on best practices,
including the Project for African Rapid Deployment of
Engineering Capabilities. We are committed to further
discussion, based on that report.
I would also like to emphasize the importance
of the role of women in peacekeeping and of the
development of human resources among the young
people who represent our future. It is women and
children who are most affected and hurt by conflict,
and female peacekeepers can provide them with the
appropriate support and address their specific needs.
Women are indispensable to peacekeeping, and Japan
will host an outreach seminar next month in Tokyo
to promote efforts to appoint more senior women to
mission leadership positions. We also aim to expand
the number of civilians contributing to peacekeeping
by enhancing training for young people.
Japan will continue to contribute proactively
to peacekeeping activities, and as a member of the
Security Council, we will take an active part in the
discussions of United Nations peacekeeping reform
and coordinate closely with other member States, as
well as the United Nations as a whole, with the aim
of achieving more effective, efficient and agile United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Uruguay expresses its solidarity with all those
countries that in recent days have fallen victim to
violent climatic events — including Mexico, which
suffered a second earthquake yesterday that caused
death and destruction.
in

I would like to thank the Ethiopian presidency,
particular the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,

26/35

20/09/2017

Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, for convening this
timely and important debate on the process of reform
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I also
welcome the open and transparent way with which
Ethiopia conducted the negotiations for the adoption
of a resolution as important as that adopted today
(resolution 2378 (2017)).
I welcome the statement by the Secretary-General,
and I thank him for the clarity of the concepts contained
therein, which bring the vision of the Secretariat on this
issue of great importance to the membership.
Similarly, we thank the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the representative of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations for
their briefings.
Allow me to reaffirm once more the commitment of
my country to peacekeeping operations, a commitment
that was made even before they were called peacekeeping
operations. Despite its small population, Uruguay has
deployed more than 43,800 personnel in its extensive
history as a contributor of contingents and police in
more than 20 operations around the world. Today the
contribution of Uruguayan troops places our country
among the major contributors in the Americas and
among the top 20 in the world. That decades-long effort
has provided our country with very rich experience in
peacekeeping operations, especially bearing in mind
that more than 80 per cent of our generals, more than
70 per cent of officers and 70 per cent of our troops
have already participated in such operations.
Our country has followed the evolution of
peacekeeping operations in the debate and on the
ground. As an elected member of the Security Council,
we take this opportunity to state Uruguay’s support
of the reform process, whose objective is to make
peacekeeping operations more efficient and effective,
and to ensure that they can continue to filfil the
mandates for which they were designed.
Peacekeeping operations continue to be the most
efficient and economic way that the international
community has to contribute to peace. Therefore,
we should be conscious that budgetary decisions and
policies must always go together, so as to prevent one
or the other from rendering a mandate non-viable. In
that regard, I should like to share some considerations
that are central to my country at a time when there is
talk of reforming the process. They reflect the national
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

position, which we have systemically made known and
defended during our 21 months in the Council.
First, we believe that there are two documents that
constitute the absolute starting point of the current
reform process. Those are the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015/446) and the subsequent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the recommendations
(S/2015/682). The contents of both documents remain
valid and current. Although there has been progress in
the implementation of the recommendations contained
therein, much remains to be done, bearing in mind
above all that the way forward should be based on the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping.
Secondly, we believe that the success of a
peacekeeping operation depends, to a great extent,
on the plans made by four parties with shared
responsibility, namely, the Security Council, the States
or parties in control of the territory in question, the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat. The Council must remain united when
agreeing on political strategies that allow for the design
of operations that encourage national actors in conflict
to make real commitments to lasting and peaceful
political solutions. That must be in addition to more
flexible and adaptable operations, with clear mandates
based in real and appropriate priorities and resources.
There have been improvements in those areas, but they
are insufficient.
Once an operation is deployed with a valid mandate,
the Council has the responsibility to demand and obtain
from the host States full respect and compliance with the
terms agreed in the status-of-forces agreements. Those
documents guarantee the protection of the personnel
that a country voluntarily contributes, and ensure the
functionality of the operation. We must prevent any
State, least of all a State that is part of an operation,
from obstructing missions established by the Council.
As a historical troop-contributing country, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to the responsibilities
of troop- and police-contributing countries, with the
understanding that they are the ones active in the field
and the ones who should implement the mandates.
In that regard, the training of what in our country is
called “the peace worker of the twenty-first century” is
essential, that is, training in the complexity of the tasks
to carry out the whole of the mandate. That includes

S/PV. 8051

avoiding the absence of command, avoiding refusal to
obey orders, avoiding the failure to protect civilians, or
insufficient equipment, to mention some of the issues
that should not be tolerated.
We have seen more than we would wish of that,
in particular when it comes to protecting civilians in
pressing situations. I am not going to relate the national
position on this issue now, because it is well known
and respected. But I would like to emphasize the
contribution of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians to the reform process, given that they refer
to efficiency in the protection of civilians derived from
training and conduct in the field and accountability.
As for the Secretariat, its role is decisive in terms
of guidance and recommendations, its capacity to bring
together basic and higher criteria regarding the operation
and fulfilment of the mandates, and the determination
of the reconfiguration needs of the missions. The recent
budget and staff cuts force Uruguay to reaffirm that any
reconfiguration should be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis and with the full evaluation of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Thirdly, I would like to relate our position on the
evolution of the reform process. We believe that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
has an important contribution to make, as do the Fifth
Committee, the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Secretariat. We
believe that we must begin to overcome the rivalry
between bodies or committees, which slows the process,
since each one has specific tasks that, when summed
up, make a positive contribution. We understand that
the efforts of the Secretary-General point to this in his
initiative to reform the peace and security architecture
of the Organization.
I wanted to make an express reference to the C-34,
since our country has consistently defended its work,
for it carries out substantial and relevant work that, in
our view, deserves special mention, in particular that
having to do with consideration of the recommendations
of the reports of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and of the Secretary-General.
Finally, I wish to speak on how to ensure the
implementation and follow-up of the reform. The
resolution we adopted today includes elements that
will allow the Council to be more active, in particular
through the consideration of reports of the Secretary-

17-2937727/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

20/09/2017

General on progress made, as well as the holding of
open annual debates. We applaud these elements.

partnerships, and new ways of planning and carrying
out peace operations.

In conclusion, reaffirming the ongoing and
unchanged commitment of Uruguay, I wish to recall
that without making systematic the participation of
women, peacekeeping operations will be unable to
achieve optimal efficiency or success.

Bolivia champions dialogue, negotiation and
peaceful conflict-settlement mechanisms. Bolivia
affirms that a preventive approach, in the framework of
a case-by-case study of the context of each conflict, is
essential for an adequate design of mandates, whatever
their nature, in strict respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, while
promoting their national ownership and without using
such operations as tools for intervention.

The President: I now I give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I regret that our
Minister for Foreign Affairs had to leave unexpectedly
last night and could not be here today. In any case,
Bolivia congratulates the Ethiopian presidency for
having organized this debate. Bolivia not only voted in
favour of resolution 2378 (2017), adopted today, but we
co-sponsored it as well.
Also, as you have expressed, Mr. President, the
Government and the people of Bolivia convey their deep
sorrow and offer condolences to the Government and
the people of Mexico for the dead and injured as a result
of yesterday’s earthquake. We extend that sentiment as
well to our brothers and sisters in the Caribbean and in
the United States who have suffered the consequences
of terrible hurricanes in recent days.
Bolivia appreciates the statement by the SecretaryGeneral, in addition to the reports of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Chair of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Two years ago, the United Nations received the report
and recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). Generally,
it examines the different environments and tasks that
such operations are currently facing, and its approach
enables the identification of different priorities and
measures to strengthen them in order to create a
coherent and adaptable system to deal with the new
conflict and post-conflict situations.
We also received the recommendations of the
former Secretary-General, who, in his report of
2 September 2015 (S/2015/682) urges the consolidation
of a coherent and viable reform in peace operations so
as to make them more effective, more nimble and more
accountable to the countries and people they help. The
report states that reform must focus on three pillars:
prevention and mediation, closer regional and global
28/35

On the other hand, in order to prevent conflicts,
it is crucial to strengthen dialogue, negotiation and
collaboration with regional and subregional partners.
This is reflected, for example, in the concerted efforts
of the African Union, through its Peace and Security
Council, and subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States, among
others. Those efforts have led to significant progress in
conflict prevention. Such efforts become more viable
when subregional and regional organizations and the
United Nations share a common understanding of a
crisis and a unified approach for its resolution.
In that regard, we must take into account all
possible support modalities for the financing of peace
operations in a sustained, predictable and flexible
manner, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016).
Those modalities should also be evaluated and revised
in a way that would grant greater autonomy to the
United Nations vis-à-vis those countries making higher
contributions, since that factor could potentially be
used to undermine the very goals and purposes of the
missions. In that sense, mandates must be clear and must
match the reality on the ground. They must be planned
according to the objectives they aim to achieve, and
there must be adequate staffing that is properly trained
and equipped.
It is not possible to achieve the objectives solely
through budgetary adjustments that do not necessarily
match the reality on the ground, and without consulting
with the host country. In many cases, the countries
that can make greater contributions also have a greater
historical debt to the countries in which the missions are
deployed. We believe that a joint strategic assessment
at the time of authorizing peace missions between the
African Union and the United Nations should include,
among other considerations, the financial consequences
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the deployment of such missions, and should be
respected and implemented.
Likewise, in the context of peacebuilding, it is
imperative to comply with the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). The participation of women
in peace processes must be underscored, ensured
and promoted through an active role in prevention,
mediation, negotiation and dialogue, in order to reach
solutions on an equal footing, including in post-conflict
reconstruction, through women’s economic, social and
cultural reintegration. Equally, priority must be given
to the inclusion of an equitable number of women in the
field of peace operations.
With regard to sexual violence in conflict, we see
with great concern that this scourge leaves victims at all
levels of society. In war and armed conflict, it has always
resulted in devastating consequences for humankind.
Bolivia reiterates its support for and commitment to
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy. We also
commend and support his comprehensive initiatives
and his programme of action against sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Bolivia reaffirms its support for and commitment
to peace operations and appreciates the work of United
Nations personnel, as well as personnel from troop- and
police contributing countries — men and women who
risk their lives every day in order to consolidate a lasting
and sustainable peace, in keeping with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is not our intention to shift the General Assembly’s
general debate to the Security Council, but the United
States delegation has brought up some themes to which
my delegation believes it must respond. It spoke of the
current composition of the Human Rights Council. It
is no coincidence that the United States is challenging
the composition of the Human Rights Council, as it is
unable to control it. I would like to call for a sincere
debate on the same terms for the reform the Security
Council — to reform it and to ensure that there is
the full and active participation of many regions that
are unfortunately excluded from the Council by its
current composition.
Similarly, we believe that one of the primary threats
to multilateralism and to the agreements reached by
the United Nations is unilateralism. This morning, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries — which is made
up of 120 Members of the Organization, that is, almost

S/PV. 8051

two thirds of membership of the United Nations, which
has called for the reform of the Council — approved the
New York political declaration. Allow me to read out
two paragraphs from the declaration that touch upon
the statement made by the United States delegation.
The Ministers for Foreign Relations of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(spoke in English)
“reaffirm their opposition to unilateralism and
unilateral coercive measures imposed by certain
States, including those of an economic, financial or
trade nature not in accordance with international
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms and the principles governing peaceful
relations among States, which can lead to the
erosion and violation of the United Nations Charter,
international law and human rights, the use and
threat of use of force” — let me repeat that — “the
use threat of use of force and pressure and coercive
measures as a means to achieving their national
policy objectives, including those measures used
as tools for political, economic and financial
pressure against any country, in particular against
developing countries”.
They further express their
“concern at the continued imposition of such
measures, which hindered the well-being of
populations of the affected countries and that
create obstacles to the full realization of their
human rights”.
I would like to read out another paragraph:
“the Ministers declare to reaffirm their
determination to refrain from recognizing,
adopting or implementing extraterritorial or
unilateral coercive measures or laws, including
unilateral economic sanctions, other intimidating
measures and arbitrary travel restrictions,
that seek to exert pressure on non-aligned
countries — threatening their sovereignty and
independence, and their freedom of trade and
investment — and to prevent them from exercising
their right to decide, by their own free will, their
own political, economic and social systems, where
such measures or laws constitute flagrant violations
of the Charter, international law, particularly the
principles of non-intervention, self-determination,
and independence of the States subject to such

17-2937729/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

practices, and the multilateral trading system as
well as the norms and principles governing friendly
relations among States, and in this regard oppose
and condemn these measures or laws and their
continued application, persevere with efforts to
effectively reverse them and urge other States to do
likewise, as called for by the General Assembly and
other United Nations organs, and request States
applying these measures or laws to revoke them
fully and immediately”.
(spoke in Spanish)
Mention has been made of the Republic of Cuba,
which has been the victim in recent days of a hurricane
that unfortunately caused very heavy material damage
and regrettably brought the loss of life. Despite this
situation, however, Cuba has been sending doctors to
other sister islands of the Caribbean in order to meet
their needs resulting from this natural disaster.
Without a doubt, Cuba is an example of solidarity;
in exchange for this daily solidarity, it has not
asked for anything from anyone — no oil or mining
concession — nor has it placed any conditions on
its contributions. Cuba is also a concrete example of
human rights. I would like many of our countries to
attain the level of education and health that the Cubans
have attained. But most importantly, Cuba is an example
of dignity. For more than 60 years, Cuba has suffered
under a unilateral and unfair blockade, which is why
the General Assembly has met on several occasions to
seek an end to such blockade.
Bolivia therefore demands that the United States
unilaterally and unconditionally end this unfair
blockade, which for more than 60 years has caused so
much suffering for the Cuban people. This failed policy
is unfair and it should come to an end. The new actions
announced by President Trump represent a resurgence
of the financial, commercial and economic blockade
against Cuba and reverses the advances made in the
bilateral relations between Cuba and United States.
Accordingly, the United Nations must abide by its
decisions, and the United States should not only lift its
criminal blockade but also pay reparative compensation
for the damages that it has caused. It should also return
Guantanamo to Cuban sovereignty.
Mention has also been made of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, which is now facing precisely
what 120 Members of the Organization have rejected,
namely, unilateral sanctions and threats of invasion
30/35

20/09/2017

by the Government of the United States, which of
course is seeking to boycott the dialogue process that
is being pursued. Bolivia naturally and categorically
rejects these unilateral sanctions. We reject these
threats of invasion and the use of force, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter. Furthermore, we
wish to express support and solidarity for President
Nicolás Maduro Moros and the people of Venezuela.
Bolivia supports the initiatives for dialogue so that
the democratic means proposed by the Government of
Venezuela may resolve the situation in the country.
Mention has also been made of relations with Israel.
The Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and
China and the vast majority of members of the General
Assembly have clearly expressed their opposition to the
criminal occupation by Israel of Palestinian territory.
Bolivia condemns the building of new settlements as
well as the military aggressions against Palestinian
people. We demand that the two-State solution be
implemented, creating a Palestinian State and an Israeli
State within pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Jacob Zuma,
President of South Africa, to take the floor.
President Zuma: Unfortunately, I am just hearing
now that I have to condense my statement. Although I
had no time to do any condensing, I will try to be brief.
South Africa welcomes the convening of today’s
open debate on peacekeeping operations. For Africa
and for all States members of the African Union (AU),
the issue of peacekeeping operations — in particular,
AU-led peace-support operations — is one of great
importance. The debate is timely, as it comes amid a
manifestation of diverse threats to peace and security
in Africa.
The scourges of terrorism and violent extremism,
as well as the proliferation of illicit small arms and
light weapons, are some of the security challenges that
Africa has to contend with currently. Furthermore, the
emergence of new armed groups and splinter armed
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

groups and the presence of negative forces in some of
the conflict situations on the continent are a source
of concern. Some of these threats maybe peculiar to
the African continent. At the same time, it could be
argued that some threats, such as terrorism and violent
extremism, are global phenomena, with implications
that transcend borders. As such, the United Nations has
an obligation to support regional peace and security
initiatives undertaken in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Significant progress has been made in advancing
the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU on matters of peace and security. In this regard,
we welcome the signing of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, on 19 April. The Framework is
a clear demonstration that African peace and security
challenges cannot be left to the AU alone to resolve,
given their complexity and far-reaching implications.
The Framework will further enhance and consolidate
coordination, cooperation and collaboration between
the two organizations.
The issue of practicable, flexible and sustainable
financing for AU peace-support operations authorized
by the Security Council is one of great concern to
South Africa. While we understand the apprehension
of some Council members regarding the use of United
Nations assessed contributions for the financing of
such operations, we also maintain the view that the
discussions of the Security Council on this issue of
fundamental importance to Africa should be guided
by the principle of the primacy of the United Nations,
through the Security Council, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and by the common
understanding that when the AU intervenes in conflicts
and crisis situations on the continent, it does so on
behalf of the Security Council. Therefore, the United
Nations has a duty to provide United Nations assessed
contributions for AU-led peace-support operations that
are authorized by the Security Council .
South Africa therefore welcomes the steps taken
by the Secretary-General in finding a solution to
this matter. We have taken note of the four financing
model options through which United Nations assessed
contributions can be utilized to meet the financial
gaps in AU-led peace-support operations, presented
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/454) on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations. These include subventions

S/PV. 8051

in exceptional and emergency circumstances; joint
financing of a jointly developed budget; United Nations
support offices; and joint financing of a hybrid mission.
We further note that of these four, the Secretary-General
has recommended that the Security Council endorse, in
principle, the option of joint financing through a jointly
developed budget.
It is my delegation’s considered view that the
Security Council should explore implementing all the
financing model options proposed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on a case-by-case basis, noting that
this will be determined by the nature and peculiarities
of each AU-led peace-support operation. However,
these should be applied in such a way as to build on
the successes while also addressing the weaknesses of
these models by learning from past experience.
I wish to reiterate South Africa’s continued
commitment to the revitalization of the AU Peace
Fund. We support the three windows of activities to be
financed by the Fund. Our evaluation is that mediation
and preventive diplomacy should remain the primary
priority of our peace and security activities so as to
mitigate the impacts of conflicts.
South Africa agrees with the observation in the
report of the Secretary-General, that
“[p]eace support operations are a key tool on which
the international community increasingly relies
to address the challenges to peace and security in
Africa” (S/2017/454, para. 2).
For that reason, my delegation believes that the United
Nations can do more on the issue of financing of African
peace-support operations, taking into consideration
the circumstances under which such operations are
deployed, often at significant human sacrifice. In
essence, this is a fundamental contribution to any
peace-support operation that ought to be appreciated
by the international community at large.
To conclude, I further wish to remind everyone of
our shared goal and responsibility towards a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Africa, in line with the objectives
of the AU Agenda 2063 flagship project, the Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic
of Estonia, to take the floor.

17-2937731/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

President Kaljulaid: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate. We in Estonia remain
committed to Secretary-General Guterres’ reform
agenda. Reforms should take us to a more effective
United Nations, with a clear emphasis on conflict
prevention and mediation. Our peacekeeping operations
must have tangible targets and exit strategies. To be
effective, the operations must have built-in flexibility,
as the surrounding situation is inevitably volatile.
The best information about the changing needs
come from our mission commanders and other field
entities. Applying their suggestions guarantees
automatic adaptation to changes on the ground. In
addition, listening to those in the field and taking into
account what they have to say is good for the motivation
of our field staff. We need those with courage to reach
out to us decision makers. These people are with us only
if we respond in a receptive manner. Thus, we create a
positive circuit of adaptation necessary to achieve our
peacekeeping objectives.
To achieve sustainable peace, partnership with
regional organizations, host Governments and local
communities is vital. It is best done by demonstrating
day after day how important it is for us to protect
civilians, assure the sustainability of the rule of law,
respect for human rights and international law, and
to involve local actors in supporting the core values
underlying all our actions.
Peacekeeping operations need to be complemented
with activities aimed at effectively improving the living
conditions of the affected populations, including the
quick implementation of effective and visible projects
that create jobs and deliver basic social services in the
post-conflict phase. Also, all mechanisms to support
women’s full participation in peacebuilding and
security issues are vital, as they will also guarantee the
best protection of children in mission areas.
We can achieve sustainable peace only if we have
a thorough and broad understanding of conflicts and
their root causes. In that regard, it is unfortunate
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali will be left without its
intelligence unit. The latter provided decision makers
on all levels with unique understanding of the issues
at hand.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have an
essential role to play in securing peace and stability
globally. Unfortunately, peacekeeping operations are
32/35

20/09/2017

sometimes seen as a waste of resources, with a lack
of positive outcomes, but we know that the truth is
quite the opposite, and we must find ways to make that
common knowledge. Communication is an important
guarantee of the continued support of general public.
Wide attention via modern channels is difficult
to achieve, but it is rapidly becoming one of the most
efficient tools for sharing our objectives, actions and
achieved results. As research shows, peacekeeping
reduces the number of civilians killed. Moreover, it is
also cost-effective. The United Nations peacekeeping
budget is less than half of 1 per cent of global military
spending, and it is shared among all 193 United Nations
Member States. That is the simple truth that we have
every right to be proud of while we continue to aspire
to the constant improvement of our peacekeeping
activities, as we should do in this unpredictable world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Mr. Kalla (Indonesia): I thank the presidency of
Ethiopia for convening this open debate.
Indonesia’s commitment to global peace and
security is cemented within our Constitution. As
such, shortly after its independence, Indonesia at once
deployed its first Blue Helmets. Today, we stand as
one of the top contributing countries. We will soon
deploy 1,040 peacekeepers, including those deployed
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
The contribution of the Blue Helmets to global
peace and security is undisputable. However, in the age
of global uncertainty and its ensuing challenges, reform
is needed. Indonesia therefore supports United Nations
peacekeeping reform. I wish to highlight several
pertinent points.
First, successful reform requires collective and
strong political support. Partnership between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the contributing
and host countries must be enhanced. The silo mindset
of the United Nations should therefore be removed.
Secondly, the 2015 report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) provides
important guidelines for essential shifts in peacekeeping
operations. We must translate the guidelines into action.
Thirdly, we must continue to interlink preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacebuilding. They form
essential elements for sustaining peace.
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Reform must reflect the actual needs of peacekeepers
on the ground. Capacity-building is one essential
element. it requires standardized knowledge and
innovative training, thereby enhancing peacekeepers’
capability to protect civilians, while ensuring their own
safety. In the end, the world will benefit from more
capable United Nations peacekeepers.
On our part, Indonesia stands ready to contribute, not
only to enhancing the professionalism of peacekeepers,
but also to promoting the role of women in peacekeeping.
Over the past three years, the Indonesia Peacekeeping
Center has trained peacekeepers from 30 countries,
including 7,000 Indonesian peacekeepers.
The important role of regional mechanisms in
maintaining peace and stability is indispensable. In
South-East Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has created a regional ecosystem of peace,
stability and prosperity. This exemplifies the concrete
contribution of regional organizations to global
peace. The United Nations must therefore strengthen
its partnership and engagement with regional
organizations. Its partnership with the African Union,
for instance, has contributed to overcoming capacity
gaps in the region.
Determined to be a true partner for world peace,
Indonesia will run for election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the term 20192020 in order to create a global ecosystem of peace and
stability, to ensure synergy between sustaining peace
and development agenda, and to combat terrorism,
radicalism and violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Prime Minister of Nepal.
Mr. Krishna (Nepal): Nepal congratulates the
Ethiopian presidency of the Council on convening this
important open debate. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for their valuable briefings.
Peacekeeping is the United Nations flagship
activity in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Today’s peacekeeping operations are not
limited to monitoring ceasefires, but have evolved into
multidimensional operations. However, peacekeeping
cannot do what negotiated political settlements can
do. Also, there can be no development without peace
and no lasting peace without sustainable development.
Peacekeeping efforts should build the domestic

S/PV. 8051

capacities of countries emerging from conflict and
ensure their own impartiality and credibility.
Nepal has been considered a consistent and reliable
partner of United Nations peacekeeping for nearly
60 years now. Over 130,000 Nepalese peacekeepers
have served to date, and 73 have made the ultimate
sacrifice. Currently the sixth-largest troop and police
contributor, and having served in some of the most
difficult missions, Nepal wishes to make the following
points on the reform of United Nations peacekeeping.
United Nations peace operations have successfully
adapted to evolving situations, and that should
continue. Reform should be a continuous process, not
a one-time event. Reform depends on the political
will, commitment, support and solidarity of all
the stakeholders. Selective implementation of the
recommendations contained in major reports cannot
produce the results that we all want.
Nepal welcomes the Secretary-General’s call for a
surge in peace diplomacy. It should be used to speed
up reform in the Council’s working methods, including
by supporting the capacity-building of national
Governments in sustaining peace.
Prevention and sustaining peace should reinforced
with resources for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and coordination with
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries, who need to be there
right from the planning phase.
Peacekeeping missions should protect civilians and
ensure the safety and security of the peacekeepers to
help keep their morale high so that they may deliver
even in adverse situations.
I wish to conclude by assuring the Assembly of
Nepal’s commitment to supporting reforms in peace
operations. Let us all move beyond non-implementation
of the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and work together to
make United Nations peacekeeping successful.
The President: I now invite Her Excellency
Ms. Erna Solberg, Prime Minister of Norway, to take
the floor.
Ms. Solberg (Norway): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the Republic of Korea and my own country,
Norway. In 2014 our three countries established an

17-2937733/35

S/PV.8051

United Nations peacekeeping operations

informal cross-regional group of friends of the United
Nations peace operations. The group has since been
meeting regularly to facilitate dialogue on reforms.
According to the Office of the United Nations high
Commissioner for Refugees, more than 65 million
people were forcibly displaced by conflict last year — the
highest number on record. Behind those figures there
are individual men, women and children — families
that have been broken up and forced to leave their
homes. We must do what we can to prevent, solve and
alleviate the immense source of human suffering.
The 2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) was a milestone
in our efforts to make peace operations more agile and
effective. Together with other recent reviews, the report
represents a coherent set of recommendations to adapt
United Nations peace operations to the increasingly
complex realities of the field. I would like to highlight
three areas where the Security Council can engage and
work in close dialogue with the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and host States.
First, the search for a political solution should guide
the design and deployment of all peace operations.
Security Council members must strive to overcome
their own differences in order to maximize the
Council’s political leverage. Only then can we expect
genuine engagement from political leaders and parties
to a conflict. But ultimately, no outside engagement
can be a substitute for genuine political will from the
leaders of the countries themselves.
Secondly, the United Nations cannot and should
not go it alone. In these times of rapid and profound
changes in the global security landscape, we need a
strong global peace and security architecture led by
the United Nations working in close partnership with
regional and subregional organizations. We particularly
welcome the new strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).
We encourage the Security Council to make the
most of its relationship with the African Union Peace
and Security Council. It is urgent to agree on a more
predictable system for financing and support for AU-led
operations. There will be no lasting peace in Somalia
or in the Sahel region if the African Union Mission to
Somalia or the joint force of the Group of Five States for
the Sahel are not adequately financed and supported.
34/35

20/09/2017

Thirdly, the litmus test for our efforts should be
more effective delivery in the field. It must include
more active engagement with local communities, not
least with women. Effective peace operations depend
on the ability of the United Nations to deliver as one,
often in difficult environments. We are therefore greatly
encouraged by the Secretary-General’s initiative to
overhaul the United Nations management systems to
build unity and efficiency across the system. Priority
should be given to ensure the safety and security of the
personnel we deploy to the field on our behalf.
We are pleased that Secretary-General Guterres
has made continued reform a cornerstone of his agenda,
building on the framework of the reviews. We can count
on the continued support of Ethiopia, Norway and the
Republic of Korea, as well as other friends of United
Nations peace operations. We will keep pressing for
change to allow United Nations peace operations to
fulfil their true potential. We are convinced that the
only way forward is by working together, focusing on
what unites us rather than on what divides us.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
Mr. Linkevičius (Lithuania): I thank the President
for organizing this highly pertinent open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
representative of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for their briefings.
Since the inception of the United Nations,
peacekeeping — a concept that was not even mentioned
in the Charter of the United Nations — has developed
into an indispensable tool for the maintenance of
national peace and security. Over time it has become a
flagship activity of the United Nations.
Today peacekeepers operate in much more
challenging environments than at any time in history.
They serve in areas where there is no peace to keep. The
multidimensional character of today’s peacekeeping
and the new, demanding realities on the ground point to
the urgency of peacekeeping reform.
As a troop-contributing country, Lithuania has a
great interest in making United Nations peacekeeping
more efficient and correspondent to the needs of
the twenty-first century. In October, an additional
34 troops from Lithuania will join the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
17-29377

20/09/2017

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8051

in Mali, making a total of 39 service members — a
contribution to be maintained through the next year.

abuse, and the President of Lithuania joined the Circle
of Leadership.

More than two years ago, the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations published
its recommendations on peacekeeping reform (see
S/2015/446). It is true that the implementation and
follow-up of those recommendations has been far too
slow. Recent peace and security reform initiatives
of the Secretary-General provide us with a unique
chance to build the momentum and keep the spirit
of the High-level Panel alive over the next year and
beyond. The reform proposals and determination of the
Secretary-General give us a genuine hope that the full
implementation of his reform agenda might reshape
peacekeeping and bring the prevention potential of the
United Nations to its full realization.

Much too often, mediation and peace processes remain
male-dominated. While women are disproportionately
affected by conflict, the critical role of women in
negotiating, keeping and building peace in their
communities is often overlooked. The deployment
of women’s protection advisers and human rights
and gender-awareness training are useful tools in
peacekeeping and should be further expanded.

“We the peoples” are the first words of the 1945
Charter of the United Nations. However, today United
Nations peace operations are rightly criticized for
neglecting the very people that the United Nations is
entrusted to protect. The protection of civilians under
imminent threat must remain a key priority in all
peacekeeping missions. In that context, I am proud to
announce that, on 13 September, Lithuania endorsed
and recognized the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians.
We are deeply concerned that, despite the longdeclared zero-tolerance policy towards all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse by the United Nations
and related personnel, sexual abuse continues to take
place. Lithuania strongly supports Secretary-General’s
efforts to act with determination and bring sexual
exploitation to an end. A few days ago, Lithuania signed
a compact on the elimination of sexual exploitation and

The safety and security of United Nations
personnel and peacekeepers in the field must remain
a high priority. Clear steps are needed to ensure that
our peacekeepers have the capabilities they need to
protect themselves first of all and, of course, fulfil their
mandate. Continuous attacks against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and many other peacekeeping missions indicate
the urgent need for our collective reform action. The use
of technologies in peacekeeping should improve earlywarning capabilities and enhance the ability to detect,
mitigate, deter and respond to all types of threats.
That is especially pertinent where peacekeepers face
asymmetrical threats.
In conclusion, we believe that both the SecretaryGeneral and Member States could build on the
emerging consensus to better integrate prevention and
sustaining peace into the work of United Nations peace
operations. Let us unite around the proposed peace and
security reform initiative of the Secretary-General and
fully utilize such unique momentum to reform United
Nations peacekeeping.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

17-2937735/35
