87

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

-------------

New Zea.Jand, as the administering Power, and to the
Niue Island Legislative Assembly for consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-opcration
extended to the United Nations by thc Governmcnt of
New Zealand in connexion with its special study of thc
question of Niue and the Tokelau l,lands;
5. Takes note of the decision of thc Niue Island
Legislative Assembly concerning the futurc status of
the Territory;
6. Expresses the hope that the forthcoming constitutional talks between the administcring Power and
the representatives of the people of Niue will result in
an early realization of thc aspirations of the Niuean
people regarding their future status in accordancc with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of thc United
Nations and thc Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue its
assistance to the Territories in order to promote their
economic, social and educational development and, in
that conncxion, to avail itself of assistance from the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as from competent regional and intergovernmental organizations;
8. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of po.Jitical
education as well as to preserve the cultural heritage
of the people of these Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th p/enary meeting
14 December 1972

2987 (XXVII). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Luda
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Antigua,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its re·solution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolutions 2593 (XXIV)
of 16 December 1969 and 2867 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples,87
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the peoples of
Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent to achieve independence in
conformity with the provisions of rcsolution 1514
(XV),
37 !bid.,
Twenty-seventh Session,
(A/87i3/Rev.1), chap. XXIV.

Supplement

No.

23

l. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implcmentation of thc Declaration on the Granting of
Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Pcoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vinccnt:
2. Rcquests the Special Committee to continue to
givc consideration to this question in accordance with
thc provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Asscmbly, and to rcport thercon to the Assemb!y
at its twcnty-cighth session.
l l I 0th plenary meeting
I 4 Decemher 197:]

3030 (\.XVII). ÜJ1itPtl Nations Fund for Namibia

T/1e General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 Octobcr 1966, by which the United Nations decided to
termínate the Mandatc of South Africa over Namibia
and assume direct responsibility for the Territory until
its indcpcndence,
_ Reaffirming its resolve to discharge that responsibility
m regard to the Territory,
M~n~ful that, _by assuming direct responsibility for
~am1bia. t~c Umted Nations incurred a solemn obligat1011 to ass1st and prepare the people of the Territory
for self-determination and independence,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970 and 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning the establishment of the United
~ations Fund for Namibia for the purpose of putting
mto eff':'c! a comprehensive programme of assistance
to Nam1bians, as outlined in the report of the Secret~ry-Gcn~ral to the General Assembly at its twentys1xth sess10n, 38
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
N_ati?ns from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
w1thm the Territory,
Hai·ing examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the Fund during 1972,39
Bearing in mind that the scope of the programme,
as_ well as i!s financing and administrative machinery,
w1ll be subiect to review by the General Assembly
whcn South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia is
terminatcd,
Noting that the Secretary-General, owing to Iack of
funds, has not been able to carry out the programme in
ali its parts as envisaged in his report submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session in accordancc with its resolution 2679 (XXV),
Noting further that thc Sccretary-General has, for
the abovc-mcntioncd rcasons, found it necessary, inter
a/ia, to dcfcr implementation of the preparation and
investigation of thc long-term measures described in
paragraph 108 of his report to the General Asscmbly
at its twcnty-sixth session,
Recag11izing the importance of undertaking a detailed invcstigation of the human and natural resources
of Namibia, with a vicw to prcparing proposals for a
co-ordinatcd plan of international economic and technical a,sistance, inclmling manpowcr training, to be
::R A 1 8473.
:io A/~841 aml Corr. l.

(;,•neral A,sembly-Twenly-seventh Session

88

implemented in Namibia after the withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory,
l. Expresses its appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the operation of the United Nations Fund for Namibia during 1972 and endorses
the conclusions and recommendations contained
therein;
2. Decides, as a transítional measure, to allocate
to the Fund the sum of $100,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1973;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
appeal to Governmcnts for voluntary contributions to
the Fund;
4. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary
financia! contrihutions to the Fund;
5. Urges thc Secretary-Gcneral to implement the
long-term rneasures and studies outlined in his report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session as
soon as the necessary funds become available;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement
the arrangements for the administration and supervision of the Fund, with the advice of the United Nations Council for Namibia and of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia; 40
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render all
necessary assistance to the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks assigned to him under the present
resolution;
8. Decides, pcnding the cntry into full operation of
the comprehensivc programmc, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme
for Southern Africa and thc United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2 I 14th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3031 (XXVII). Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered tbe question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council far Namibia, 41
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on thc Situation with regard to thc
Implemcntation of thc Declaration on the Granting of
Independcnce to Colonial Countrics and Peoplcs rclating to thc question of Namihia, 4 ~
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General concerning the enlargement of the Unitcd Nations
Council for Namibia, 43
40 Established by the Security Council under resolution 28.,
(1970).
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8724).
42 !bid., Supplemcnt No. 23 ( A/8723/Rev.1 ), chaps. II, nr
and IX.

4~ A/8934.

N oting with satis!action the courageous and manifest
will of the Namibian people to achieve freedom and
independence as a single unified entity,
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the national liberation movement of Namibia, the
South West Africa People's Organization, to participatc in an observer capacity in its consideration of
the Territory, and having heard thc statcment of the
rcprescntative of the national liberation movement, 44
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 4~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
I ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implerncntation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and
subsequent resolutions relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the relevant resolutions of the
Sccurity Council,
Recalling further the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 46 delivcrcd in response to the request addressed to it by
the Security Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of
29 July 1970,
Bearing in mind the direct responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia and its people,
Deeply deploring the continued illegal occupation
of the international Territory of Namibia by South
Africa, in defiance of resolution 2145 (XXI) and in
flagrant violation of its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the efforts of South Africa
to consolidate and perpetuate its occupation of the
Territory by repressive means, including the extension
to Namibia of its policies of apartheid and the further
crcation of so-called "homelands" against the wishes
of the majority of the inhabitants,
Deploring thc use of the Territory of Namibia by
South Africa as a base for taking actions which violate
the sovercignty and territorial integrity of independent
African States,
Afjirming that the basic condition for the fulfilment
of the responsibility of the United Nations towards
Namibia is the removal of South Africa's presence
from the Territory,
Mindful of the obligations of ali Member S¡ates
under Article 25 of the Charter,
Expressing its satis! action at the success of the Namibia International Conferenoe, held under the auspiccs of the South West Africa People's Organization
in May 1972, and commending the declaration and
n.:commcndations adoptcd by that Conference, 47
44 Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Twenty-seventh
Session, Fourth Committee, 2018th meeting.
~;; /bid., 2014th and 2018th meetings.
4 0 Lef?al Consequences for States of the Conti11ued Presence
,,f South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Coundl Reso/11tion 276 ( 1970), Advisory Opinion,
/.C.f. Reports 1971, p. 16.
4 7 See Official Records of the General Assemóly, Twenty·'('Vi'nth Scssion, Supp/ement No. 24 (A/8724), vol. IJ, appcndix II.
