S/PRST/2002/1*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 February 2002
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4450th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 January 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
between Eritrea and Ethiopia”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
The Security Council, recalling all previous resolutions and statements of
its President regarding the situation in Ethiopia and Eritrea, welcomes the
Secretary-General’s progress report of 13 December 2001 (S/2001/1194).
The Security Council reaffirms the commitment of all Member States to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The Council further reaffirms its strong support for the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the Government of the State of Eritrea and the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, signed in Algiers
on 12 December 2000 (S/2000/1183), and the preceding Agreement of
Cessation of Hostilities (S/2000/601), signed in Algiers on 18 June 2000
(hereafter referred to collectively as the Algiers Agreements). The Council
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to contribute to the completion of the
peace process.
The Security Council looks forward to the border delimitation
determination by the Boundary Commission, which is final and binding. The
Council stresses that in accordance with article 4.15 of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (S/2000/1183), which has the full support of the international
community, the Parties have committed themselves to accepting fully the
determination of the Boundary Commission.
The Security Council notes that, notwithstanding the outstanding issues,
the situation in the Temporary Security Zone (TSZ) has remained calm with
the considerable progress made to date under the peace process preserved.
The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and calls on the parties to cooperate
fully with UNMEE.
The Security Council notes that UNMEE has proved allegations made in
the recent past by the parties, including concerning military build-up in the
TSZ and adjacent areas north of the zone, to be unfounded. The Council
* Reissued for technical reasons.

02-21614* (E)

120202

*0221614*

S/PRST/2002/1

welcomes the recent reduction in the use of rhetoric by the parties and
encourages them to continue to defuse tension and exercise greater degrees of
flexibility in their approaches to the peace process.
The Security Council notes that Eritrea has begun to allow UNMEE to
visit some locations in the adjacent area north of the TSZ upon 24-hours’
notification and calls again on Eritrea to grant UNMEE the full freedom of
movement it requires in this area to allow, in particular, for monitoring of
Eritrea’s redeployed forces and hence facilitate expeditious responses to any
allegations, thereby facilitating mutual confidence.
The Security Council reiterates its call on Eritrea to disclose the number,
strength and disposition of its militia and police inside the TSZ and to refrain
from deployment close to the southern boundary of the TSZ, thereby
facilitating mutual confidence.
The Security Council further reiterates its call on Eritrea to conclude the
status-of-forces agreement with the Secretary-General. The Council notes, in
this regard, that the model status-of-forces agreement as set out in resolution
1320 (2000) of 15 September 2000 is in effect.
The Security Council notes the information provided by Ethiopia
regarding mines and calls on Ethiopia to provide UNMEE with further details
on the types of mines used in the TSZ and adjacent areas, as well as more
specific information on minefields already cleared by Ethiopian Armed Forces,
with the view to facilitate the return to home of internally displaced persons
and the forthcoming border demarcation work.
The Security Council expresses its regret that there has been no progress
regarding the establishment of a direct high-altitude flight route for UNMEE
between Asmara and Addis Ababa. It notes with deep concern that the current
extended flight route for UNMEE between the two capitals has significant
security, logistical and financial implications. The Council calls on the parties
once again to work with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
a spirit of compromise to settle the issue for the mutual benefit of all.
The Security Council, underlining the need for confidence-building
measures, calls on the parties to release and return unconditionally and without
further delay, under the auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), all the remaining prisoners of war and release all other persons
detained as a result of the armed conflict, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the Algiers Agreement. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the repatriation yesterday of 25 Ethiopian prisoners of war from
Eritrea under the auspices of the ICRC. The Council encourages authorities
and civil society in both Ethiopia and Eritrea to afford humane treatment,
without discrimination, to each other’s nationals and persons of each other’s
origin within their respective territories.
The Security Council, inviting the parties to make further contributions
to fulfil their financial responsibilities regarding the Boundary Commission,
expresses its determination to support the practical demarcation of the border.
It looks forward to the forthcoming recommendations by the Secretary-General
in this regard.

2

S/PRST/2002/1

The Security Council, expressing appreciation to those Member States
that have already provided voluntary contributions, calls on Member States in
a position to do so to provide further support to the peace process and to
alleviate the difficult humanitarian situation and, where conditions allow, help
facilitate reconstruction and development in both countries, including by
making contributions through the following channels:
(a)

United Nations Consolidated Appeals process for 2002;

(b) United Nations Trust Fund to Support the Peace Process in
Ethiopia-Eritrea; and, in light of paragraph 13 above,
(c) United Nations Trust Fund for the Delimitation and Demarcation of
the Border established pursuant to resolution 1177 (1998).
The Security Council confirms its intention to send a mission to the two
countries in February 2002.

3
