General Assembly-Twelfth Session

26

accorded to it by Mandate of the League of l\ations
dated 17 December 1920,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
makes it incumbent on each Member State to pursue
every available means of negotiation and conciliation
for the settlement of international problems on the
basis of respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter,
Being confident that the Union of South Africa will
wish, in the light of its obligations ur,der the Charter,
to co-operate in a further endeavour to arrive at a
settlement of the question of South West Africa,
1. Decides to establish a Good Offices Committee on
South West Africa, consisting of the United States of
America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, and a third member to be nominated
bv the President of the twelfth session of the General
Assembly, to discuss with the Government of the
Union of South Africa a basis for an agreement which
would continue to accord to the Territory of South
vV est Africa an international status ;
2. Requests the Committee to submit to the General
Assembly, at its thirteenth session, a report on its activities for examination and decision by the Assembly
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee with all necessary staff and facilities.
709th plenary meeting,
25 October 1957.
*

* *

At the 714th plenary meeting on 1 November 1957, the
President of the General Assembly appointed Brazil as the third
member of the Good Offices Committee on South West Africa.
The Committee is therefore composed as follows: BRAZIL,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND

and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

1152 (XII). Economic conditions in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Comsidering that, by resolution 564 (VI) of 18
January 1952, it approved the special report drawn up
in 195l15 as a brief but considered indication of economic conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories
and the problems of economic development,
Considering that, by resolution 846 (IX) of 22 November 1954, it approved a further special report on
economic conditions 16 as a supplement to the 1951
report,
Noting the 1957 report on economic conditions in
Non-Self-Governing Territories, 17 prepared by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
l. Approves the 1957 report on economic conditions
in Non-Self-Governing Territories and considers that
it should be studied in conjunction with the reports
approved in 1951 and 1954;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to communicate the
1957 report on economic conditions in Non-Self-Gov"" Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/1836), part
three.
'" Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/2729), part
two.
17
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/3647 and

Corr.l), part two.

erning Territories to the Members of the United
Nations responsible for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories, to the Economic and Social
Council, to the Trusteeship Council and to the specialized agencies concerned for their consideration.
722nd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.

1153 (XII). Economic development of Non-Self.
Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having examined the 1957 report on economic conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories, 17 prepared
by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Having noted that the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community provides for the association with the Community of certain Non-Self-Governing Territories, 18
Believing that this association may have important
effects on the economic development of these Territories,
l. Invites the Administering Members concerned to
transmit to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, information on the association of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration with the
European Economic Community;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
thirteenth session of the General Assembly a report on
the developments connected with the association of
Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European
Economic Community, taking into account the studies
that may be undertaken in this connexion by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic Commission
for Europe, the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East, the Economic Commission for Latin
America and other international organs, in so far as
these studies may be relevant to the economic development of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Decides to resume consideration of this question
at its thirteenth session.
722nd plenary meetinq,
26 November 1957.
1154 (XII). Scholarships for students from NonSelf-Governing Territories under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX)

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report presented by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
twelfth session 19 in compliance with resolution 931 (X)
of 8 November 1955,
Noting ·with satisfaction the further response to resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954, inviting Member States to extend offers of facilities for study and
training to inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Taking into account the interest in the offers indicated by the steadily increasing number of applications,
"'A/C.4/360.
1
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 35, documents A/3618 and Add.1.
