IV.

34 / 53.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V)
of 23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967,
2451 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2670 (XXV) of
8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971,
2965 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3091 (XXVIII)
of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3457 (XXX) of 10 December 1975, 31/105
of 15 December 1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977
and 33/114 of 18 December 1978,
Reaffirming once again the fundamental importance
of the maintenance of international peace and security
by the United Nations as set out in the Charter,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations 15 and the report submitted
to the Special Committee by its Working Group, 16
Concerned at the lack of progress during the past year
towards the completion of agreed guidelines for conducting peace-keeping operations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and towards agreement
concerning specific questions related to their practical
implementation,
Emphasizing again that only by greater demonstration of political will and conciliation can such progress
be achieved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Repeats its invitations to Member States to report and to provide information on experience gained
in peace-keeping operations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
further compilation of the replies submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above;
4. Urges once again the Special Committee to expedite its work for an early completion of agreed guidelines which will govern the conduct of peace-keeping
operations of the United Nations in accordance with the
Charter and to devote attention to specific questions
relate~ to the practical implementation of peace-keeping
operat10ns;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects".
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1979

34 / 66.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space11 on the work of its
twenty-second session,

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in furthering the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all
States the benefits derived therefrom, as well as the importance of international co-operation in this field, for
which the United Nations should continue to provide a
focal point,
Welcoming the successful completion of the recent
outer space mission carried out jointly for the first time
by cosmonauts from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Bulgaria, within the framework of the
"Intercosmos" programme,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule of law in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space,
l. Endorses the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States which have not yet become parties
to the international treaties governing the uses of outer
space to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, on the basis of the recommendations of the Legal Sub-Committee, has completed
the text of the draft Agreement Governing the Activities
of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies; 18
4. Takes note with appreciation of the detailed
recommendations on the preparation and organization
of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space submitted
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in its capacity as Preparatory Committee for the
Conference; 19
5. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its eighteenth session continued:
(a) Its efforts to elaborate draft principles governing
the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct
television broadcasting;
(b) Its efforts to formulate draft principles relating
to the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth
from space;
(c) Its efforts to complete the draft treaty relating to
the moon;
(d) Its discussion of matters relating to the definition
and/or delimitation of outer space and outer space
activities, bearing in mind, inter alia, questions relating
to the geostationary orbit;
6. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Legal SubCommittee at its nineteenth session should:
(a) Continue on a priority basis:
(i) Its detailed consideration of the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from space,
with the aim of formulating draft principles relating to remote sensing;
(ii) Its efforts to complete the elaboration of draft
principles governing the use by States of artificial
earth satellites for direct television broadcasting;
(b) Continue to consider matters relating to the
definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer
space activities, bearing in mind, inter alia, questions
relating to the geostationary orbit;
(c) Include in its agenda an item entitled "Review
of existing international law relevant to outer space

1~

Ibid., agenda item 52, document A/34/592.
annex.
17 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20).

16 Ibid.,

75

18 /bid.,
19 lbid.,

annex II.
Supplement No. 20 (A/34/20), paras. 84-115.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

76

activities with a view to determining the appropriateness
of supplementing such law with provisions relating to the
use of nuclear power sources in outer space";
(d) Continue to include in its agenda the item entitled "Other matters";
7. Notes that the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its sixteenth session:
(a) Continued to consider both the current preoperational/ experimental phase of remote sensing as
well as possible future operational satellite remote sensing systems;
(b) Continued to consider the United Nations programme on space applications and matters relating to the
co-ordination of space activities within the United Nations system;
(c) Continued to examine the physical nature and
technical attributes of the geostationary orbit;
(d) Considered technical aspects of and safety measures relating to the use of nuclear power sources in
outer space and adopted the report of the Working
Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer
Space; 20
(e) Considered questions relating to space transportation systems;
(f) Achieved significant progress, in its capacity as
advisory body to the Preparatory Committee for the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in its detailed consideration of questions relating to the preparation and
organization of the Conference;
8. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific
and Technical Sub-Committee at its seventeenth session should:
(a)
Consider the following priority items:
(i) Questions relating to the United Nations programme on space applications and the coordination of space activities within the United
Nations system;
(ii) Questions relating to remote sensing of the
earth by satellites;
(iii) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(iv) Co-ordinating role of the United Nations in the
use of space science and technology, particularly in the developing countries;
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Space transportation systems and their implications for future activities in space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical attributes of the geostationary orbit;
9. Endorses the United Nations programme on
space applications for 1980 proposed to the Scientific
and Technical Sub-Committee by the Expert on Space
Applications; 21
10. Approves a continuing sponsorship by the
United Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station in India and the CELP A Mar del
Plata Station in Argentina;
11. Endorses the recommendation that the existing
five regional remote sensing centres in Africa should
receive from the United Nations the technical assistance

and co-operation which could be made available for
such a purpose;
12. Requests the specialized agencies to continue to
provide the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space with progress reports on their work relating to the
peaceful uses of outer space;
13. Takes note of the report submitted by the World
Meteorological Organization on its tropical cyclone project, 22 in response to General Assembly resolution
33/16, and requests the World Meteorological Organization to continue submitting annual status reports on
the project;
14. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments
which acted as hosts to, offered fellowships for, or otherwise assisted in the holding of, international training
seminars and workshops on space applications, particularly for the benefit of developing countries;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with
the present resolution and previous resolutions of the
General Assembly, to consider, as appropriate, new
projects in outer space activities and to submit a report
to the Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, including its
views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
89th plenary meeting
5 December 1979

34/67.

Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

The General Assembly,
Recalling that it has been more than a decade since
the first United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was held at Vienna, in
1968, and that this period has seen rapid progress and
growth in space exploration and the development of
space technology and its applications,
Considering that there is a need to assess these developments, to exchange information and experience on their
present and potential impact and to assess the adequacy
and effectiveness of institutional and co-operative means
of realizing the benefits of space technology,
Recognizing the importance of wider participation of
Member States in the activities of the United Nations in
outer space matters,
A ware of the need to increase the benefits of space
technology and its applications and to contribute to
orderly growth of space activities favourable to the socioeconomic advancement of mankind, in particular of the
peoples of the developing countries,
Taking into account new developments in space science and technology which are being projected and envisaged in the coming decade as well as the new
applications emerging therefrom and their potential
benefits and possible implications for national development and international co-operation,
Conscious of the need further to increase the awareness of the general public with regard to space technology and its applications,
Desiring to stimulate an enhanced co-ordinating role
of the United Nations, which is eminently suited to bring
about increased international co-operation and assistance to the developing countries in the field of exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Recalling its resolution 33/16 of 10 November 1978,
in which it decided to convene a second United Nations

Al

20
AC.105 /238, annex II.
2 1 A/AC.105/233, sect. III.

22

See A/AC.105/245.
