S/2014/173

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Mali,
1-3 February 2014
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 13 January 2014, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had decided to send
a mission to Mali on 31 January 2014. France and Chad co -led the mission, which
included:

14-26016 (E)

Argentina

Marcos Stancanelli, Second Secretary

Australia

Gary Francis Quinlan, Permanent Representative

Chad

Banté Mangaral, Deputy Permanent Representative,
mission co-leader

Chile

Ignacio Llanos, Political Coordinator

China

Shen Bo, Political Coordinator

France

Gérard Araud, Permanent Representative, mission
co-leader, assisted by Emmanuel Suquet, France
mission expert

Jordan

Mahmoud Hmoud, Deputy Permanent Representative

Lithuania

Raimonda Murmokaitė, Permanent Representative

Luxembourg

Sylvie Lucas, Permanent Representative

Nigeria

Usman Sarki, Deputy Permanent Representative

Republic of Korea

Oh Joon, Permanent Representative

Russian Federation

Petr Iliichev, Deputy Permanent Representative

Rwanda

Eugène-Richard Gasana, Permanent Representative

130314

*1426016*

S/2014/173

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland

Peter Wilson, Deputy Permanent Representative

United States of America

Samantha Power, Permanent Representative

2.
The Security Council mission was the first Council visit to Mali. Its primary
purpose, in line with the statement by the President of the Se curity Council dated
23 January 2014, was to reiterate the Council’s urgent call for the launch of an
inclusive and credible negotiation process after a halt of several months in the
convening of the two implementation bodies established pursuant to the Ouagadougou
preliminary agreement of 18 June 2013 — the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
and the Mixed Technical Commission on Security. The mission further aimed at
assessing progress in the implementation of resolution 2100 (2013), notably the
stabilization of key population centres in the north of Mali, the re -establishment of
State authority, the rebuilding of the security sector and the protection of human
rights, as well as the level of deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The mission liaised with the
full complement of Malian civil society and government representatives, as well as
the northern armed groups and the international community.

II. Key issues
Status of the political process
3.
The armed groups signatory to the Ouagadougou preliminary agree ment, the
Mouvement national pour la libération de l’Azawad (MNLA) and the Haut conseil
pour l’unité de l’Azawad (HCUA), called for the full implementation of the
agreement. They reiterated their willingness to canton their combatants and disarm
them upon the signature of a comprehensive peace accord, as provided by article 6
of the agreement. The groups said that they welcome the participation of all regional
countries in the inclusive dialogue and, with regard to Algeria ’s current mediation
initiative, proposed that Algeria join the existing dialogue mechanisms. MNLA and
HCUA called for the negotiations to be held in a neutral location.
4.
The adherent groups to the preliminary agreement, the Mouvement arabe de
l’Azawad and the Coordination des mouvements et forces patriotiques de résistance,
expressed frustration that they were not included in the meetings of the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security and had not been assigned any cantonment site.
The groups insisted on the multi-ethnic character of northern Mali, stressing that
they represented sizeable communities that ought to be included in any
comprehensive negotiation process. The mission reassured the adherent groups of
the full support of MINUSMA for an inclusive peace process. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali reminded them that it was article 8
of the preliminary agreement that had set the membership of the Commission, and
explained that the expansion of the Commission required agreement among its
current members. He recalled that the Commission had not met for some time but
pledged to support the adherent groups’ request.
5.
Civil society, for its part, pressed for the inclusive dialogue process not to be
restricted to the armed groups, but to also include the conflic t’s victims, arguing that

2/11

14-26016

S/2014/173

the conflict should not be seen as rewarding the armed elements for the abuses they
had committed on the civilian population. Civil society organizations advocated for
the inclusive dialogue to be held in Mali so as to facilitate ordinary citizens’
participation. The Malian authorities committed themselves to involving civil
society in the inclusive dialogue.
6.
The President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, expressed gratitude for all the
international support extended to Mali. He recalled his appreciation for the
mediation efforts of Burkina Faso, which had led to the signing of the Ouagadougou
preliminary agreement and enabled the holding of the presidential elections. He said
that he had similarly welcomed Algeria’s offer to gather together the northern armed
groups in mid-January, although he indicated that, with legitimate institutions now
in place in Mali, the Government should take ownership of the reconciliation
process and any new agreement should be signed in Mali. The President informed
the mission that the Government was developing a national reconciliation road map,
whose implementation he hoped the United Nations would support. He stressed that,
in his view, the full disarmament of the armed groups should precede the
comprehensive negotiation process.
7.
The Prime Minister, Oumar Tatam Ly, briefed the mission on the preparatory
steps the Government envisaged prior to the launch of the comprehensive peace
talks. The Government and MINUSMA had already held preliminary consultati ons
on cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. MINUSMA had
planned three workshops pertaining to the lessons learned from previous peace
agreements, cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as the return of State administration and resumption of public services in the north
of Mali during the week following the mission. The Government further intended to
hold consultations with civil society, starting with women’s organizations. The
Prime Minister pointed out that these four events were scheduled in February and
that, provided that Algeria would in parallel conclude the exploratory talks, the
inclusive dialogue could begin shortly. The Government subsequently made
available to the mission a concept note outlining its road map for conflict resolution.
8.
The international members of the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee
stressed the urgency of launching the inclusive dialogue. There was consensus
among those members that the current lapse in the implementation of the
preliminary agreement heightened the risk of further divisions within and among
armed groups and the danger that some may take up arms again. They also pointed
to the danger that the delay in the launching of the comprehensive peace process
could be exploited by potential spoilers. The African Union posited that there was
no alternative to reconciliation. The European Union called for the implementation
of the preliminary agreement without preconditions, starting with the inclusive
dialogue, cantonment and the re-establishment of State authority and services in
northern Mali. Algeria expressed support for the Government of Mali and concurred
that the disarmament of the armed groups would ensue in the context of the
comprehensive peace agreement. Algeria further indicated that the exploratory
discussions under way in Algiers were meant to pave the way for an inclusive
dialogue to be held in Mali. The Economic Community of West African States
underlined the positive cooperation between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the regional organizations. The international partners of Mali
reaffirmed their availability to support an intra-Malian process through a cadre de
concertation.

14-26016

3/11

S/2014/173

9.
All Malian stakeholders reaffirmed their willingness to take part in an
inclusive dialogue with a view to reaching a comprehensive and sustainable
settlement to the recurring crisis. The mission held that only the Malians could
negotiate a sustainable settlement to the country’s recurring crisis, and urged the
parties to engage without preconditions in inclusive talks immediately. Council
members recalled the preliminary agreement, reaffirming that cantonment would be
the first step in the disarmament process and that full disarmament would take place
with the signature of a comprehensive peace agreement. The mission advocated for
the negotiations to start as soon as possible within a pre -established timetable.
Protection of human rights and support to national justice
10. Civil society organizations testified to a marked improvement in the human
rights situation in southern Mali, following the re-establishment of the constitutional
order. They also attested to some progress in the human rights situation in northern
Mali but questioned why known human rights abusers, notably perpetrators of
sexual violence, had not been prosecuted to date. The liberation of conflict-related
prisoners and the lifting of the arrest warrants against former Members of
Parliament, who were also members of the armed groups, in accordance with the
preliminary agreement, were denounced by civil society as infringement by the
executive power on judicial independence. Some representatives of civil society and
armed groups called for the establishment of an international commissio n of inquiry,
as provided for by the preliminary agreement.
11. The Minister of Justice briefed the mission on ongoing efforts to guarantee the
victims access to justice, including cooperation between the Ministry and civil
society organizations to identify and support survivors of sexual violence as well as
between the Ministry and MINUSMA to facilitate the return of judicial authorities
to northern Mali.
12. The Government underlined that it had renamed the former Dialogue and
Reconciliation Commission and reformed it into the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission, which would soon begin its work. The Minister for
National Reconciliation pledged to include civil society in the work of the
Commission, which would be mandated to look into all human rights abuses and
violations committed since 1961 so that no pending claims remain unanswered.
Stabilization of key population centres and deployment of MINUSMA
13. Civil society representatives from Timbuktu and Gao reported that MINUSMA
was only securing cities while civilians remained at risk in rural areas, which was
also an observation echoed by the northern armed groups. The Prime Minister called
for the force to be reinforced, while the Minister of Security called on MINUSMA
to strengthen its cooperation with the Malian army. The MINUSMA military
leadership confirmed that the lack of critical enablers such as helicopters curtailed
its capacity to deploy throughout northern Mali. The Force Commander and the
Sector West Commander stressed the urgent need for air assets that would enable it
to respond in real time to emerging developments.
14. Malian and international interlocutors stressed that the terrorist threat
remained, as jihadist groups had retained significant capacity and maintained their
objective of regaining control over northern Mali. The northern armed groups stated
that they continued to fight against terrorist groups and that this would need to be

4/11

14-26016

S/2014/173

taken into account when planning the further cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of their combatants.
15. The mission was told that MINUSMA would have to play a central role in
securing the northern population centres over the coming months, as Operation
Serval was gradually drawing down and the rebuilding of the M alian security sector
remained at an early stage. The Serval and MINUSMA Force Commanders briefed
the mission on their respective mandates. The Serval Commander underlined that,
except for Serval’s mandate to intervene in support of MINUSMA elements under
imminent and serious threat as provided by resolution 2100 (2013), the French force
would from now on solely implement counter-terrorism activities. This would leave
MINUSMA with the lead responsibility for securing the key population centres,
especially in northern Mali, and protecting civilians.
16. The Serval Commander assessed that the MINUSMA force had performed well
in spite of its limited troops and assets. He stressed the need to deploy the remainder
of its authorized capabilities, noted that the force would need to put into practice its
robust rules of engagement and advised that it procure unmanned aerial systems to
more fully apprehend the terrain in which MINUSMA was mandated to operate.
17. MINUSMA management told the mission that it was simultaneously deploying
additional blue helmets and upgrading the equipment inherited from the African -led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). Only 5,910 troops out of the
11,200 authorized were on the ground in Mali during the Security Council’s visit.
While contributors of 90 per cent of the outstanding military requirements had been
identified by the United Nations Secretariat, MINUSMA assessed that it would
reach full operational capacity only by June. In Mopti, the mission visited a formed
police unit and a level II hospital from Togo, which had initially been deployed
under AFISMA. The mission was informed that Togo’s level II hospital equipment
would be upgraded to United Nations standards upon its redeployment to Kidal. The
MINUSMA Director of Mission Support informed the mission that contracts had
been concluded to erect major joint civil-military bases for MINUSMA personnel in
three key locations around the country. The Government had alloc ated 70 ha plots to
enable the construction of those bases by June.
Security sector reform
18. The European Union Training Mission in Mali and Operation Serval gave a
positive assessment of the performance of the three Malian army battalions trained
in Koulikoro and now operating in the north. Serval and MINUSMA support the
training activities of the European Union mission. The curriculum is oriented
towards the training of individual battalions and the restructuring of the military. It
includes scenario-based, practical training in international humanitarian law and
human rights, with theoretical teaching and practical exercises supported by
MINUSMA personnel. Serval monitors the performance of the battalions that have
completed the training and have been deployed in the north. A few months into their
deployment, the Training Mission debriefs the Malian officers and provides
additional support as needed. Feedback on the performance of the Malian troops
trained by the European Union mission was overall positive, though it was noted
that the population in the north of Mali distrusts the Malian military. It was further
noted that the Minister of Defence was focused on increasing the size of the Malian
military. The European Union mission underlined the importance of focusing on

14-26016

5/11

S/2014/173

improving the quality of the troops to ensure more professionalized forces. At the
same time, Serval, the European Union mission and MINUSMA recalled that the
responsibility for the maintenance of law and order should be entrusted not to the
military but to civilian police. The mission was also advised that rebuilding the
national army and reforming the security sector was a long-term endeavour, which is
likely to go beyond the end of the current mandate (May 2016) of the European
Union Training Mission.
Re-establishment of State authority and early recovery
19. The Prime Minister briefed the mission on the Government ’s plan to gradually
redeploy State administration and resume the delivery of public services in the north
of Mali. He stated that, in the Timbuktu and Gao regions, administrative staff had
returned at the regional and subregional levels but had not yet resumed their
functions at the local level owing to latent insecurity. In Kidal, State representatives
were confined to the main town. The Prime Minister said that the Government had
earmarked CFA 35 billion in its 2013-2014 budget to rehabilitate public
infrastructure in the north of Mali. He further informed the mission that the
European Union and the World Bank had committed themselves to support the
Government’s efforts through humanitarian and development programmes aiming at
enhancing the living conditions of northern communities. The United Nations
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator testified to the major improvements
accomplished in Gao region over the past six months. He said that 75 per cent of
schools and 90 per cent of health centres that operated before the crisis were
functioning again, but later noted that only 50 per cent of eligible children even
attended school. He noted, however, that food insecurity remained high and there
was an urgent need to restore and improve basic services.

III. Observations
20. The Security Council travelled to Mali concerned that the stalled political
process, particularly the launch of an inclusive dialogue towards a comprehensive
peace settlement to the crisis, may threaten the remarkable progress achieved by the
Malian people and authorities over the past year. It was briefed to the effect that,
unless the inclusive dialogue provided for by the preliminary agreement starts
without delay, the deepening lack of trust between the parties and growing divisions
within the northern armed groups risk leading to a radicalization of some elements
and closing this unique window of opportunity to find a durable solution to the
crisis. The Council’s interlocutors consistently highlighted the need for intra communal as well as inter-communal dialogue, and the full involvement of civil
society.
21. After all stakeholders reassured the mission of their commitment to the
reconciliation process, Council members urged the parties to engage as soon as
possible in an inclusive dialogue, without preconditions but within a pre -defined
timetable. They recommended that cantonment continue as part of the negotiation
process paving the way to a comprehensive agreement and full disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the armed groups. The Security Council
reiterated its support to the efforts of all bilateral and multilateral partners aiming at
supporting the Malians in their quest for a sustainable solution to the recurring
crisis. It welcomed the Government road map, including the workshops organized

6/11

14-26016

S/2014/173

by MINUSMA and the preparatory activities planned by the Government with civil
society. The Council reaffirmed its readiness to support the efforts of the Malian
parties through the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and
Head of MINUSMA.
22. Several Malian stakeholders called for MINUSMA troops to expand their
stabilization efforts beyond the key population centres in the north of Mali, noting
the threat posed by terrorist and criminal elements against the civilian population.
The mission expressed concern about the delays in the deployment of the force,
particularly as the stalled political process heightens tensions and the peacekeeping
mission would be called to play an increasingly central role amid Operation Serval ’s
drawdown. The mission took note of the Government’s call to expedite the
deployment of the force and reinforce the cooperation between the Malian army and
the peacekeepers.
23. A number of civil society representatives expressed the view that the crisis in
northern Mali did not stem from ethnic tensions but from development and
governance issues. They called the Security Council’s attention to the
underdevelopment of northern Mali and the absence of work opportunities for the
youth. The northern armed groups also advocated for enhanced United Nations
development activities. President Keïta briefed the mission that he had adopted a
zero-tolerance policy on corruption and stressed that national reconciliation was his
priority, which the mission welcomed as essential to resolving the crisis. He stated
that he hoped to find a durable settlement to the crisis so th at he could then turn his
attention more fully to combating poverty and overseeing the sustainable
development of his country. The mission took note of the convergence of views
among all Malian stakeholders on the need to advance national reconciliation an d
accountability, and reiterated the Security Council’s call to address the underlying
causes of recurrent crises that have affected Mali.

14-26016

7/11

S/2014/173

Annex I
Security Council mission to Mali: terms of reference
1.
To welcome the full restoration of democratic governance and constitutional
order in Mali, following the successful conduct, with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), of
peaceful and transparent presidential and legislative elections i n 2013; to consult
with the newly appointed and elected authorities.
2.
To welcome the initial efforts of the Government of Mali to launch a series of
national consultative events on the situation in the north of Mali and to encourage
further steps towards consolidating stability, advancing national reconciliation,
fostering social cohesion and addressing the underlying causes of recurrent crises
which have affected Mali; to assess progress on conflict mitigation and prevention
activities at the national and local levels, including through local partners, and the
national dialogue and reconciliation process, including through the participation of
civil society.
3.
To reiterate the urgent call of the Security Council for an inclusive and
credible negotiation process open to all communities of the north of Mali, with the
goal of securing a durable political resolution to the crisis and long -term peace and
stability throughout the country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Malian State, as called for in the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement of 18 June 2013.
4.
To underscore the call of the Security Council for all the signatories of the
Preliminary Agreement and those armed groups in the north of Mali that have cut
off all ties with terrorist organizations and committed unconditionally to the
Agreement to swiftly and fully implement its provisions, including the cantonment
of armed groups, the progressive re-establishment of State administration
throughout the country and the launching of inclusive and credible peace talks.
5.
To reiterate the full support of the Security Council for the facilitation of an
inclusive process through the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali, in close coordination with the international community,
including the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and
the European Union in accordance with paragraph 4 of Council resolution 2100
(2013), towards the restoration of peace and security throughout the national
territory of Mali, in the context of a comprehensive agreement ending the crisis.
6.
To reiterate the call of the Security Council for all relevant Malian parties to
agree without any delay on active measures to further the cantonment of armed
groups as an essential step leading to an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement; to assess
how MINUSMA can further support the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
7.
To reaffirm the support of the Security Council to MINUSMA and to receive a
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2100 (2013), in particular the
operational deployment of MINUSMA to stabilize key population centres,
especially in the north of Mali, and to support the re -establishment of State authority
throughout the country and the promotion of the rule of law and protection of
human rights.

8/11

14-26016

S/2014/173

8.
To reiterate the concern of the Security Council about the volatile security
situation and to receive a briefing on the security situation, particularly in the north
of Mali, and the threat posed to regional stability by terrorist groups; to g et updates
on the implementation of the MINUSMA mandate, in support of the Government of
Mali, of protecting civilians and stabilizing the key population centres, especially in
the north of Mali, and, in this context, deterring threats and taking active st eps to
prevent the return of armed elements to those areas, and of contributing to the
creation of a secure environment for the safe, civilian-led delivery of humanitarian
assistance, in accordance with the United Nations guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance; to receive updates on the cooperation of all parties with
MINUSMA, with a view to ensuring the Mission’s safety and security; to receive a
briefing on the implementation of the mandate of the French forces to support
MINUSMA when under imminent and serious threat.
9.
To reiterate the call of the Security Council for maintaining Malian civilian
control and oversight of the Malian Defense and Security Forces as a key element of
the overall reform of the security sector and, in this reg ard, to encourage the
Government of Mali to continue to make progress and to assess the contribution of
MINUSMA and other international donors, including the European Union through
the Common European Security and Defence Policy and the European Union
Training Mission in Mali.
10. To emphasize the continuing concerns of the Security Council about the
protection of civilians, the importance of the fight against impunity and the need to
address the issue of sexual violence and strengthen child protection; to advocate
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, to encourage the
Government of Mali to ensure that those responsible for serious violations and
abuses of human rights are swiftly brought to justice and to continue to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court.
11. To emphasize that the perpetrators of sexual violence must be held accountable
and to stress the need to ensure the full, equal and effective participation of women
at an early stage of the stabilization phase, including in the security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, as well as in the
national political dialogue and electoral processes, bearing in mind Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000); to further emphasize that perpetrators of violations and
abuses against children must be held accountable and to ensure that specific
attention is given to the protection of children in security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes.
12. To underscore the need for the Government of Mali to continue to address the
humanitarian challenges, including the food crisis, and to achieve lasting solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons, including by creating conditions
conducive to their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return.
13. To reiterate the call of the Security Council for all relevant United Nations
agencies and the international community to strengthen their support for the eff orts
of the Government to provide assistance to the affected populations, particularly
women and children, and to support the provision of basic services to the
population, in particular in the north of Mali; to encourage the international
community to coordinate actions for addressing the immediate and long-term needs
of the population of Mali, including in the context of the high -level international
donors conference held in Brussels on 5 February to support the development of

14-26016

9/11

S/2014/173

Mali, in consultation with the Government; to reiterate the call of the Council for
the international community to address the gap in funding of the consolidated
humanitarian appeal.
14. To commend the Government of Mali for its chairmanship, for the coming two
years, of the coordination platform, as an outcome of the ministerial meeting on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, held in Bamako on 5 November
2013; to reiterate the call of the Security Council on States of the Sahel, West Africa
and the Maghreb to enhance interregional cooperation in order to develop inclusive
and effective strategies to address the transnational challenges in the Sahel region,
including to combat terrorist activities and transnational organized crime in the
region; to reaffirm the commitment of the Council to addressing the complex
security and political situation in the Sahel region, which is interrelated with
humanitarian and developmental issues.

10/11

14-26016

S/2014/173

Annex II
Security Council mission to Mali: programme of work
1 February 2014
2200

Working dinner hosted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

2 February 2014
Mopti
1030-1100

Meeting with authorities

1115-1215

Meeting with civil society

1225-1310

Visit to MINUSMA camp and briefings

1310-1400

Meeting with United Nations agencies and working lunch

Bamako
1700-1830

Audience with Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta, President of the
Republic

2000

Dinner hosted by the Government

3 February 2014

14-26016

0800-0830

Briefing by MINUSMA Force Commander, Police Commissioner
and Chief Security Adviser

0900-1000

Meeting with civil society

1015-1045

Meeting with Operation Serval Commander

1100-1130

Meeting with the Head of the European Union Training Mission

1130-1400

Meeting with members of the Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee

1500-1630

Meeting with the Government

1730-1815

Meeting with members of the Parliament

1900-2000

Press conference

2000-2100

Dinner

2130-2200

Visit of Serval camp

11/11
