THIRTY-SECOND

Yl:‘AR
rd
MEETING: 9 DECEMBER 1977

NEP

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

,...... ,. .... ..... ,. ... .... ..

1

.,... .. ....... ... ... .. ... ..,........ . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 December 1977 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Republic of Cameroon to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 2470) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2053)
Adoption of the agenda

SlPV.2053

NOTE
Symbols of United’Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of’such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

Held in New York
Presidelzt: Mr. Radha Krishna RAMPHUL

on Friday,

9 December

(Mauritius).

1977, at 3.30 p.m.

3. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other appropriate United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. It accordingly seems appropriate for
me to proceed, if there is no objection, to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional ruIes of
procedure to the Chairman of the Special committee
against Apartheid.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Saviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2053)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 December 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Cameroon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 2470)

At the invitution of the President, Mr. Harriman (Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.
5. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, may I offer you our most cordial
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. We also
wish to extend our congratulations and our thanks to
Ambassador Kikhia of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his
conduct of the Council’s affairs in November. We fully
endorse what has been said by previous speakers, all of
whom have recognized his skill during the officia1 meetings
of the Council and during the equally important unofficial
consultations that took place last month.

The meeting was culled to order at 4.15 p. m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 5 December 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Cameroon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12470)

6. In the course of this year, the racist regimes of southern
Africa have redoubled their repression of the peoples they
subject and have had to resort to all sorts of manoeuvres to
try to contain the growing opposition being mounted
against them. The grave events that took place recently in
South Africa have once more underlined the need to
accompany expressions of horror and censure with concrete
action directed against the Pretoria r6gime.

1. The PRESIDENT: ln accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at its 2052nd meeting, I invite the
representatives of Saudi Arabia and the United Republic of
Cameroon to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) and Mr. Oyono (United Republic of Cameroon)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. The overwhelming majority of States Members of the
United Nations have always believed in the adoption of
measures including various kinds of sanctions against the
authorities of South Africa. This was once again made
manifest in the course of the debate held by the Council a
few weeks ago. Although at the time, for reasons of which
all members are aware, it was not possible to agree on
broader measures, the Council did take a significant step
with the adoption of resolution 418 (1977), by which a
binding arms embargo was, for the first time, applied
against South Africa. At that time, we expressed the hope
that that decision was only the first st?p towards ultimate
adoption of more vigorous action, and we shared the

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated
9 December 1977 from the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, Mr. Leslie 0. Harriman,
representative of Nigeria, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour, as Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, to request the opportunity
to participate in the meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the item under the Council’s consideration.”
1

tive interpretation. I believe that later, when the new
Committee starts its work, this question of interpretation
will be well taken care,of.

concern expressed by a number of African delegations
regarding the importance of ensuring implementation of
that binding arms embargo by establishing an ad hoc
committee.

14. The apartheid rCgime has been engaged in frantic
efforts to overcome and frustrate the arms embargo. As we
all know, the regime issued a proclamation, dated 11
November-virtually
the week after resolution 418 (1977)
was adopted-authorizing it to compel companies to produce and to deliver arms and strategic materials. This is
evidence that there is pressure on that rCgime. The Special
Committee has, however, noted with grave concern and
indignation the plans of some transnational corporations to
manufacture military equipment in South Africa. We are
watching this development very closely and we hope that
the Committee on the arms embargo will also follow it very
carefully.

8. Since then, a number of intense negotiations have taken
place, leading to the preparation of the resolution that the
Council adopted this morning [resolution 421 (1977)]. The
Venezuelan delegation wishes to express its satisfaction
with the decision taken, which represents the corollary
necessary to ensure the full implementation of resolution
418 (1977). We wish to express our determination to
co-operate in the work of the Committee to monitor the
implementation of that resolution. We trust that the
establishment of the Security Council Committee will serve
as an impetus for the approval of a comprehensive
programme of practical action aimed at eliminating the
apartheid system.

15. On 14 November, I addressed letters, on behalf of the
Special Committee, to a number of Governments which
have in the past supplied South Africa with military
equipment, components and/or licences for the manu.
facture of military equipment. I stressed the great importance of the immediate implementation of all provisions of
resolution 4 18 (1977).

9. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the representative of Venezuela for the kind words she addressed to me. Miss Maria
L6pez is not only a lady of great personal charm but also
combines Latin beauty with a natural diplomatic skill and
great talent combined with a rare intelligence,
10. The next speaker is the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, to whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. Accordingly, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

16. I should like to express appreciation to the Govern.
merits which have sent replies to the Special Committee and
reports to the Security Council. But I must note with
concern that several arms-exporting countries have not yet
reported on actions taken by them, or have failed to
provide full information. In this connexion, I wish to recall
the request of the Secretary-General on 4 November
(2046th meeting] for the “most complete” information
from all States, Members and non-members on the measures
taken by them in compliance with the binding decision of
the Councif.

11. Mr. HARRlMAN
(Chairman, Special Committee
against ApnrGeid): On behalf of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 1 wish to express my satisfaction at the
adoption of the resolution establishing a Security Council
Committee to follow the progress of the implementation of
the arms embargo against South Africa. We appreciate the
fact that it is a procedural resolution, but we regard it as an
indispensable complement to resolution 418 (1977). I
assure you that this is the mildest statement that has ever
come from me as Chairman of the Special Committee,
because 1 believe that this represents a good step forward. I
am particularly glad that this resolution was adopted under
the presidency of the distinguished representative of Mauritius, who has contributed, with his usual energy and
dedication, to the efforts towards securing unanimous
support for the resolution.

17. I wish to assure the Council that the Special Corn.
mittee, in the discharge of its mandate, will lend its full
co-operation to the Council and to the newly-established
Committee in securing the full implementation of the arms
embargo against South Africa.
18. We sincerely hope that the Committee will begin work
without delay, for the Special Committee already has I
number of matters to bring before it.
19. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid for his kind words addressed
to me. I also thank him for the co-operation he has offered
to the Council on behalf of the Special Committee.

12. The World Conference for Action against Apartheid,
held at Lagos.last August, solemnly called for action by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter to
ensure the full implementation of the arms embargo against
South Africa. It also recommended the setting up of a
watchdog committee to follow up the observance of the
arms embargo. We are happy that both steps have been
taken.

20. The next speaker is Mr. M. J. Makatini, to whom the
Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure at its 2052nd meeting. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

13. The Special Committee against Apartheid welcomed
resolution 418 (1977)-though
it was rather belated and
limited-as an important step by the Security Council
towards the elimination of apartheid. The Special Committee had looked forward to the establishment of the
necessary machinery to secure the full implementation of
that resolution without any delays, equivocations or restric-

21. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, it gives me great
pleasure to extend to you, in the name of the African
National Congress, the warmest fraternal congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council during
the last month of this eventful year and on the eve of what
2

we believe will be declared International Anti-&art/lcid
Year by the General Assembly at its thirtysecond
session.
Indeed, we are singularly happy that you, a tested brother
and comrade-in-arms, whose experience, dedication and
skill as the doyen of the African ambassadors and the
representative of a country whose active commitment to
our struggle is well known, should assume this office at a
time when the Council at long last appears to be poised for
action against the apartheid rigime.

contemptible regime,I say: Castasideyour hypocrisy and
deceit; declareyourself on the sideof oppressionif that is
your secret design.Do not think we will be deceivedby
your pious protestations so long asyou activeiy support
the tyranny in our land. The test is your stand on the
principle: No arms for South Africa. No expression of
concern, no platitudes about injustice will content us.
The test is action-action againstupartheid.”

22. The unanimous adoption of the resolution on the
setting up of a Committee to monitor the implementation of
resolution 41X (1977) marks the first but an extremely
important point on our joint scoreboard. We are mindful
and highly appreciative of the fact that this is the result of
the magnificent and indefatigablerole played by your two
immediatepredecessors,
Mr. Jaipal of India and Mr. Kikhia
of Libya, under whoseable guidance the Council, depending on the political will of all parties concerned, hasmade
considerableprogresstowardsperforming the task expected
of it by the international community for decadesnow.
Your outstanding qualities as a diplomat and freedom
fighter have helped usto achievethe goal of our unanimous
decision this morning. And as we approach International
Anti-Apartheid Year, during part of which the Council vill
be presided over by Mr. Harriman, the Chairman of the
SpecialCommittee againstApartheid and representative of
Nigeria,whose illustrious head of State, General Obasanjo,
hasrecently and solemnly committed his country to action
not only against the apartheid regime but also againstits
collaborators,we are convinced that today’s decisionis yet
another landmark in ever-escalatinginternational action
towardsthe total ostracismof the Vorster r6gime.

26. That statement was made in 1961 by Chief Luthuli,
after winning the Nobel Peace Prize. Later, he was
assassinated
in what we maintain and will soon prove were
mysterious circumstances.Particularly now that the world
is receptive to information about the brutal crimes committed by the apartheid regime sincethe Steve Biko case,
we shall soon prove that Albert Luthuli, a man of great
stature, was not hit by a train. We have been making a
study of the caseand we maintain that he was killed and
then put on the railway line so that it could be declared
that he had beenkilled in a train accident.
27. It is important to recall that, sinceLuthuli madethat
appeal, there has been a great deal of action in support and
in defence of apartheid in the form of economic, diplomatic, military, cultural and nuclear collaboration, despite
the countless General Assembly resolutionsand the 1963
Security Council voluntary arms embargo. As the racist
regime frantically stepped up its arms race in preparation
for full-scale internal repressionand external aggression,
SO
did someWestern Powersstep up the delivery of sophisticated military hardware and the furnishing of licencesto
ensure the rCgime’sself-sufficiency and the perpetuation of
apartheid, that unique racist system and instrument for
super-exploitation which has now becomean integral part
of international imperialism.

23. I thank you most heartily for allowing me to speakon
behalf of the African National Congress.Our position on
resolution 418 (1977) is well known. We maintain that the
content of that resolution is too little and has come too
late, and this hasbeen confirmed by a seriesof statements
by the Pretoria rCgime’sauthorities. But, as we saidon the
day it was adopted [204&h meeting], we welcome it as
constituting the basis for future and more meaningful
action, such as economic sanctionsunder Chapter VII of
the Charter and strict observance of the limited arms
embargoit setsout to impose.
24. On the subject before us today, sinceour position has
beenrepeatedly confirmed by the FascistPretoria authorities, who openly boast of self-sufficiency and the assurance
of continued suppliesof war equipment, as the representative of China said this morning, quoting Botha, the
Minister of Defence, we hold the strong view that this
resolution is the last test of the sincerity of the Western
countries.
25. The gravity of the military collaboration between
someWestern countries, of which the Council has been
seizedsince 1963, was ably expressedby our late President
Albert Luthuli when, in a statement addressedto the
international community in general and to Britain in
particular-then the major supplier of arms to South
Africa-he said:

“To the nations and governments of the world, particularly those directly and indirectly giving aid to this
3

28. So great is the scaleof this collaboration that there is
only one way for some Western countries to escapethe
verdict of first-degree active complicity, at what might very
well be a South African Nurembergafter the holocaust the
neo-Nazi Pretoria regime is being armed for by someof
those Western countries. That way is to give their full
co-operation in ensuring that the supervisory Committee
established under the resolution adopted this morning is
made fully effective. Although this would not absolvethem
completely from the chargeof systematic collusion in the
criminal acts of the apartheid rigime, we maintain that it
would serve as a strong mitigating factor, strengthenedby
the fact that in most casesthose agreementswere concluded by the administrations and Governments that
preceded those representedat the Council meeting today.
29. We stressthe need for clear and meaningful terms of
reference, which we hope will be given to the Committee
concerned, because we have in the past been duped by
these guilty Powers, which have masteredthe techniqueof
running with the hare and hunting with the hounds. We
could quote so many instances,including that of the 1963
voluntary arms embargo, after which the supplies of
genocidal weapons continued unabated, either overtly or
covertly, and despite our protests and condemnations,this
was either denied or defendedwith such argumentsaswere
often heard in certain Westerncircles, for example: if we do

ate action with a view to the imposition of economic
sanctions against the South African rCgime under Chapter
VII of the Charter and the extension of the recently
adopted mandatory arms embargo to cover oil and petroleum products, as it is clear to all and is confirmed by
South African legal and military experts that oil is a
strategic product. No one can deny that the South African
and Rhodesian planes and tanks and other vehicles used by
those regimes to commit genocide in southern Africa would
in no time be grounded if and when the Council took the
appropriate decision to help to curb the threat to peace and
international security constituted by the two rbgimes.

not do it, the Americans will do it; if we do not do it, the
Germans will do it, and so on.
30. The most important example of the deceit we have
been subjected to relates to the measures adopted against
the Ian Smith rCgime, and it is at this juncture thdt I should
like to express our disappointment at what I heard from
severaf representatives this morning who maintained that
the Committee on Sanctions against Southern Rhodesia had
set a precedent. We maintain the contrary, that if the
Committee on Sanctions against Southern Rhodesia is to
serve as a guide, it should be only if we agree that it was
riddled with so many loopholes that it was never intended
to be effective. If we are serious-and
we believe the
members of the Security Council are at last sarious-we
shall, we hope, make sure that the loopholes that are to be
found in the Committee on Sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia are not repeated in the envisaged Committee.
When the Committee on Sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia was made a closed committee that takes decisions
on the basis of consensus, it was tied hand and foot right
from the beginning. Let us be frank: in such a situation the
principle of decision by consensus is tantamount to giving
veto powers to all members. The holding of closed sessions
by that Committee also, in our view, enables the guilty
parties to pursue their policies of deception and covert
complicity.

34. Mr. JAlPAL (India): Mr. President, my delegation is
very glad to see you preside over the Council for the month
of December and to extend to you our congratulations and
good wishes. We have every confidence that, with your
broad experience, diplomatic talents and contacts, you will
always guide our difficult deliberations to successful conclusions. Your dedication to the cause of Africa is well
known and it is therefore fitting that, under your presidency, the Council should have decided this morning to
establish a Committee to monitor the arms embargo against
South Africa.
35. It is clear by now that there is no one in the Council
who supports South Africa, But it remains to be seen
whether the arms embargo is too small a measure and has
come too late, as suggested by Mr. Makatini, the representative of the African National Congress.

31. If we sound over-pessimistic, it is because of our past
experience. We are none the less encouraged by the sense of
urgency manifested by the members of the Council
following the adoption of resolution 418 (1977). The
unanimous adoption of today’s resolution designed to set
up a Committee to monitor the strict implementation of
the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa is indeed
encouraging. Since it coincides with the intensification of
repression by the Vorster rigime, on the one hand, and the
growing resistance by the South African people under the
leadership of the African National Congress, on the other,
we have reason to believe that, this time, the Western
members of the Council intend to make this belated and
limited mandatory arms embargo effective.

36. It is, of course, quite possible that the mandatory arms
embargo may not have any effect at all on the policy of
apartheid, except perhaps to reinforce the determination of
the Afrikaners to pursue apartheid with even greater zeal
and vigour; but, in our view, that does not constitute
sufficient reason for minimizing the signficance of the arms
embargo. As we see it, the arms embargo is only the first
step in the mandatory process under Chapter VII of the
Charter that the Council has to take in its comprehensive
programme of action against South Africa, in order to
eliminate apartheid and thereafter enable the people of
South Africa as a whole to enjoy to the full their human
and national rights and fundamental freedoms.

32. It is for that reason that, when the time comes-in the
immediate future, WC hope-for the Council to define the
terms of reference of the new Committee, we hope there
will be unanimity in ensuring that the shortcomings to be
found in the Committee on Sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia will not be repeated. To this end, we hope that
the envisaged Committee wiI1 hold open public hearings of
experts in the various fields and that decisions will be taken
by vote. We maintain that this would help to ensure the
education of public opinion in Western countries, thereby
strengthening the position of those convinced of and
committed to the urgent need to ostracize the South
African r&$ne in all fields, in the same way as the
community of nations ostracized the Hitlerite Nazi regime
in response to the appeals of world statesmen, in&ding
eminent figures like President Roosevelt.

37. For the present, the Security Council has only
determined that the acquisition of arms by South Africa
constitutes a threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, It is not just the acquisition of arms
that is the problem; it is rather the purposes for which arms
are required and their uses to which we take strong
exception. The arms are being used to maintain the policy
of apartheid, to whose abolition the Council is fully
comnlitted. If the arms embargo does not take us nearer
our goal, we shall have to consider other forms of action,
such as additional embargoes. We must never lose sight of
our final goal while considering further measures that may
be needed.
38. It is with that long-range perspective in mind that my
delegation has agreed to the establishment of a Committee
to monitor the effectiveness of the mandatory arms
embargo. Of course, the Committee cannot do more than
discharge its own mandate, but the Security Council may

33. Finally, and in support of the position taken by the
representative of the United Republic of Cameroon, who
spoke on behalf of the 49 African Member States, I wish to
appeal to the members of the Council to consider immedi4

go beyond that, always keeping in mind our progress
towards the elimination of apartheid in relation to the
measures now being enforced.

towards neighbouring States. Continued aggressiveness on
the part of the Vorster regime could precipitate a general
war in the southern African region. The South Africa
regime must be denied the means to carry out acts of
aggression. The imposition of a mandatory arms embargo is
an important step towards the achievement of that goal and
towards the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.

39. We would expect the Secretary-General to seek and to
obtain from all Member States complete information
regarding the steps and measures taken by them to comply
with the provisions of resolution 418 (1977) and to furnish
that information to the Committee that has been established. The Committee would examine that information, as
well as all other information it may receive independently,
either from Member States or from any other source,
regarding allegations of violations of the arms embargo, and
then make recommendations to the Council.

46. I am sure every member of the Council will agree that
resolution 418 (1977) must be effectively implemented as
soon as possible. This will not be an easy task. My
delegation is aware of the difficulties which we confront in
implementing the embargo, The Council, by its resolution
of this morning, created a Committee which will have the
necessary power to monitor the embargo and to bring
possible violations to the Council’s attention and to the
attention of the international community.
Appropriate
machinery which can carry out the variety of tasks needed
for the service of the Committee will undoubtedly be
established within the Secretariat.

40. Some observations have been made about the Committee’s work and functioning. Our own view is that the
Committee should observe the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure in the conduct of its business, subject to such
variationi as it may agree upon, having regard to the special
nature of its work.

47. The United Nations has already had some experience
with the administration of an embargo. We must learn from
the failures and the successes of that experience.

41. Mr. President, I should like to conclude by placing on
record my delegation’s tribute to the excellent work done
by your predecessor, the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, as President of the Council last month.

48. We all know that, under a series of resolutions,
notably resolutions 253 (1968) and 277 (1970), the Security Council established a Committee for the implementation of sanctions against the illegal rkgime in Southern
Rhodesia. As we know too, certain machinery was established to enable the Committee to do its work. In the view
of my delegation, however, the Committee has had only
limited success. The original mandate was quite restrictive
and it was never properly widened. The Secretariat staff
proved dedicated and hard-working.
None the less, the
Committee did not really have the powers it needed. It was
therefore unable to carry out its task satisfactorily. I speak
from experience, since I had the honour to preside over
that Committee in 1977.

42. Mr. KIKHIA (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Sir, I should
‘like first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December. 1 am
sure that under your wise and able guidance the work of
the Council will go forward successfully. I should like to
assure you of the high esteem of my delegation and to
pledge our complete co-operation in your efforts in the
coming month. We are particularly happy, of course, that
the presidency should fall to an African brother in a month
when we face problems which are of deep concern to our
continent.
43. I also express our sincere thanks to those of OUI
colleagues who voiced in the Council kind words to my
delegation and to me personally in regard to my presidency
for the month of November.

49. The proof is in the fact that that Committee has had
to assume a relatively passive role in the operation of the
embargo against Southern Rhodesia. It has consequently
not been in a position to impede the flow of vital
commodities and arms to the illegal Smith rCgime. It is well
known that oil has been flowing to Southern Rhodesia
through the South African subsidiaries of transnational
corporations
since 1965, and it is clear from recent
publications of the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute that important weapons systems, including aircraft, helicopters and tanks, have been reaching the illegal
r6gime through a variety of channels.

44. We are meeting here to discuss the implementation of
the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa voted by
the Council on 4 November. This is not an inconsequential
matter, even if it is only a procedural one. There is no need
to elaborate here on the fact that, in adopting resolution
418 (1977), the Council took a historic step: it was the first
time that the United Nations had taken action against a
Member State under Chapter VII of the Charter.

50. These facts underline the difficulties we have been
confronting since we took up the question on the agenda
this morning. We must be sure that the machinery created
for the implementation of the mandatory arms embargo
against South Africa is more effective than that created for
the implementation
of sanctions
against Southern
Rhodesia.

45. That action was not taken lightly. The question of an
arms embargo had been under discussion for a long time;
the Council was fully aware of the implications of its
decision to call for a mandatory embargo. Now that a
decision has been taken and a precedent set, we must make
sure that the embargo is properly carried out. To allow it to
fail would be to do the United Nations itself great harm.
However, proper implementation of the embargo is necessary, above all, for practical reasons: we are trying to curb
South African aggression. South Africa has, over the last
few years, behaved in an arbitrary and aggressive manner

51. We are in the midst of a deepening crisis: southern
Africa is at war, the racist rBgime in South Africa has
abandoned any pretence of reasonableness and it is far
5

.

--

Subsequent to that request, each State created machinery
for the implementation of a national embargo against South
Africa. On the whole, it is said, that system has worked
well, In particular, those members claim that the major
arms-producing countries of the West have scn~pulously
observed the 1963 embargo, that shipments of arms and
equipment to South Africa have been stopped. According
to that view, there is no need for additional United Nations
machinery today. The machinery set up by individual
States after 1963 could be used to implement the mandatory arms embargo quite effectively.

more dangerous than the Smith rCgime. It is creating
a
garrison State; it is extremely powerful and belligerent; it is
pursuing an aggressive and expansionist policy in an effort
to shore up the crumbling system of apartheid. As the circle
closes around the Vorster rCgime, we can expect more and
more aggressive action on its part.
52. However, to pursue its present policies, the South
African racist Ggime must be able to buy foreign arms and
military technology. There should be no mistake about
South Africa’s dependence on overseas military supplies.
Contrary to the opinion prevailing in certain countries,
South Africa is not able to provide for its own military
requirements. It simply does not have the capacity to do so
economically. According to the most recent defence White
Paper from Preloria, the regime spends 55 per cent of its
military budget on foreign purchases, and some American
studies indicate that South Africa has been spending in
excess of $1 billion per year on foreign arms and military
equipment for the last several years. Such expend&Ire
reveals an enormous dependence on foreign suppliers.

57. The trouble with that view is that the voluntary arms
embargo has been far from successful. In fact, it appears to
have broken down some time ago. There is, first of alI, the
obvious evidence. It is a documented fact that the South
African r&me has been spending hundreds of millions of
rand per year on the purchase of foreign arms and
equipment. One has only to look at the annual defence
White Papers to see how important such purchases have
been over the years. Furthermore, authoritative sources
have shown that that money has been spent on foreign
weapons, more particularly on weapons from the major
Western countries, A number of well-known military and
trade sources have published lists of major weapons in the
South African arms inventory, and it is clear from those
lists that South Africa has acquired many modem weapons
systems in the last decade-that is, long after the imposition
of the voluntary embargo. There is, consequently, strong
prir~la facie evidence of the widespread violation of the
1963 embargo. South Africa could not have acquired the
weapons that it now
possesses if suppliers had not been
violating it.

53. Council members must be aware that there is already a
highly dangerous military imbalance in southern Africa.
South Africa has by now achieved a formidable military
capability. Its neighbours are poor and militarily weak. The
Pretoria regime now possesses a large stock of modern arms
of all sorts. If we continue to allow the sale of arms to that
rCgime, we will be courting disaster. A failure to implement
the new arms embargo and to stop the flow of weapons
would be an invitation to Mr. Vorster to pursue increasingly
aggressive policies. South Africa has already attempted an
invasion of Angola; it has attacked Zambia, and it has
provided the oil and weapons used by the Smith regime to
atlack Mozambique.

58. In recent months, new and detailed evidence of the
breakdown of the 1963 embargo has come to light. At a
hearing before the Sub-Committee on Africa of the United
States House of Representatives in July, an expert witness
testified that large quantities of arms had been secretly sold
to the South African r6gime after 1963. They included
hundreds of aircraft, helicopters, tanks and other armoured
vehicles. The witness added that the weapons in question
had reached South Africa through channels known only to
a small circle of government officials and arms dealers in
certain countries,

54. The international community cannot afford to wait
passively. We all know that the Vorstcr rCgime has prepared
an aggressive “forward
defence” policy, It would be
exceedingly dangerous to wait to see what that rCgime will
do. WC know what it will do, and once certain things arc
done it will be much more difficult than it is already to
contain the conflict in southern ATrica. We cannot afford to
wait for the first air strikes against Maputo. We cannot
afford to wait for the first attack on Lusaka or Luanda by
airborne commandos. If the South African regime is denied
new weapons, new technology and spare parts by concerted
international action now, it will think twice before embarking on such adventures.

59. The testimony presented to the Sub-Committee on
Africa on 24 July caused considerable controversy, for it
went beyond allegations that the 1963 embargo had been
violated from time to time. According to the witness, the
violations had been widespread and continuous. As a result,
South Africa had been able to acquire a large “secret”
arsenal; in fact, the witness stated, the South African
r&me had acquired overwhelming military power in
Africa. Thus, according to the testimony presented to the
Sub-Committee, the military imbalance in southern Africa
is the direct result of the widespread violation of the 1963
embargo by arms suppliers.

55. As things now stand, Pretoria evidently believes that it
can use its military superiority to inflict punishment on
neighbouring States. Members of the Council are, 1 believe,
more
or less in agreement on the dangers of the situation. I
shall not dwell on the internal situation in South Africa and
the policy of oppression against the black majority because
other colleagues have done so in detail.
56. Some circles and certain Powers are clearly not very
happy about the establishment of the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa by resolution 418 (1977) and
the creation of a new machinery to ensure its implemcntation. They point out that the Council rcquestcd a
voluntary arms embargo against South Africa in 1963.

60. For those reasons, we express our hope for a sincere,
full and effective implementation of resolution 418 (1977)
and for a strong, effective appropriate machinery, as
decided on this morning by the Council. That is, in our
view, the only way to ensure that the embargo is
6

adt
the
wo
61
sor
OpC

tot
Ch
Ii11
62
Slli
re1
63
co
wi
de
ha
in
t11
;;:
en
6’
aI
to
su
6:
Cl
01
W

re
c
6
c
G
ir
a

administered in accordance with the considered interests of
the international community and of peace and justice in the
world.

force. But perusal of the records of Ambassador Richard’s
remarks will show that hc misunderstood my reference to
that question and thought that I had singled out the United
Kingdom. I made that statement about the smuggling of
narcotics in the context of the arms smuggling, inasmuch as
Governments everywhere are against narcotics.

61. The PRESIDENT: Ambassador Kikhia has expressed
some important views regarding, inter nliu, the modus
operandi of the Committee which we have established
today and he has drawn on his personal experience as the
Chairman of the Committee on Sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia.

71. Likewise, inasmuch as the Council means well and is
to be lauded for the resolution that it adopted creating a
Committee to monitor the arms shipments to South Africa,
I cannot agree more with what my good brother and
colleague from India said in his statement this afternoon, to
the effect that--I am, of course, paraphrasing-this was the
maximum that could be obtained from the CounciI in the
form of agreement, without opposition.

62. There are no more speakers inscribed on my list. 1
shah now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of MAURITIUS.
63. The draft resolution we have adopted today is a
consequence of resolution 418 (I 977) by which a worldwide mandatory arms embargo against South Africa was
decided upon. The Security Council Committee which we
have just created will have one of the most important tasks
in the history of the United Nations. It will have to ensure
the full co-operation of the States members of the Council
and, indeed, of all States, Members and non-members of the
United Nations, in the task of implementing the arms
embargo.

72. Therefore, it is not fair for my good friend, Ambassador Richard, because 1 was citing certain examples from
my personal experience, also to say that it shows how good,
shall I say, the British are in enforcing things when they do
not want to have any arms exported, This was in reference
to what 1 said when the Ambassador of Ethiopia said to me
“Ah, if we could only find a source of arms so that we
could fight Mussolini”. Since I was active in the City of
Londonnot
in the arms industry or export, but in
chemical projects-I
happened to know someone who
wanted to dispose of surplus Greek arms. He told me about
it and I passed on the information to the Ethiopian
Ambassador, who in turn told the late Emperor Haile
Selassie.

64. 1 am confident that the Secretary-General, in accordance with paragraph 3 of this resolution, will do his utmost
to make the application of Chapter VII of the Charter
successful to the highest degree possible.
6.5. I am pleased to note that the Chairman of the SpeciaI
Committee Against Aputhcid,
Mr. Harriman, is of the
olpinion that the new Committee should start its work
without undue delay. My Government stands firmly behind
resolution 418 (1977) and will co-operate fully with the
Committee in the discharge of its great responsibilities.
66. I now resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

73. Then again, to set the record straight, I was active in
Red Cross matters and appeared on a platform in order to
collect money for the Ethiopians. It was an International
Red Cross affair and I believe the British Red Cross was
involved too. On the platform, without my knowledge, was
Sylvia Rankhurst, who passed the information to me that
Mr. Chamberlain was writing to his sister-in-law at Rome.
Incidentally, she must have been a channel between the
British Govcrmnent and Mr. Mussolini. That was not
unusual. If WC go back to the Congress of Vienna, we know
about the Stuarts, Lord Liverpool, Castlereagh and what
happened in those days. Some used women friends as
channels. Thus, we know that the Duchesse dc Sagan, who
was a friend and almost a mistress of Metternich, played a
role in politics. It is not unusual. Mr. Chamberlain allegedly
wrote to his sister-in-law that she should tell Mussolini that
the British Government would close its eyes to what he was
doing in Africa provided he did not align hh~~sclf with
Hitler.

of the

67. The reprcsentativc of Saudi Arabia has asked to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
68. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The bantering sarcasm
which was evident in the reference by my good friend
Ambassador lvor Richard to the statement I made this
morning calls for a reply and a rectification so that the
record may be set straight.

74. Is it not better to draw from my experience than to
mad from books? Why should I read from books when I
lived in that era and happened to live through two World
Wars, and in particular the aftermath of the Second World
War? Is there anything wrong with that’?

69. First of all, Mr. Richard said that my statement took
half an hour and consisted of my reminiscences. In fact, I
hardly took 20 minutes to make that statement. I have
always known my British friends to be noted for precision.
Why did Mr. Richard inflate the time I took? Is it in
keeping with the currency inflation that is rampant in
Europe and elsewhere? That is why I referred to his
remarks as bantering sarcasm.

75. Mr. Richard, I believe, was not born in 1937, or if he
was born he must have been a babe on the knee of his
mother. Should 1 produce rcminisccnces only of times that
he could discuss? He was a baby then; it is not my fault
that he was a baby and could not possibly check on what I
said. But this does not vitiate our good relations and the
friendship I have for him.

‘70. Secondly, I did not single out the United Kingdom
when I referred to the smuggling of narcotics all over Ihe
‘world, notwithstanding the measures that were taken by
IGovemments after the narcotics Convention came into
7

76. When 1 made remarks in this very Council on another
question-I do not want to exacerbate matters and say what
it was-he said that I was engaging in something that
sounded like anti-Semitism. 1 had to remind him the next
day in my right of reply, how can a Semite he an
anti-Semite-and I happen to be an arch-Semite?
77. Bantering sarcasm, as I call it, dots not have a place
here in the Security Council. I was making a serious analysis
of the situation when I said that a monitoring committee,
no matter how efficient, might not be in a position to stop
the smuggling of arms. I cited a few examples from the past
which bear repetition-for
instance, the case of Luxembourg in the First World War. During that war, Luxembourg, which was neutral, was selling steel-necessary for
the arms industry-to the Allies, that is, France and Britain,
and to the Central Powers, that is, Germany and Austria.
And this was going on during the war, not merely before or
after it. Those who were making money out of this in
Luxembourg were not stopped either by the Allies or by
the Central Powers.
78, What 1 meant-and I said this in quite a mild manner, I
think-was that, much as we laud the efforts of the Security
Council to find a common denominator of agreement to
ensure that arms do not go to South Africa, the efforts will
be ineffective, This will not be the fault of the members of
the Council; it is simply that mammon always wins in the
end; people sell their souls to the devil, to USCa metaphor.
Jesus of Nazareth said 2,000 years ago: Yc cannot serve
God and mammon; cithcr you will hate the one and love
the other, or hold to the one and despise the other. J think
that mammon is still being worshipped. And do not think
that 1 am referring only to Europe; this is true in my part of
the world too, as in all other parts of the world. 1 would
not want anyone to think that I was throwing mud at my
good British friends, l have a great deal of admiration and
respect for them.
79. Nor was I trying to admonish my brothers from
Africa. I was being frank with them. Perhaps I displeased
some of them when I said: Be careful when you take
power, lest you run the risk of being overthrown for not
knowing how to run the industries and the mines. Their
ineptness in this respect is certainly not the result of a lack
of intelligence; it is merely that they lack experience.
80. Does frankness have no place at the United Nations?
Has it no place in the Council? Should we cover things up
with platitudes? As 1 said this morning, 30 draft resolutions have been adopted on disarmament and related
subjects-platitudes, too many words and very little action.
People smile at each other in Moscow, Washington and
elsewhere. They profess friendship. They talk about

ddtente. And a11the time, intelligence services are subverting one another-if not in their own countries, then in
countries under their spheres of influence.
81. What is wrong in my pointing out these things‘? Could
it irk any honest tnan? Are we afraid of our so-called
leaders’? I fear that some of them are unwittingly misleading their people.
82. I have to raise my voice before I die. I have nothing to
lose. Should I play the game of conformity? Why should
I? Conformity did not get us anywhere in two world wars.
Should we not bc innovative? Should WC not draw from
our experience and stand to be corrected if we are wrong?
I certainIy stand to be corrected if I am wrong. If 1
sometimes seem to be probing in my speeches, it is because
I want the younger generation to be a little more creative
than the old fogies of my generation have been. That is my
object.
83. Having set the record straight, I am sure that the
representative of the United Kingdom who is deputizing for
Mr, Richard at this meeting will convey to him the message
that I have a great deal of respect and admiration for him;
but, for heaven’s sake, if he wants to engage in bantering
sarcasm, I think I am a good match for him.
84. The PRESIDENT: As one of my predecessors in the
Chair--Ambassador
Jaipal of India-said on a previous
occasion, it is always wise to read the statements of
Ambassador Baroody before commenting on them. I hold
no brief for the representative of the United Kingdom, but
Ambassador Richard was speaking off the cuff and on the
spur of the moment and l do not believe it was his
intention to offend in any way Ambassador Baroody, who
has always commanded the respect of us all. Ambassador
Baroody’s anecdotes, which hc draws from his long
expcricnce, and his frankness have always been a source of
enlightenment and guidance to members of the Council.
85. Mr. FIFOOT
(United Kingdom):
I am sure,
Mr. President, that my Ambassador will be grateful for
what you have just said. The representative of Saudi Arabia
is well aware of the regard in which he is held by my
Ambassador. Mr. Richard would not have wished any
statement of his lo have put Ambassador Baroody to the
troubIe of addressing the Council a second time today.
86. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has thus
completed the present phase of its consideration of the
question of South Africa.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

IX3

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vcnte dans les librairies
et les agences
dr5positaires
du monde entier. Informsx-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-VOW
& : Nations
Unies. Section cles venles, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las N&ones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-November

1978-2,200
