. OFFICIAL
FORTIETH

RECORDS

’

YEAR

2635”

MEETING:

12 DECEMBER

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2635) .....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

The $%$kk?#&xn

rus: re ort of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
$17657 and Add.1 and 2) ..... .. .... ...... .......

1

.-.
NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with Qures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly SuppIement.9 of the O&!Jcial Record& of the SeCouncil. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.

:.:_
:_
:..._

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolurions and Decision of the
Securiiy CInuzcil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

2635th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 12 December 1985, at 11.25 a.m.
President: Mr. Uandre

BASSOLE

(Burkina Faso).

moment I shall invite Mr. Koray to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

3. The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period 1 June
to 30 November 1985 in documents S/17657 and Add.1
and 2, dated 30 November, 9 December and 11 December
1985, respectively. Members also havebefore them a draft
resolution contained in document S/17680, which has
been prepared in the course of the Council’s consulta-

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2635)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

tiOIlS.

2. The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyrpus
. (S/l7657 and Add.1 and 2).

4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to vote
on the draft resolution. Unless I hear any objection I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.

The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

A vote was taken by show of hand.

Adoption of the agenda

The drafr resolution was adopted unanimous& [resolution
578 (198S)J

The agenda was adopted.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is the representative of Austria. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

The situation in Cyprus: report oi the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/17657
and Add.1 and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation $-om French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Austria, Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the debate, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. Mr. FISCHER (Austria): First, I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for December. I am confident that you will guide
the CounciYs proceedings in a constructive manner. I
should also like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Woolcott, the representative of
Australia, Austria’s neighbour in the United Nations, for
the exemplary way in which he conducted the Council’s
work last month.
7. Our request to be allowed to participate in the debate
after the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
on behalf of
all the troop-contributing
countries-Australia,
Austria,
Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Sweden and the
United Kingdom-was
the result of careful deliberations.

At the invitation of the president, ME Moushoutas
(C)pus), ME Dountas (Greece) and MC Ttikmen (Wkey)
took places at the Gxmcil table; MI: Fischer (Austria) took
the p&e resewed for him at the side of the Gmncil Chamber.

8. The u ose of thii statement is to address the question of t R%
e ancial situation of UNFICYP, which is a
source of deep concern to the Governments of the troopcontributing
countries. The widening gap between the
level of voluntary contributions and the real costs of this
important peace-keeping operation places an ever heavier burden on our countries. The troop-contributing
cotmtries have always borne a large portion of the expenses of

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation $vrn French): I
should like to recall that in the course of the Council’s
consultations members agreed that an invitation should
be extended to Mr. &er Koray in accordance with rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any
objection I shall take it that the Council decides to invite
Mr. Koray in accordance with rule 39. At the appropriate

,
1

UNFICYI! They have done sobecausethey consider their
participation in UNFICYP as a special service to the
mtemational community.

‘Barkey’snoncompliance with a host of General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, aswell as the ongoing
peace-making initiative of the Secretary-General, to the
successof which we attach great importance.

9. With the mounting deficit of UNFICYP, however,
resulting in totally unsatisfactory rates of reimbursement,
the share of the costsborne by troop-contriiuting countries hasbecome disproportionate and, we believe, unfair.
In this situation our Governments have directed a special
appeal to Member Statesto make every effort to alleviate
the serious financial situation confronting UNFICYI? We
have requested them to increase their contributions or to
begin making contributions if they have not done so before. The same request has been made by the SecretaryGeneral, and we are grateful for his continuous efforts.

14. The members of the Council are aware that, as a
result of the 1974 invasion, almost 37 per cent of our
territory remains under ‘Ibrkish occu ation, 200,000Qp- -.
riots have been uprooted from their lf omesand lands and
rendered refugees in their own country and hundreds are
missing;and the lossin property is staggering.Our people,
who lived intermingled for centuries, have been segre- .
gated by blood and iron on the basisof ethnic background.
15. Artificial barriers, apartheid policies and attempted
secessiondepict the present grim state of affairs in the
occupied areas.A schemeis promoted by Turkey in order
to destroy the cultural character and heritage of Cyprus
by desecrating and looting churches, some a thousand
years old, as well as other places of worship; by looting
ancient monuments and treasures; and by changing historical names of towns,villages and places in the ruthless
pursuit of total Turkification of the occupied areas. This
policy is coupled with the crime of massimportation of
settlersto usurp the homes and properties of the expelled
Greek Cypriots,with the ob’ective of changing the age-old
demographic character of &P I-US.Illegal and sham “eleo
tions”, the adoption of a so-called new constitution, actions which are contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and in flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and the very initiative of the Secretary-General- .
those are some of the illegalities being pursued, even
more arduously since the premeditated undermining of
the high-level meeting of 17 January 1985.

10. Peace-keepingoperations are in the interests of the
entire international community. Every Member Statehas
a stake in the continued effectiveness of this essential
instrument to safeguard international peace. We cannot
ignore the fact that a sound financial basisis an important
element for the viability of peace-kee ing operations. On
the occasion of the extension oF the mandate of
UNFICYP the troop-contributing countries reiterate
their appeal to all Member States to demonstrate their
solidarity and to increase their efforts to improve the
financial situation of UNFICYI? We also wish to express
our appreciation to those Governments that over the
years continue to contribute regularly to UNFICYI?
11. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom
Inowcall.
12. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (Cyprus): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumptionof the
high office of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December and to expressappreciation for
the skilful manner in which you have conducted the consultations on the draft resolution that hasjust been unanimously adopted, renewing the mandate of UNFICYP for
another period of six months. It is a source of great
satisfaction to my Government that the presidency of this
important organ of the United Nations is in the talented
hands of a worthy and distinguished representative of
Burkina Faso,avery friendly country with which we share
the closest of diplomatic relations, especially within the
United Nations and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. May I add my personal felicitations and say that,
knowing your diplomatic experience and your friendly
and human touch, I conclude that your presidencyaugurs
well for the Council and its important tasks.I also extend
my warmest congratulations to your predecessor for the
month of November, an outstanding diplomat, Mr. Richard Woolcott of Australia, whose wise and impeccable
1hxeaTp has already been acknowlexigtxlby the Security
.

16. Encouraged by the seeming inability of the world
Organization to force Turkey to comply with solemn Security Council resolutions and decisions,Ankara is seeking to complete its unlawful intentions against Cyprus by
striking at rts territorial integrity and by creating a puppet
regime maintained in power by the bayonetsof the occuwing-y*
17. Disregarding the demands in the relevant United
Nations resolutions and declarations of the Non-Aligned
Movement for complete demilitarization of the Republic
of Cyprus, Turkey has recently stepped up its militarization of the occupied areasby completing a major air base
in the occupied area of Lefconico, and it is now nearing
completion of a naval base in occupied Kyrenia. That is
yet another attestation of contempt for the United Nations and an indication of a ruthless determination to
perpetuate ‘Ru-key’smilitary presence in the island. The
sire of the installations and the magnitude of the costs
should give rise to serious concern as to their true purposesand uses.

13. I thank the members of this body for giving me the
opportunity to address the Council. The renewal of the
peace-keeping mandate of UNFICYP, to which my Government had given its consent, is, in the circumstances,
imperative, owing to the continuing military occupation
of part of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus and

18. In stark contrast to Ankara’s continuous militarization is my Government’s written acceptance of military
deconfrontation of the area of Nicosia as proposed by the
Force Commander in paragraph 17 of the SccretaryGeneral’s latest report.
2

19. The United Nations resolutions on the question of
Cyprus reflect the consensusof world opinion. These are
mandatory decisions.They demand the immediate withdrawal of all occupation forces from the Republic of
Cyprus and the return of all refugees to their homes and
lands in safety.They further demand respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of
Cyprus and non-interference and intervention in its affairs, they call for re
for the human rights and fundamental freedoms osp”f
all Cypriots, including, of course,
freedom of movement, freedom of settlement and ownership of land. They further call for the withdrawal of the
declaration of secession,the condemnation of all secessionist actsand the non-recognition of the illegal entity. I
need not remind the Council that ‘Ibrkey castan affirmative vote for General Assemblyresolution 3212 (XXIX),
which was subsequently endorsed by Security Council
resolution 365 (1974) and rendered mandatory.

23. The expansionistpolicies of Turkey against Cyprus
and its people ex@ainthe positions taken by the Turkish
Cypriot commumty through the various rounds of the
intercommunal talks on the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral and in accordancewith the provisions of United
Nations resolutions demanding the withdrawal of the foreign troops from Cyprus. Indeed, contrary to repeated
assurancesby Turkey, someof them in this forum, we now
face a situation whereby ‘I’brkey and Mr. Denktq dare
openly admit that their sition has been and will continue to be thatthe with 8”rawal of the Turkish occupation
forces is non-negotiable and that the Turkish troops will
remain in Cyprus in perpetuity.
24. These statementsmake a mockery of the words of
Mr. Gilnes, Foreign Minister of ‘Ibrkey at the time of the
invasion, and recent statements by Mr. Kirca, former
representative of Turkey to the United Nations, in the
Security Council that “the ‘Ibrkish armed forces will remain on the territory of the Federated State until the
conclusion of the final agreement between all the parties
concerned” [see2405th meeting pam. 116)

20. Unfortunately, but not surprisingly, the record of
Turkey towards the United Nations and the hnplementation of theseresolutions have been dismal. Up to now, not
a single refugee has been allowed to return to his home.
As a matter of fact, the contrary is true. Considering that
over 20,000Greek Cypriots had remained in the occupied
areas right after the 1974 ‘Bxkish onslaught, these unfortunate victims of the cruelty of Attila were forced
gradually to abandon their ancestral homes and seek
refuge in the government-controlled areas.

25. It should be stressedin this respect that the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions call
for the immediate withdrawal of ‘Ibrkish troops. That is
the solemn demand of this body. No qualifications exist
for their withdrawal, other than that it has to be immediate. Thus, by the ‘Bnkish insiitence on the pretext of
effective protection, the international community, including the Greek Cypriot side, is asked to accept something
which is contrary to the provisions of the relevant Assembly and Council resolutions. These Council resolutions
are mandatory, binding on all Member States, on the
Secretary-General himself and of course on the aggressor
and its victim.

21. But what about the Security Council demands for
withdrawal of the attempt& secessionand an end to the
l’hrkish occupation, as well as the need for respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms? Total disregard
and absolute noncompliance by Ankara. As a matter of
fact, each day that passes,new steps are taken by ‘lbrkey
to consolidate its stranglehold over its small victim by way
of new illegalities in the areas controlled by the Turkish
army, contrary to United Nations resolutions and
Ankara’s own assurancesgiven to the Secretary-General.

26. As if all that did not constitute enough evidence of
the hardening of the Turkish positions, a further undermining of the initiative of the Secretary-General is now
promoted by the Turkish side through certain statements
which block future implementation of the three freedoms,
namely, those of movement, of settlement and of ownership of land. That, in fact, amounts to a negation of the
right of the people of Cyprus-irrespective of ethnic background-to move about freely in their own country, after
a solution is reached.

22. I am sure that the members of the Council do not
view as serious the fallacious arguments of ‘Bnkey that
these illegal actsemanate from the ‘Ibrkish Cypriots, who
allegedly administer the occupied areas. It is the ‘IWish
army that runs everything. It was so recognized by the
European Commission of Human Rights, which found
‘hrkey guilty of massviolations of human rights in Cyprus.
Whenever and wherever it chooses,the army intervenes
in controlling-suppressing, rather-the ‘Ibrkish Cypriots
from whom it demands absolute obedience. There is one
soldier for every four civilians, and if we add the settlers
brought by Ankara from Anatolia there are two ‘Ibrkish
mainlanders for every four Turkish Cypriots. This militarization and saturation of the area with mainland ‘Ibrks
frustrates any independent policy or action by the Turkish
Cypriot community, which in fact is under occupation and
thus unable to negotiate freely, as required by United
Nations resolutions. The presence of the ‘Ibrkish troops
poses an insurmountable obstacle to genuine negouations, for nobody can negotiate freely under the barrel of
the gun.

27. These ‘Ibrkish positions, while violating intemationally acceptedprinciples of human rights, are alsocontrary
to the letter and the spirit of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions on Cyprus, particularly
Council resolutions 365 (1974), 541 (1983) and 550
(1984), which not only provide for the return of all refugeesto their homesin safetybut also safeguard the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all Cypriots.
28. The Turkish insistence,on the other hand, that even
after an agreement is reached Turkey should maintain its
military presence in the island, in s ite of the aggression
it hascommitted against the Repub B‘c of Cyprus, amounts
to forcing the victim of an assaultto employ the protective
servicesof the attacker.
3

_‘.
_‘_
:_

,
,‘_
J’
,‘..
‘_

29. There were also repeated statements to the effect
that the so-called Turkish Republic of. Northern Cyprus,
being an “independent State , 1sentrtled to enter mto
treaties with or seek recognition by other States. The
creation of a central bank, which we have exposedin past
meetings of this forum asa separatist and partitionist act,
and the recent announcement that the bank will begin
shortly to issue.currency are in line,with the scheme of
so-called separate independence. I shall not refer to the
assurancesgiven again in this body, after ‘the annotmcement of the creation of a so-called central bank in 1982,
that it could not be a separatist act sincethe most important element of a central bank, that of issuingcurrency,was
lacking. Nor shall I elaborate on the now-ludicrous argument advanced-byThrkey, right after the attempted secession of November 1983,that the sole aim of Mr. Denktq
was. simply to create a component State of a Federal
Republic in Cyprus; I need not do so, since the sinister
partitionist and aimexationist designs of Turkey are by
now clear to all.
‘.,
30. I shall revert again, however, to the illegality of this
offspring of aggression,the so-called Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus. This puppet has no territoryof its own
other than the areas occupied by the ‘Ihrkish troops, the
latter having only recently uprooted the indigenous Greek
Cypriot community, constituting 82 per cent of the population in the areas, and having implanted thousands of
settlers from the mainland of ‘Rukey in the homes and
lands of those expelled. To hear, therefore, the representatives of Turkey speak in the forums of the United Nations of the need for respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms is to witness the epitome of absurdity, amounting to a tragic irony of Aeschyleanproportions. The right to self-determination, as provrded in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), is to be exercised by the people as a whole, and not separately by
factions, religious sects,communities or ethnic groups.
One can only wonder what the world map would look hke
if the Turkish way of viewing things were to be accepted.
It would be very interesting also to seehow Turkey itself
would be dismembered, in application of this doctrine.

to their ancestral homes. This means no foreign armies,
no dividing lines and no meddling in their internal affah-s.
33. As my President stated yesterday,abasic pre-condition for the solution of the problem of Cyprus is the end
of occupation--which means the withdrawal of the Turkish troops from the Republic of Cyprus before the establishment of an interim Government.
34. As regards Addendum 1 to the Secretary-General’s
report on his good off&s, I should like to state the
following.
35. As always,’our sidedhas co-operated constructive1
with the Secretary-General in his current initiative, whit 8
began in Vienna in August 1984 and continued with the
proximity talks, the high-level meeting and the meetings
at a lower level. We shall continue to do so.
36. At the same time we think that we should remind
members of the Security Council of the following. After
the high-level meeting failed to reduce results because
of the persistent refusal of Mr. ii enktq to engage in a
meaningful dialogue and his rejection of all efforts to
reach a compromise,we acceptedthe Secretary-General’s
idea for a new high-level meeting. Mr. Denktq not only
did not accept or co-operate, but proceeded instead with
a series of ‘illegal acts aimed at entrenching the invalid
unilateral declaration of independence that he had been
called upon by the Security Council to’ withdraw and
rescind.
37. After Mr. Denkt similarly rejected a suggestionby
the Secretary-General7 or ajoint lower-level meeting, we
accepted in the same spirit of compromise another idea
put forward by the Secretary-General for separate meetings with the two sides. Several meetings between the
Secretary-General or his colleagues and our side were
held, including meetings with the President and the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Cyprus, and as a.result
we arrived at the April documentation, which was described in the Secretary-Gene&s re rt of 11June 1985
[S/17227L4ddI] asthe formula most illY
’ ely to lead to ajust
and lasting solution to the Cyprus problem.

31. The right to self-determination cannotbe exercised
on a part of the territory of Cyprus, which is!controlled
through force of arms by the ‘Ihrkish military occupying
forces, inasmuch as the Republic of Cyprus has de jure
jurisdiction over this area, as confirmed by a host of
United Nations resolutions. Thus, the so-called referen:
dum for a new constitution of the secessionistself-proclaimed ‘Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” and the
so-called elections held in the occupied areas ,on 5 May
and 9 June 1985 are whhout any legal standing and con:
stitute a mockery of all democratic principles and aviolation of international law and universally recognized
conceptsof human rights.
:
32. The Turkish insistenceon the perpetual presence of
the occupation troops in Cyprus not only is contrary to all
United Nations resolutions but undermines the hopes for
sumss of the Secretary-General’s initiative. The people
of Cyprus demand peace and an end to their ordeal. But
they are not willing to settle for anything lessthan peace
with justice and freedom, which will allow them to return

38. Thus, in lessthan two months we reached a complete
agreement with the Secretary-General, and in the process-and this is well known-we came well within reach
of the safety line that demarcatesthe boundaries between
ajust and viable solution and asolution that would not be
consistentwith the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the norms of international law, including the minimum standards applicable to fundamental freedoms and
democratic rights.
-39. The Secretary-General is well aware of our position.
Hence, we have no doubt that in deciding on his next step,
and with his usual fairness, he will be acting accordingly.
40. In a parallel effort, the Secretariat has for the past
eight months been trying to obtain an affirmative reply on
the documentation from the Twkish Cypriot side.As early
as last June the Secretary-General reported to the Security Council that the Turkish side had not yet made known
4

its position on the efforts he had undertaken sinceJanuary
and that he was awaiting its response.The response that
the Secretary-General received from the ‘Ibrkish side
months later was, to use an understatement, not positive,
and apparently it maintains the sameposture to date.

vate him to the highest point of distinction for mtemational contriiutio~ Cyprus wishes hhn well and thanks
him warmly for what he has done for its people. We also
warmly appreciate the valuable contribution of the Secretary-General’s close assistants,Mr. Feisseland Mr. Picco,
in their conthmous efforts to advance the causeof peace
in our country. I pay a specialtribute to Mr. JamesHolger,
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, for the efficient manner in which he pursues his
difficult mission.

41. All that is needed, therefore, is to persuadethe other
side to reciprocate our good will by accepting the April
documentation as it stands,or in consolidated form, thus
paving the way to substantial negotiations and speedy
resolution of the Cyprus problem. It is our firm belief that
the members of the SecurityCouncil, aswell asthe whole
membership of the United Nations, could greatly assist
the Secretary-General in obtaining such results.

47. My Government’s deep appreciation goes also to
Major-General Gremdl. Commander of UNFICYP and
to his officers and men for the dedicated manner in which
they continue to carry on,the duties entrusted to them by
the Security Council. In referring to UNFICMP, I should
of course like to expressour warmest feelings of gratitude
and ap reciation to all the friendly Governments which;
throu & voluntary contributions of personnel and funds,
have enabled UNFICYP to conthme to render its indispensable peace-keeping servicesin Cyprus.

42. For its part the Government of Cyprus is anxious to
reach a negotiated settlement of the problem. It is our
most firm belief that the people of Cyprus asawhole stand
to benefit from an end to the almost 12 years of military
occupation of part of our national territory. Through ajust
and lasting solution all the people of Cyprus will be able
to enjoy once again the blessingsof peace and of unimeded freedom to move and to reside all over the island.
th oseaspirations of our people and their yearning for the
blessingsof justice, peace,co-operation and happinessin
a Federal Republic of Cyprus are in accord with the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the declarations of
non-aligned countries and of the Commonwealth and the
high-level agreements.

.

48. Before concludiig, I should like to expressthe hope
that the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus will
proceed urgently with its humanitarian task of ascertaining definitively the fate of the hundreds of missing.This is
a moral obligation which we owe to their families.
49. The PRESIDENT (intepretation jbm French): The
next speaker is the representative of Greece, upon whom
Inowcall.

43. In agesture of good will the Cyprus Government has
refrained for the past three sessionsof the General Assembly from insisting on a debate on the question of
Cyprus. We have done so in order to allow the initiative
of the Secretary-General to proceed smoothly. We must
not, however, be expected to be the only side which respondsto the Secretary-General’s suggestionfor a moratorium. As we have stated before, our hopes for
vindication and justice rest on the United Nations, which
constitutesthe cornerstone of our foreign policy and the
framework within which, we feel, a just and lasting solution of our problem can be found.

50. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on the assum tion of the presidency of the
Council for the month of 8 ecember. I am certain that,
with your well-known tact and diplomatic experience,you
will ably carry out your difficult task.It would be remissof
me if I failed to take this opportunity to thank the President of the Council for November, the representative of
Australia, Mr. Woolcott, for the really exemplary way in
which he guided the Council.

44. ‘We are striving to secure implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, to make Cyprus an
island without foreign armies or dividing lines and to
rebuild the bridges of co-operation blown up by foreign
interference and intervention and by chauvinistic forces
of division’and confrontation.

51. The representative of Cyprus has dealt extensively
with many facets of the Cyprus problem. On the occasion
of today’s Council meeting, I should simply like to reiterate certain fundamental positions of my Government regarding the continuing occupation of northern Cyprus by
the ‘Ibrkish army. In other words, I should like to address
one of the most substantive aspectsof the Cyprus question.

45. The Government of Cyprus reiterates its unreserved
support for the most commendable efforts of the Secretary-General in the framework of his personal initiative in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In this respect, I express to him our deepest
appreciation of his untiring efforts in seeking a peaceful
and just solution to the problem of Cyprus.

52. Apart from Greece’s special relationship with the
people of Cyprus,‘the interest of my country stemsalso
from the fact that it is one of the guarantors of the
Republic of Cyprus. My .Government remains unswervingly convinced that no solution to the Cyprus question can be envisaged aslong asit does not provide for the
withdrawal of the ‘Ibrkish army from the island before any
transitional machinery is set up in the Republic in accordancewith an eventual agreement. Furthermore, a system
of effective guarantees should be agreed upon. The agreement should fairly allay the fears of the ‘Ibrkish Cypriot
cmnmunity that its rights might be abused by the Greek
Cypriot community. It should equally protect the over-

46. We commend warmly the valuable and significant
contribution of the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Brian
Urquhart. His great and meaningful contriiution to the
United Nations by staunchly defending the pu
es and
principles of the Charter and labouring to eIx- ante the
prestige and effectiveness of the world Organization ele5

whelming Greek Cypriot majority of the island and effectively safeguard the unity and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus against any further lbrkish threats.
53. As far as the security of the Turkish Cypriot community is concerned, this goal could be achieved convincingly
through workable constitutional guarantees and an extension of the presence of UNFICYP under a new mandate
for a substantial period of time. This arrangement has
been re eatedly proposed both by President Kyprianou
and by 8 rime Minister Papandreou.
54. As far as the security of the Greek Cypriot majority
is concerned, the withdrawal of the Turkish army would
be a positive development. Allow me, in this respect, to
quote from a major foreign‘policy statement delivered by
Prime Minister Papandreou before Parliament on 6 December: “We cannot accept a transitional period, a provisional Government, before the last Turkish soldier has
withdrawn and the occupation of Cyprus is ended.” And
he added: “If l’brkcy becomes a guarantor Power we will
not agree to become a guarantor Power as well . . . our
proposal [Greece’s pro osal] is to have guarantees from
a group of States from Ls t, West and the third world.”
55. The rationale behind this statement is more than
obvious. It would be unwise and dangerous for Greece to
guarantee a solution which not only might prove constitutionally unworkable but which would also provide for the
presence of the ‘Ibrkish army in the island under one form
or the other-and allow me to stress most particularly this
last point. Such a structure would most probably soon
collapse, leading to a major crisis that would threaten
peace in the area. I am certain that considerations of this
nature are not alien to those who provide ideas for a
solution to the Cyprus problem.
56. In this context, allow me to refer to the report of the
Secretary-General in document SJl7657lAdd.1, dated 9
December 1985, which we read with the attention it deserves, particularly its paragraph 10. I should lie to point
out that, as it seems to us, any agreement which would not
explicitly provide for the major question of the withdrawal
of the Turkish army before any transitional machinery is
set up would not only turn the whole initiative into an
exercise in futility; it would also strengthen the position of
the aggressor in Cyprus. Obviously, the United Nations
cannot have such an intention.
57. As far as the constitutional aspects of the Cyprus
question are concerned, this is not a problem in which
Greece is involved. I shall confine myself to saying simply
that, in our view, any solution should provide for a structure of the State in full conformity with the universally
accepted democratic principles, that it should not ignore
the element of the composition of the population and that
it should be functional, in orderthat greater tragedies may
be averted in the future..
58. The Greek Government has consistently supported
and continues to support the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral. We deeply appreciate-his untiring efforts and his
dedication in carrying out a highly difficult mission. We
sincerely wish that he will be able, through the procedure

he has initiated, to bridge the gap between the positions
of the two sides. However, in view of the extremely important concessions made by President Kyprianouwhich may have gone even beyond the safety limit for the
Greek Cypriot community and the State of Cyprus-this
is the time for Tbrkey, we believe, to take a decisive step.
59. It is well known to the Council that we are already,
by too many years, late in our efforts to restore the unity
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, which
finds itself &fuczo split in two. It is high time for a solution,
which will enable the Cypriot people in their entirety,
irrespective of their religious or national affiliations-all
of them: Greeks, Turks, Armenians, Latins, Maronitesto enjoy the benefits of peace: freedom and prosperity.
6$. In concluding, I should like to express our deep
appreciation to Major-General
Greindl and the officers
and men of the Force, as well as to the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. They have performed their duties with dedication and in an impeccable
manner, and we are grateful to them. Our particular
thanks are also addressed to all the friendly countries that
for many years have been contributing with troops and
funds, thus making possibIe the continuing and most valuable presence of UNFICXP in Cyprus.
61. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfi~
French): The
next speaker on my list is Mr. Gzer Koray, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation in accordance with
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
62. Mr. KORAY: Allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
and through you, all the distinguished members of the
Council for granting me the opportunity to participate
in the deliberations on the extension of the stay of
UNFICYP in Cyprus for a period of six months.
63. The ‘Ibrkish Cypriot side values very highly opportunities that enable it to air its views on the question of
Cyprus, for such opportunities are few and far between.
This inequitable distriiution, ‘between the two sides in
Cyprus, of the right to be heard and to present one’s case
lies today at the heart of the failure to bring about a
negotiated solution to the issues between the two peoples
in Cyprus. The sooner this fact is perceived by the international community, the better will be the prospects of
bringing these issues to a mutually acceptable, satisfactory
conclusion. In the absence of such a perception, the Greek
Cypriot side will be more than happy to prolong the issue
and thus keep on monopolizing the title of “Government
of Cyprus”, which it contrived to usurp 22 years ago, in
1963.
$4. It is an irony which never ceases to astonish the
l’brkish Qpriot side that the representative of the side
which for years tried by all the means at its disposal to
destroy the bicommunal independence of the 1960 Republic of Cyprus and to turn it into a colony of Greece has
come, by default and with the connivance of others, tom
speak for the Republic of Cyprus and claims to represent
the whole of its population, while by contrast the repre-

choice is between peace through negotiations on an equal
footing with the elected representatives of the ‘Rukish
people of Cyprus and the constant pursuit of unrealistic, one-sided, condemnatory resolutions harmful to peace
and reconciliation.

sentative of the side whose selflessresistanceand courageousstruggle gave birth to that Republic and prevented
its colonization has come today to speakbefore this body
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. For us
this is avery irksome and unjust state of affairs, without a
single shred of constitutionality, which must be corrected
if the way to a negotiated solution is to be opened.

70. Does the recent behaviour and attitude of the Greek
Cypriot leadership provide any hope for the future? The
answer, unfortunately, is no. Having rejected the 27 November 1984 draft agreement-which was the result of
four months of high-level proximity talks between the two
sides-at the summit meeting of 17 January 1985, convened at the behestof Mr. Papandreou, the Greek Cypriot
leader, Mr. Kyprianou, and his administration displayed
no feelings of regret in the succeedingmonths. Even the
continuing initiative and efforts of the Secretary-General
to arrive at a new document which would be acceptableto
both sides have not sufficed to make the Greek Cypriot
leaders desist from further intemationalization and exploitation of the conflict in the absenceof the legitimate
representatives of the ‘Ihrkish Republic of Northern QPrt=
71. The resolution of the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to
7 September 1985, which was adopted at the instigation
of the Greek Cypriot side and in the absence of the
legitimate representatives of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus, is a prime example of the unchanging
Greek Cypriot policy of making use of unrealistic, irrelevant resolutions extracted from international forums to
achieve on paper, at least,what they could not achieveon
the ground by force of arms-that is, the transformation
of the island of Cyprus into a place where the Turkish
Cypriots will not be allowed to stand upright, much lessto‘,
rule. After Luanda, the Scenemoved to the Bahamas,to
the Commonwealth Conference held from 16to 22 Fober 1985.There we witnessed a repeat performance.

65. I would hazard the guessthat, despite the rule under
which I have been invited to address the Council today,
everybody present in this Chamber, including Mr.
Moushoutas, silently acknowledges the fact that Mr.
Moushoutas and I, barring our disguises,are in reality
speaking as the representatives of our res
peoples-no more, no less.The only diffztg
E!tLyrii
the guise in which the Greek Cypriot side has been allowed to masquerade since 1963, the fateful year of the
Greek Cypriot coup against the bicommunal Government
of Cyprus.
66. Ib those who cannot bear the voice and presence in
tliis building of a few ‘Ihrkish
riots, we promise one
thing only: the righteous voice9o the Turkish people of
Cyprus will grow ever stronger; we shall not be silenced,
nor shall our presence be removed by trickery.
67. We have just witnessed a desperate attempt by Mr.
Moushoutas to rewrite history, an unquestionably trying
taskby any yardstick He is not alone in failing dismally in
this, for his predecessorshave tried and failed before him.
He can, if he wishes, find solace in that fact. Yet this
may-and we hope it will-pen the eyes of the Greek
Cypriot side and help it see that its customary role of
profusely disseminating falsehoods and malicious allegations against Xukish Cypriots and ‘Ibrkey in intemational forums will no longer pay dividends, becauseit has
been stretched and exploited to its ultimate limits for so
long+ full 22 years, to be precise.
tLc;

72.. The Greek Cypriot side took those stepsconsciously
and in full knowledge of their possiblenegative repercussions on the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General to
open the way to the result-oriented dialogue which had
been blocked by Mr. Kyprianou at the 17January summit..

68. Year after year this illegal entity, in the guise of an
aggrieved party, has trotted round the globe repeating its
worn-out, hackneyed arguments and trumped-up charges
against the ‘Bukish peo le of Cyprus, whom it has persecuted for so long but falf* ed to enslave,and against‘Ibrkey,
whosetimely intervention caught it red-handed and put a
stop to its abominable crimes against the ‘Ihrkish Cypriots
and the island of Cyprus. ‘I&lay we have heard more of
the same, and we deem it to be not worthy of response.
Suffice it to saythat those of us who wish to contriiute to
the creation of an atmosphere conducive to a peaceful
solution of the issuesbetween the two sides in Cyprus
should do all we can to bring an end to this dismal performance, replete with Byzantine antics.

73. The Government of the ‘Ihrkish Republic of Northem Cyprus cannot, with all its good will, ignore, forgive or
appraise lightly the actions of the other side or the end
product of suchactions,for those resolutions have all the
ingredients that could signal the end of the initiatives of
the Secretary-General, or at least render them meaningless. We believe that the Secretary-General himself is
apprehensive about the effects of such actions and resolutions on his initiatives, knowing of course that the content of those resolutions runs counter to, and more often
than not rejects, the various agreements concluded between the two sides in Cyprus under the aegis of the
United Nations, on the basisof which the Secretary-General is mounting his initiatives. Our side’s evaluation of
the real intentions of the Greek and Greek Cypriot camp
is being vindicated by these actions;that camp has not yet
abandoned its old habit of viewing Cyprus as a Greek
island, let alone accepted us as equal partners in a bizonal, bicommunal federal republic.

69. The Greek Cypriot leadership should be made to
understand once and for all that the time has come for it
to make the crucial choice between, on the one hand, the
Secretary-General’s efforts and initiatives within the context of his mission of good offices in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 367 (1975), and, on the other, the
continuation of its tendentious activities in international
forums, falsely portraying its illegal administration as the
Government of Cyprus, capable of representing and
speaking for both srdes in Cyprus. In other words, the
7

74. In order the better to understand the Greek Cypriot
leadership’sbehaviour and to place it in the rightperspectrve, we would be well advised to refer to the speechmade
on 7 October 1985by the Prime Minister of Greece, Mr.
Papandreou, to his party’s parliamentary group. On that
occasionMr. Papandreou said, inrer ulia:

78. The ‘Ihrkish Cypriot side then responded positively
to an invitation by the Secretary-General to further consultations at a technical level in London on 18 and 19
November. Those consultations, too, were found useful
by the Secretary-General. Further contacts are anticipated.

“For a long time there have been initiatives within
the context of the mission of good offices of Mr. Perez
de Cu6llar. I must point out that those initiatives are
never in accordancewith the SecurityCouncil and General Assembly resolutions and declarations . . .

79. The Turkish people of Cyprus, confident of the justice of its struggle and totally committed to a peaceful
solution of its differenceswith the Greek Cypriot side,will
continue, asbefore, to extend to the Secretary-General its
full and ungrudging cooperation in his efforts within the
context of his mission of good offices.

“Those initiatives consist of Mr. Perez de Cu6llais
attempts to find a negotiated solution between the two
communities. I say‘two communities’ on purpose, because the mediatron attempts have created such an
atmosphere . . . For ‘us,the Cypi-usproblem has always
been and remains an international issue. It is not a
dispute between two communities.”

80.’ The Government and people of the Tlirkish Republic of Northern Cyprus know that their State has legally,
constitutionally-and morally a sound basisand believe that
it can be used as a starting point for a return to legality
and legitimacy in the whole of Cyprus. Only in this way
can the illegality and illegitimacy that have pervaded q
prus for 22 years be removed.

Mr. Papandreou then goes on to complain about his
oppositron and third parties ,blaming him and the Greek
Cypriot side for lack of progress in the negotiations and
contacts and adds, “These constant accusationsare the
reason for cypruS remaining and acting within the framework of Cutllar’s initiatives”.
.
75. That lucid expose by Mr. Papandreou tells it all. It
explains with clarity why intercommunal talks and the
initiatives and efforts of the Secretary-General have not
succeeded.It confessesthat the Greek and Greek Cypriot
side has all along been paying only lip-service to the
intercommunal negotiatrons and to the SccretaryGeneral’s mission of good offices. And it contains the
explanation for Mr. Kyprianou’s rejection of the 27 November draft agreement. I believe some members will
agreewith me in concluding that for the Greek and Greek
Cypriotsideperpetuationoftheconflictisanendinitself.

81. We invite the Greek Cypriotleadership to take a step
back at this late hour from the edge of the precipice and
seethat its interest, too, lies in reconciling its differences
with the Turkish Cypriot side. That reconciliation can be
achieved without undue sacrificeson its part, because all
its ingredients and elements are found in the various
agreementswhich the two sides have already made over
the years.It need only respect and implement the agreementsit has made with us. Acceptance of this path by the
Greek Cypriot leadership will, we are sure, lead us to the
establishmentof a bicommunal, bi-zonal federal republic,
guaranteeing equal political status and the legitimate
rights and aspirations of both sidesin Cyprus.
82.’ The Turkish guarantee, which has proved so effeo
tive in bringing the Turkish Cypriot people and the isIand
of Cyprus back from the brink of destruction and colonization, is the only element which will safeguard the workability and durability of such a settlement. We cannot
forgo this guarantee, and the Greek Cypriot side cannot
reasonably oppose it, unless it harbours ill intentions for
the future.

76. Deipite all this, the ‘lbrkish people of Cyprus and its
elected leadership, displaying extreme patience, preserved their faith in the initiative of the Secretary-General
and continued in this period to give it full support and
co-operation. Notwithstanding the almost overwhelming
ressure not to do so, the Government of the l’brkish
fl epublic of Northern Cyprus kept open its channels of
communication with Mr. Perezde CuCllar, with a view to
helping him advance his initiative after the setbackof 17
January suffered at the hands of Mr. Kyprianou.

83. Rejection of the guarantee or attempts to circumvent it by new-fangled means destroy the chancesof successin r&oncilingthe differences between the two sides
in Cyprus. This attitude, together with the precondition
of the withdrawal of all the ‘Xbrkish troops before a solution is found in Cyprus, servesonly thosewhose interests
are juxtaposed with the perpetuation of the conflict and
anti-Turkish enmity. It only serves the self-interest of
Prime Minister Papandreou, who, in a speechto his Parliament on 6 December, only two days before the Greek
Cypriot elections in the south, served the world with
another clear notice of his determination to hamper all
efforts towards a negotiated, satisfactory solution of the
coIl.flictillcypnls.

77. As a result of those contacts,the Secretary-General
invited President Denktag to further consultations in New
York on 11 and 12 September 1985.Two days of sincere
talks encouraged the Secretary-General to release the
following statement:
..
‘The Secretary-General has had .most useful talks
with His Excellency Mr. Denktag. These talks will be
helpful to him in assessingthe present situation and in
deciding upon the next step to be taken by the Secretary-General in the near future. The Secretary-General
will continue to be in touch with both sides.”

84. In that speechMr. Papandreou, infer&z, warned the
Greek *riot community against a rappmchemenr with
the ‘Rukrsh Cypriot side through negotiations within the
context of the Secretary-General’s mission of good of8

terpart, the,‘Ibrkish Cypriot leadership, in order to find
solutions to our remaining differences.

fices, which, in a previous speech I have already quoted,
he. had said he rejected. He also gave a stem warning to
the Greek Cypriot community that he would have no
qualms about interfering in its internal affairs. He took
pains to influence the outcome of the Greek Cypriot
parliamentary elections in favour of Mr. Kyprianou and
the rejection& front. The election results show that he
was clearly successful in this regard. As the dust settles in
south Cyprus, we wonder whether Mr. Kyprianou and the
other beneficiaries will ever be allowed to forget the help
they received from this indiscreet tirade by Mr.
Papandreou.

90. Similarly, the reference in the fourth preambular
paragraph to “other relevant resolutions” is unacceptable
to the ‘Ibrkish Cypriot side-since the ‘Ihrkish Qpriot
side has either rejected in fofo or accepted subject to
reservations the resolutions in question.
91. Concerning the reference in paragraph 2 to the “mission of good offices” of the Secretary-General, the Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
would like to state that it understands that missiontbbe
emanating from Security Council resolution 367 (1975),
in which case my Government pledges its full support to
it. As before, we shall be ready and willing to co-operate
fully with any initiative the Secretary-General may wish to
undertake within the context of his mission of good of-

85. The cruciai question which is being pondered is
whether the Secretary-General-with
so many unwarranted broadsides directed at his initiatives by Mr.
Papandreou, applauded by the present Greek Cypriot
leadership-+vill
be able to continue with his initiatives.
The international press clearly sees the results as a setback

fiC43.

92. In paragraph 3, a reference is made to the “present
mandate” of UNFICYI? As the Secretary-General himself states in paragraph 7 of his report -to the Council
[S/17657] this mandate “was conceived in the context of
the confrontation between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish
Cypriot communities”
and as such, after 21 years, the
mandate in question is not compatible with the radically
changed conditions and circumstances of today. We believe, therefore, that a reappraisal of UNFIcyp’s
mandate is long overdue and necessary.

86. Turning now to the resolution just adopted, I wish to
stress the following points.
87. The Government of the Turkish Republic of Northem Cyprus finds itself once again in the osition of rejecting the resolution in zuto. While we %o not doubt the
Council’s sincerity in desiring an amicable solution to the
problems between the two sides in Cyprus, we believe that
the resolution will not help bridge the gap between the
parties to the conflict. On the contrary, in the light of the
foregoing, it will increase the intransigence of the Greek
Cypriot side, seeing that its pretence is once again connived at by the international community. This will almost
certainly be the result of the reference to “Government of
Cyprus” in the resolution.

93. Despite its unavoidable rejection in tofo of the present resolution for the reasons stated above, the Turkish
Cypriot side is nevertheless favourably disposed to accept
the presence of UNFICYP on the territory of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus on the same basis as that
stated in June 1985. Thus our position continues to be that
the principle, the scope, the modalities and the procedures of co-operation between the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and UNFICYP shall be
based only on decisions which shall be taken solely by the
Government of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.

88. The administration to which the resolution refers as
the “Government of Cyprus” is nothing more than an
illegal, usurping entity, which by hook or by crook and by
default has, as I have stated before, managed to conceal
its evil character behind the title of “Government of Cyprus”. Yes, there was once a legitimate Government of
Cyprus, constitutionally, legally and morally equipped to
represent the whole of Cyprus, but that Government,
some may remember, was toppled by force of arms by its
Greek Cypriot wing, which then ejected the Turkish Cypriots from all the organs of that Government. Thus the
Government of Cyprus, as decreed by the now defunct
1960 Constitution, ceased to exist and the 1960 Constitution was also shelved. Those of us who are inclined to look
forfuits accomplis in Cyprus would do well to remember
and look into this case, because it is the onlyfair accompIi
which we know to have taken place in
rusanditisa
fait accompli par excellence, to which the
9 urkish people
of Cyprus has not succumbed and never shall.

94. We earnestly hope that Governments contributing
troops will display a neutral stance in the dispute between
the two peo les. I do not wish to go into the details of the
matter, but P can only say that theSecretary-General
has
already been informed of the issue. We shall keep this
matter under review in the light of some recent developments which have caused serious misgivings.
95. Before concluding, I should like to avail myself of
this opporttmity once again to convey to Mr. Javier Perez
de Cutllar my Government’s profound appreciation and
thanks for his untiring efforts within the context of his
mission of good offices and for the balanced and egalitarian way in which he pursues his contacts with both sides
in Cyprus. Our gratitude is his due. Our sincere. thanks
and appreciation go to Mr. Brian Urquhart, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, who in his
long years of invaluable services to the United Nations has
earned the respect of all the ‘parties he has had to deal
with. We in Northern Cyprus respect him very much and
wish him well in his future endeavours. Our appreciation

89. Feather-bedding of this illegal entity by third parties
may give it an edge in its international and bilateral dealings, but at the end of the day the decisive factor is our
righteous non-recognition of it. Let me stress once again
that unless that usurped seat is relieved of its burden there
will not be much use in hoping that the Greek Cypriot
leadership will engage in a serious dialogue with its coun9

and thanks go also to the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, Mr. James Holger, to
Major-General
Guenther Greindl, UNFICYP
Commander, and the officers and the men under his command
for their undersf anding and the efficient way in which they
carried out their duties during this period. We wish also
to thank the members of the Secretariat dealing with the
Cyprus issue. We commend Mr. Gustave Feissel and Mr.
Giandomenico Picco for their dedication in discharging
their responsibilities. Lastly, I take this opportunity to
wish Mr. Marrack Gouldmg every success in his new
exalted post.

96. The PRESIDENT

retary-General in his mission, and we are grateful to him
for pursuing his good offices. We shall certainly continue
to play a constructive role in support of an agreed settlement between the ‘Ibrkish Cypriots and the Greek Qpriots-the two peoples of Cyprus who have to reconcile
their differences through negotiations in a manner which
satisfies the legitimate concerns and interests of both sides
on the basis of political equality.
102. I do not wish to go into the substance of the matter
at this stage since the members of the Council have been
kept informed of the efforts begun by the Secretary-General in August 1984, which culminated in the joint highlevel meeting of 17 January 1985. The unfortunate
conclusion of that meeting has unavoidably continued to
influence subsequent developments.

(intetpretationfiom French): The

next speaker is the representative
now call.

of Turkey, on whom I

97. Mr. TURKMEN
(‘Ihrkey): I am grateful to you, Sir,
and the other members of the Council for granting me this
opportunity of making a statement. I wish to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of December. I am confident that your
experience and wisdom will be invaluable in guiding the
deliberations of the Council to constructive results. May
I also pay a warm tribute to Mr. Richard Woolcott, who
presided over the Council with distinction and diligence
in November.

103. As the Secretary-General notes in his report, Turkish Cypriot views were communicated to him extensively
on 8 August 1985 by President Denktag, who has subsequently met the Secretary-General in New York on 12 and
13 Se tember. The Secretary-General remarked that he
woul a be in touch with both sides with regard to the next
step he would take. At the suggestion of the SecretaryGeneral, talks were held at the technical level between the
‘Ibrkish Cypriot negotiator and his advisers and the Secretary-General’s staff in London in November. The Secretary-General had also similar talks with the Greek
Cypriot side. We hope that these discussions will enable
the Secretary-General to continue his mission of good
offices with a greater chance of success. I must say, however, that certain recent developments and statements of
Greek Cypriot and Greek leaders cannot be reconciled
with a genuine desire to contribute to a negotiated settlement.

98. The United Nations Peace-keedne Force in CMrus
will soon be entering its twenty-secoidiear
of existk’nce.
The ‘Ihrkish Cypriots fortunately no longer face the tragic
situation which prompted the creation and the stationing
of the Force in the island during the dark days of 1964.
UNFICYP’s continued presence after 21 years has to be
viewed in the light of the radically changed circumstances
in the island and in the context of its role- in support of
peace-making efforts. Because of this role in particular,
we would have wished this resolution on UNFICYP
to
have a content enjoying the support of all the directly
interested parties.

104. In October, Prime Minister Papandreou, speaking
before the parliamentary group of PASOK, expressed his
opposition to the content and scope of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts on Cyprus. Then the Secretary-General
was obliged to remind Mr. Papandreou of the basis of his
mission of good offices, as well as of the statement by the
President of the Security Council calling upon all parties
to co-operate with the Secretary-General.

99. I do not need to repeat here our fundamental objeo
tions to the contents of the resolution just adopted by the
Council. They are well known by the members of the
Council and continue to remain valid. Mr. Gzer Koray has
reaffirmed the position of the Turkish Republic of Northem Cyprus on the present resolution and on the modalities of UNFICYP’s presence in Northern Cyprus. I only
wish to reconfirm the Turkish Government’s complete
agreement with this position.

105. More recently, Mr. Papandreou made a statement
in the Parliament which is contrary to the basic premises
on which the Secretary-General’s efforts are based. That
statement came on 6 December, just before the Greek
Cypriot elections held on 8 December. I do not wish to
elaborate on this timing, but its purpo~was clearly diagnosed in the international press. Let me just quote here a
paragraph from The New York limes of 9 December about
the consequences of the important support Mr. Kyprianou
received from Mr. Papandreou:

100. We understand, of course, thewish of the Turkish
-Republic of Northern Cyprus to keep under constant
review its position on the presence of UNFICYP, in particular in the light of recent developments which might
impair the impartiality of some troop-contributing
countries.

Qe result of this competition of patriotic claims,
according to diplomats, has been to move the entire
Greek
riot political spectrum to less conciliatory
attitudes.T-his * is believed to make even less promising
Mr. Perez de Cutllar’s efforts to bring Mr. Kyprianou
and Rauf Denktas, the unchallenged leader of the Tbrkish community, back to New York for another attempt
at ending the ll-year stalemate.”

101. I should like to thankthe Secretary-General for his
present report, which reflects the continuing efforts he is
deploying in the framework of his mission of good offices
for a peaceful solution to the long-standing problems
between the two sides in the island. The Turkish Govern?
ment has consistently supported and encouraged the Sec10

106. The latest statementby Mr. Papandreou cannot be
characterizedasanything but a very rigid standagainstany
negotiated settlement. It is significant that the Greek
opposition leader stated in the Parliament that he radically disagreed with Mr. Papandreou’s views on the Cyprus problem, adding that there were possibilities for a
lust settlement of the issuein the context of the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative. The opposition leader spoke again
today and accusedMr. Papandreou of undermining the
efforts of the Secretary-General. Obviously, Mr.
Kyprianou fully supports Mr. Papandreou. He expressed
his gratification at the Greek Prime Minister’s position.
107. In the circumstances,it is clear that progresscan be
made only if the Greek Cypriots and Greek leaders
change their basic positions and come to the conclusion
that they really want a negotiated agreement. If they
compete with each other in making militant speeches
totally irrelevant to the reality of the situation and the wish
of the international community, they will not even fool
their own public opinion, asevidenced by the reactions in
Greece and southern Cyprus.
108. It is incumbent upon ‘Brrkeyand Greece to do their
utmost to facilitate and encouragean agreement between
the two sidesin Cyprus through the good offices mission
of the Secretary-General. That is what Turkey is doing,
and it must be clear to everybody that we shall not support
any other negotiating process.If Greece is unhappy with
the Secretary-General’s mission and the prospect of a
settlement in Cyprus on the basisof the principles agreed
upon by the Turkish and Greek Cypriots, it should then at
least refrain from interfering in a negative and destructive
manner. But at present the Greek Government is actively
intervening in the negotiating process,with the obvious
objective of disrupting it. There are even from time to time
ominous signsof an intent to broaden this intervention to
the military field. At this stage, we thought it would be
useful to call the attention of the Security Council to the
dangers involved in present Greek policies.
109. Indeed, the statement of the representative of
Greece has confiied our misgivings. It has made clear
that Mr. Papandreou wishes to impose the terms of a
settlement in Cyprus. Mr. Dountas has,in fact, presented
us with a detailed scenario made in Athens. It rs obvious
that Mr. Papandreou considers that he has the right to
veto an agreement between the two negotiating parties
that is not to his liking. This statement by Mr. Dountas is
the most convincing proof that the main obstacletoday to
a negotiated agreement between the two Cypriot sides is
Greece. Greece is the causeof the tragedy in Cyprus; Mr.
Papandreou should not aggravate it further.
110. There was a torrent of vicious and unfounded allegations in the statement by Mr. Moushoutas. It is clear
that he made a specialeffort to surpasseven his previous
statementsin this regard. Does he really believe that such
intense rhetoric will distract the attention of the Security
Council from the real question? Is the Greek Cypriot
Administration willing to negotiate an agreement within
the framework proposed by the Secretary-General? If not,
the abundant verbrage to which we have been exposed is
just a waste of time.

111. I shall therefore not waste more of the Council’s
time by replying to Mr. Moushoutas. Let me just clarify
one point. The draft agreement submitted by the Sccretary-General in January 1985 foresaw negotiations on a
timetable for the withdrawal of non-Cypriot forces--not
only Turkish forces. The Turkish Cypriots accepted this
draft agreement, but the Greek Cypriots rejected it.
Therefore, whatever has been said here about the withdrawal of Turkish forces is pure demagoguery.
112. Irr conclusion, I wish to expressagain our thanks
to the Secretary-General and to assure him of my
Government’s full support for his mission of good offices.
We hope his efforts within this framework will be successful. I should like to express our appreciation to MajorGeneral Guenther Greindl, Commander of UNPICYP
and his staff. I should like alsoto thank Mr. JamesHolger,
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, aswell asthe Secretariat members dealing with
Cyprus here in New York. They all enjoy the confidence
of the Turkish side, and this hasvery particular importarxe
in the context of this problem.
113. The PRESIDENT (intepretutbn from French):
The representative of Qprus has asked to be allowed to
make a statement, and I now call on him.
114. Mr. MOUSHOU’IXS (Cyprus): Unlike the representative of Turkey, I should hke to take a few minutes of
the Council’s time in order to set the record straight and
defend my Government and people. I do so in the hope
that if certain facts are made abundantly clear to the
Council and the problem we are facing is seen in its right
perspective, a positive contribution will be made to the
efforts under way to achieve a just and lasting solution.
115. As I have done at previous meetingsof the Security
Council, I shall addressmy remarks only to the representative of Turkey. It is not my intention to disregard-nor
do I believe the members of this body will disregard-the
statement of the individual who was allowed to speak in
his personal capacityunder rule 39 of the rovisional rules
of procedure-and then proceeded onry to abuse that
right, in order to complement the voice of the occupying
Power. In spite of that statementby him, I feel that Turkey
is the principal and that ‘Rukey madeboth statements;for
he who does things through surrogatesactually doesthem
himself.
116. I would only saythat if Mr. Koray sheds the guise
of the surrogate, one seesthat he is in reality a Cypriot. I
sincerely consider him as such-a member of a community which is an inseparable part of our people.
117. The representative of Turkey, through Mr. Koray
and in his own statement, went to some length to lay
down the importance of the issueof the withdrawal oPthe
occupation troops. His motive is obvious. ‘Ihke away the
forces of occupation, allow the Cypriot people to move
freely all over their country, deprive Turkey of any pretext
on which to allege grounds to be present for an invasion,
and the whole Turkish thesis of presenting their Attila as
a peacemaker falls flat on its face.

118. The Council will no doubt appreciate that Turkey
and its few apologistscould not succeedin their diversionary tactics.They could not impress upon the Council and
the world at large their fallacious notion that there is no
need to pay attention to little details such as the withdrawal of the Turkish forces of occupation and the application to Cyprus of the minimum prerequisite for every
State structure, whether federal or unitary. I consider the
three freedoms to be a minimum: freedom of citizensto
move about, freedom to settle and freedom to own property, especiallyif they were deprived of suchpropertres by
someinvaders, asI saidin my statement, and settlersfrom
Turkey.
119. But if I may be allowed to take a more sober view
towards these ‘Ihrkish assertions,I would strongly submit
that Ankara’s spokesmen are out of order and in utter
contem t of the Security Council whenever they present
themsePves in the Council, making propositions and prop
agating partition, secession,perpetuation of the military
occupation and the prevention or curtaihnent of basic
human rights to the people of Cyprus as a whole.
120. The Turkish side complains about the Luanda declaration and the Commonwealth declaration. They say
they are one-sided and they are therefore not bound by
them. May I remind the Council that l’brkey voted for
resolution 3212 (XXIX) in the General Assembly.That
resolution, as may be recalled, was later endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974) and made
mandatory. Does the representative of Turkey consider
that that has nothing to do with reality? Having voted for
that resolution, what did Turkey do to implement it? Have
the Turkish occupation troops withdrawn, asprovided for
in the resolution? Has the demand for respect for the
sovereignty and independence, territorial integrity and
unity of Cyprus been met? Have the refugees been allowed to return to their homes and lands in safety, as is
provided for in the resolution? Those are the pomts to
which the representative of Turkey should address himself.

position with regard to the initiative. I said quite clearly, I
dare sayunequivocally, that the Greek Government “has
consistentlysupported and continues to support the initiative of the Secretary-General”, and I went on to saythat
we “appreciate his untiring efforts and his dedication in
carrying out a highly difficult mission”. And I concluded
that part by saying that we sincerely hoped he would be
able through the procedure he has initiated to bridge the
gap between the positions of the sides.That is what I said,
and it doesnot conformwithwhat Mr. ‘IQ&men maintains
I said.
125. But apart from that I should like to make it clear
that not only do we sup rt the Secretary-General’s initiative; we have also ma8”e agreat many positive contriiutions within the framework of numerous contactsin order
to see that initiative succeed.But what we are againstand I want to be extremely emphatic on this--is the
continuation of the occupation of Cyprus by Turkish
troops. In this we are both rigid and unswerving.
126. And I should like to ask Mr. Xi&men why he
construes the statement that we want to see the occupation troops withdrawn from Cyprus asbeing irreconcilable
with the initiative of the Secretary-General. Does hebelieve that the Secretary-General is in favour of continuation of the occupation, orperhaps, which is mostprobable,
does he wish to give us a clear hint that the Tmkish troops
will not withdraw from Cyprus?
127. There is another point I should like to touch onvery
briefly. Mr, Koray said that the-Prime Minister of .Greece,
in one of his recent statements to the Parliament, had
warned the Greek Cypriots against any rapprochement
between the two communities. That is absolutely hxorrect. On no occasionhas the Prime Minister said or even
hinted that he is against rapprochement between the two
communities. The only explanation I can fmd is that
perhaps Mr. Koray did not have time to read the statement of Mr. Papandreou and he found it convenient to
draft a statement of the Prime Minister to match his own
purposes.

121. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fmm French): I
call on the representative of Greece.

128. I am a bit hesitant to refer to one of the remarks
made by Mr. ‘Ibrkmen. He referred to a statement by the
leader of the Greek opposition criticizing the Prime Minister. In Greece, asin many other countries, very often the
opposition critic&s the Government. I am really sorry
that the situation in Turkey does not permit me to quote
from statementsof the Turkish opposition.

122. Mr. DOUN’IXS (Greece): I should like to refer to
a few of the statements and remarti made by Mr.
Tilrkmen.
123. M distinguished colleague, referring to the statements o?Prime Minister Pa andreou, the gist of which is
that the Turkish army shoupd withdraw from Cyprus before anytrausitional Government is setup-that is thegist
of all the statementsof Prime Minister Papandreou-Mr.
lb&men maintained that those statementsare irreconcilable with the hritiative of the Secretary-General, that
those statementsare against a negotiated settlement. He
also said that those statementswere undermining-perhaps I am not using the exact words, but I am giving the
gist-the initiative of the Secretary-General.

129. The PRESIDENT (inteqvvtatbn jdm French): I
call on the representative of Turkey.
130. Mr. -N
(‘lbrkey): F&t of all I wish to
assure Mr. Dountas that I am going to send him some
statementsfrom opposition leaders in ‘&key. We accept
that there is democracy in Greece. Democracy in Greece
came after the tragedy Cyprus underwent in 1974,when
the Greek dictatorship tried to invade the island. It was
thanks to the ‘Ibrkish mtervention and the consequences
of that intervention-the uproar in Greek public o inion,
the reaction of the Greek people-that brought Bemocracy to Greece. I think it is not, therefore, very proper for

124. Allow me to attempt to ut the record straight. We
are not against the initiatrve oPthe Secretary-General. A
few moments ago I had the opportunity to reiterate our
12

136. As to the gratitude we owe to the invasion of Cvnrus
by the Turkish &my, because throu that invasiocdemocracy was restored in Greece- !? would assure Mr.
Birkmen that in the list of the benefactors of democracy,
after the name of Pericleswe will inscrii the name of the
Rtrkish army.

Mr. Dountas to try to Intimate that there is no democracy
2 gckg There 1sdanocracy today both m ‘Ibrkey and
.
131. Now, perhaps -repon
why, in ‘&key, the oppo
sition leader is not a5cmng the policy of the Thrkish
Government on w
is that the Turkish Government’s
policy in that resped ia vev clear. We just sup rt the
good offices missiondthe Secretary-General. T e do not
enter into the substanz of the matter. We do not want to
influence in any negxtive manner the ongoing negotiations between the two sidesin Cyprus under the auspices
).
of the Secretary-General

137. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Cyprus has asked to make a statement, and I now call upon him. _.
138. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (C&x-us): Withdrawal of foreign troops-as a matter of fact, o&i ation troops, as
they are described in relevant Unite B Nations resolutions-is not prejudging the outcome of the negotiations.
This is a solemn demand in solemn decisionsof this body,
and ‘Ibrkcy has not implemented those resolutions. We
are here to renew the mandate of UNFICYI? The question is, why is UNFICYP there? UNFICYP is there because lhrkey again did not comply with decisions and
resolutions of this body. I would also invite the attention
of the representative of Turkey to the resolution just
adopted, and specifically to the paragraph that states:
“Reaffirming the provisions of resolution 186 (1964) and
other relevant resolutions”.

132. Mr. Dountas saysthat he seesnothing in what Mr.
Papandreou has said that is against the initiative of the
Secretary-General, that he has paid his tribute to the
Secretary-General. I did not say that he has not paid
compliments to the Secretary-General. What I said is that
Prime Minister Papandreou, by taking the sitions that
he has taken, is prejudging the outcome o$ the negotiations between the two sidesin Cyprus. Mr. Dountas himself provided us with a detailed agreement proposed by
Mr. Papandreou, but Mr. Papandreou and the Greek
Government are not direct negotiators. The negotiators
are, on the one hand, the Greek Cypriots and, on the other
hand, the Turkish Cypriots.

139. The PRESIDENT (inzerprefafionfiom French): Before calling upon the representative of Turkey, who has
asked to make a statement, I would like to appeal to the
various representatives. We have listened to you most
attentively. Like my colleagues here, I am convinced that
it would bc pointless to prolong this debate. It is not today,
in hearing the different views with which we are very
familiar, that we will be able to resolve the problem.
--..
140. I till upon the representative of Turkey.

133. Mr. Moushoutas s ke at length about resolution
3212 (XXIX) and other tipnited Nations resolutions and
of the fact that ‘Ihrkey has not implemented them, and he
said that all those resolutions were relevant to our discussion here today. They are not. He has only to read the
resolution just adopted. The only operative paragraph
with regard to negotiations, paragraph 2, requests the
Secretary-General to continue his mission of good off%xs,
to keep the Security Council informed of the progress
made and to submit a report on the implementation of the
resolution by 31 May 1986. I do not see any reference
there to other resolutions. His statement, therefore, was
totally irrelevant.

141. Mr. TURKMEN (‘Ibrkcy): First of all, when Mr.
Dountas speaks of the Turkish “invasion” and the debt
owed to the ‘Rtrkish army, he forgets one thing. He forgets
that in 1974 the late Archbishop Makarios came to the
Council and said that he wasfacing, not aTurkish invasion,
but a Greek invasion. This is in the records of the Security
Council for its 1780th meeting. What happened in 1974
was a ‘Ibrkish intervention within the framework of the
Treaty of Guarantee which now Mr. Dountas saysgives
Greece the right to dictate the terms of a settlement in
cypl-=
:
142. I also wish on this occasion to point out a contradiction in Greece’s position. On the one hand, it rejects
the Treaty of Guarantee and it saysit does not want- to
become a party to a treaty of guarantee in the future, and,
on the other hand, they take advantage of it today. They
say that as a guaranteeing Power they have the right to
interfere in the negotiating processin Cyprus. We are not
doing that.

134. The PRESIDENT (inzerP~ration from French):
The representative of Greece has asked to make a statement, and I call upon him to do so.
135. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): It iswith reluctance that
I have asked to speak again. I should like to say that by
quoting what my Prime Minister said and in what I said I
am not prejudging the outcome of the negotiations.
Greece-and I made this clear at the very outset of my
statement-in the capacity of guarantor of the Republic
of Cyprus, which means in the same capacity as Turkey,
felt that it had the right and the duty to make clear its
position with regard to this very important international
aspectof the Cyprus problem and to say to all the members of the Council that one of the fundamental positions
of Greece with regard to the solution of the
rus problem is the withdrawal of the Turkish army.% e did not
impose that solution on the Secretary-General; we did not
impose that position on anybody. We simply stated our
position, as it is our inalienable right to do.

143. As far as Pericles is concerned, I must Saythat we
all owe a debt to Pericles.But Greece itself has not been
very faithful to Pericles,andwe would therefore all do very
well to be respectful to Pericles, but also to render to
Caesarwhat is due to Caesar-and certainly Greece owes
13

to the Turkish intervention in Cyprus after the Greek
invasion of Cyprus a debt of gratitude for its own democl-=Y.

146. The PRESIDENT (infeqefufion *rn French):
The representative of Cyprus wishesto make a statement,
andInowcalluponhim..

144. The PRESIDENT (inreq~~&n from French): In
spite of my appeal the representative of Greece wishesto
make a statement, and I therefore calI upon him.

147. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (Qprus): If the Treaty of
Guarantee had given such a right, it would8have been
against the provisions of ArticIe 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations. As we ah know, Article
103 does not allow for such contradiction.

145. Mr. DOUNlXS (Greece): I immensely appreciate
the Council’s generosity. I would iike to saythat I did not
sayI was going to dictate a solution. Again, I repeat that
what I said is that we wanted to make our position clear.
As to the Treaty of Guarantee, we never saidwe were not
a guaranteeing Power. What we said is that we do not
recognize that the Treaty of Guarantee gives the right of
military intervention in Cyprus.

Litho

iu United

Nations,

New York

148. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation jivm French):
There are no further speakers.The Security Council has
thus completed the resent stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenBa.
The meeting me at 1.20p.m.

90-61439-October

1991-2.050
