A/59/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-ninth session

73rd plenary meeting
Friday, 17 December 2004, at 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at noon.
Agenda items 45 and 55 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/59/L.53)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a joint debate on
these two agenda items at its 58th, 59th and 60th
meetings, held on 22 and 23 November 2004.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/59/L.53 will be issued later today in all languages
under the symbol A/59/615. The English version of
that report is now before the Assembly. In that regard,
with the understanding of members, the Assembly will
proceed at this meeting to take action on the draft
resolution before it.
At the outset I would like sincerely to thank all
delegations for the spirit of cooperation they have
accorded me throughout the consultations, as well as
for the constructive proposals they have put forward. I
would also like to address my most heartfelt
congratulations to the two facilitators — Mr. Eduardo
Sevilla Somoza, Permanent Representative of

(Gabon)

Nicaragua, and Mr. Johan Løvald, Permanent
Representative of Norway — on the superb job they
have done and on the dedication with which they did it.
The draft resolution I am submitting today to the
General Assembly for adoption is the outcome of
intensive consultations conducted by the facilitators
and myself over more than a month with delegations,
both individually and in groups. I thus consider it to be
the product of a collective endeavour. It seems to me
important to stress that draft resolution A/59/L.53 is
designed to set the general timetable for the holding of
the high-level meeting. I see in it particularly a
worthwhile tool that would enable our leaders to begin
now to plan their own participation and that of other
members of their Governments in the 2005 high-level
meeting, and in activities related to preparing for it,
such as the High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development.
Given the many issues on which we still have to
make decisions, particularly as regards the preparatory
process and the outcome of the high-level meeting, the
General Assembly will have to take action on other
related draft resolutions at the beginning of next year.
This applies to the matter of the co-presidency of the
high-level meeting, the drawing up of the list of
speakers for the plenary meetings as well as the
organization of and participation in the round tables.
We will also have to decide on practical organizational
modalities or the High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development, to be held on 27 and 28 June 2005, and
for the meeting on financing for development to be

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-65211 (E)

*0465211*

A/59/PV.73

held within the framework of the high-level meeting.
We also will have to consider how to organize the
interactive hearings envisaged for the month of June
2005.
As regards the involvement of observer
delegations — particularly that of the Holy See, in its
capacity as an observer State, and that of Palestine, in
its capacity as observer — I should like to inform the
Assembly that — as was done for the Millennium
Summit — the modalities of their participation will be
specified in a subsequent draft resolution, on which we
shall have to work early next year.
Lastly, as I have done on a number of previous
occasions, I should like to reaffirm that the preparatory
process for the high-level meeting will remain openended, inclusive and transparent. Thus, we will have to
bring into play a variety of inputs and ultimately adopt
a composite document dealing with all the major
issues. As was the case with other high-level meetings
of the General Assembly, every effort must be made to
reach consensus.
Before submitting draft resolution A/59/L.53 to
the Assembly for action, I wish to make some revisions
to the text.
In paragraph 4, the word “separate” should be
inserted before the words “meeting on financing for
development”; and the initial letters of the words
“financing” and “development” should be capitalized.
The latter part of that paragraph should thus read as
follows: “and also decides to hold a separate meeting
on Financing for Development within the framework of
the High-level Plenary Meeting”.
In paragraph 8, the word “informal” should be
inserted before the word “interactive”. The relevant
portion of the paragraph should thus read as follows:
“to organize informal interactive hearings”.
I now submit to the Assembly for adoption draft
resolution A/59/L.53, as orally revised, which I very
much hope will be adopted by consensus.
May I take it that the General Assembly adopts
the draft resolution, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/59/L.53, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 59/145).
The President (spoke in French): By adopting
this resolution by consensus, the General Assembly has
reaffirmed its commitment to fully shoulder its

2

responsibility to organize the high-level plenary
meeting scheduled for September 2005.
I personally welcome this major decision, and
wish to congratulate all concerned. Allow me also to
interpret this as an expression of the Assembly’s
confidence in the presidency. I once again express my
gratitude to the two facilitators for their major
contribution.
Before concluding, I want once again to make of
a point of congratulating all delegations on the interest
and the spirit of cooperation they manifested
throughout the consultations, which enabled us to
complete this first stage. I hope that our future
consultations will be carried out in the same spirit.
Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): Very briefly and
simply, the European Union would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your enormous personal efforts to
achieve this important result; our thanks go also to the
facilitators. We express our fullest commitment to
support you in the further preparatory process for the
high-level plenary meeting to be held in September
next year.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the observer of Palestine.
Mrs. Barghouti (Palestine): My delegation is
taking the floor just to express our thanks and
appreciation for the statement that you, Mr. President,
made before the adoption of this important resolution
with respect to the participation of Palestine in the
high-level plenary meeting to be held at the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly. We hope that the
omission of Palestine from the draft resolution will not
constitute a precedent for the future work of the
General Assembly.
Secondly, we regret very much the attempt by one
or two delegations to politicize this procedural draft
resolution. The inclusion in the draft resolution of
Palestine in its capacity as observer is not a request for
a favour from the General Assembly. It is our right,
and it is in conformity with the past practice of the
General Assembly, including its resolution 52/250,
which gives Palestine the same rights and privileges as
other States, without the right to vote.
Finally, I express our sincere hope that the
establishment of an independent and viable State of
Palestine will soon be realized and that our head of

A/59/PV.73

State will participate in the very important meeting to
be held in September 2005.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your statement about the
participation of the Holy See as an observer State at the
important high-level meeting. However, I would also
like to echo what has been said by my colleague of the

delegation of Palestine and hope that the previously
established practice of the General Assembly and what
is stated in resolution 58/314, on the status of the Holy
See in the General Assembly, will be fully taken into
consideration in the future, since it seems that this time
those elements were not fully taken into consideration.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly has thus completed the present stage of its
consideration of agenda items 45 and 55.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

3
