V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with concern that the measures taken so far in
favour of land-locked developing countries and the assistance given fall far short of their needs.
l. Reaffirms the right of land-locked developing
countries to free access to and from the sea and their
right to freedom of transit;
2. Appeals to ali States, international organizations
and financia! institutions to implement, as a matter of
urgency and priority, the specific actions related to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries envisaged in resolutions 63 (111), 98 (IV)
and 123 (V) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in other relevant resolutions of
the United Nations;
3. Urges ali donor countries, as well as those in a
position to do so and the international organizations
concerned, to provide land-locked developing countries
with appropriate financia! and technical assistance in
the form of grants or concessional loans for the construction and improvement oftheir transport and transit
infrastructures and facilities;
4. Urges a/so the international community and multilateral and bilateral financia] institutions to intensify
efforts in raising the net flow of resources to land-locked
developing countries to help offset the adverse effects of
their disadvantageous geographical situation on their
economic development efforts, in keeping with the overall economic situation of each land-locked country;
5. Invites the transit countries to co-operate effectively with the land-locked developing countries in harmonizing transport planning and promoting other joint
ventures in the field of transport at the regional, subregional and bilateral levels;
6. Commends the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and other United Nations agencies
for their work and the assistance they have provided to
the land-locked developing countries and invites them to
continue to take appropriate and effective measures to
respond to the specific needs of those countries;
7. Further invites the international community to
give financia! support to interested transit and landlocked developing countries in the construction of alternative routes to the sea;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities
relating to the conducting of necessary studies and
the implementation of special actions and action programmes for the land-locked developing countries, including those in the area of economic co-operation
among developing countries, as well as those that have
been e·nvisaged in the programme of work of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
regional commissions and other programmes and
activities at the regional and subregional levels.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/59.

Particular problems facing Zaire with regard to
transport, transit and access to foreign markets

The General Assembly,
Having considered the interim report of the SecretaryGeneral on the particular problems facing Zaire with
regard to transport, transit and access to foreign
markets, 4 '
"A/35/512.

121

Reca/ling resolution 110 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,4'
Recalling further its resolutions 32/ 160 of 19 December 1977, concerning the Transport and Communications Decade in A frica, and 34/ 193 of 19 December
1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General to take
the necessary steps to accelerate the implementation of
resolution 11 O (V) of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and to report thereon to the
General Assembly,
Regretting that the measures provided for in resolution 34/193 have not been implemented,
A ware of the particular difficulties facing Zaire
beca use of the problems encountered by its foreign trade
with regard to transport, transit and access to foreign
markets,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral48 on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 34/193 concerning the particular problems
facing Zaire with regard to transport, transit and access
to foreign markets;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with a view to enabling the appropriate organs of
the United Nations to provide the necessary technical
assistance as soon as possible to the Government of
Zaire and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth session.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/60.

United Nations Conference on trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 Septem_ber 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Trade and Development Board on its eleventh special session and twentieth session 40 and on its twenty-first session; 10
2. Notes with satisfaction the adoption, on 27 June
1980, of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund
for Commodities' t and the pledges already announced
for voluntary contributions to its second account, and
urges ali Governments to complete expeditiously the
procedures required for its signature, ratification, acceptance or approval, so that it may enter into force as
early as possible;

3. A/so notes with satisfaction the adoption, on
24 May 1980, of the United Nations Convention on lnternational Multimodal Transport ofGoods 12 and urges ali
Governments to consider signing the Convention and
taking the necessary steps to become contracting parties
to it as expeditiously as possible;
---

" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supp/ement No. /5 (A/35, 1 15), vol_ l.
1
" !bid., vol. 11.
'' TD/IPC/CF/CONF 1 24.
'' TD/MT /CONF/16
