V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
---

---

11. Strongly appeals to all contributing Governments to make every effort to pledge, in 1980, substantial increases in their contributions for 1981 and to those
Governments that have not yet contributed to the Fund
of the United Nations Environment Programme to
pledge to do so in 1980, in order that the agreed target
for the period 1978-1981 may be reached;
I 2. Invites Governments to consider proposals
whereby additional contributions to the Fund of the
United Nations Environment Programme would be
used for measures dealing with serious environmental
problems in developing countries, taking into account
the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
34/188 of 18 December 1979, and requests the Governing Council of the Programme to report thereon to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981;
13. Decides to convene, in 1982, a session of a
special character of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme, open to all States,
to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held
at Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972, at the same place
and immediately prior to the tenth regular session of the
Governing Council, and invites Governments to be represented at that session at a high political level:
14. Decides that at the session of a special character
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme should review the major achievements in the implementation of the Action Plan for the
Human Environment, adopted at Stockholm, m and
make recommendations with respect to the major environmental trends to be addressed by the Programme
over the forthcoming ten years:
15. Invites the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to proceed, in consultation with Governments, with the preparation of the
above-mentioned session and to present to the Governing Council, at its ninth session, a comprehensive report
on all matters relevant to the organization, agenda and
financial implications of the session, including proposals
as to the dates and venue of the two sessions.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/75.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 114 and the relevant recommendations for
national action I is adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinians in the occupied territories'',
contained in the recommendations for international cooperation adopted by Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements 1 '" and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 and
2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
11 1
· See Report of the United Natiom Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm. 5-16 June 1972 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.73.11.A.14 and corrigendum). chap. II.
'" See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-// June /976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.lV.7 and corrigendum) chap. I.
"' Ibid., chap. 11.
11
" Ibid., chap. 111.

--

135

---

Recalling further its resolutions 31/110 of 16 December 1976, 32/171 of 19 December 1977, 33/110 of
18 December 1978 and 34/113 of 14 December 1979,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Arab territories; 111
2. Deplores the refusal of the Government of Israel
to allow the Group of Experts on the Social and
Economic Impact of the Israeli Occupation on the Living Conditions of the Palestinian People in the Occupied Arab Territories 118 to visit the Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel;
3. Condemns Israeli policy resulting in the deterioration of the Jiving conditions of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories;
4. Calls upon all States to co-operate with United
Nations agencies, organizations and organs and local
Palestinian authorities to alleviate the tragic living conditions of the Palestinian people caused by the Israeli occupation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive and analytical report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, through the Economic and
Social Council, on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/76.

Strengthening of human settlements activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/116 of 14 December 1979
on the strengthening of human settlements activities,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1224 (XLII) of 6 June 1967 and 1670 (LII) of
I June 1972 concerning the improvement and upgrading
of living and environmental conditions in the squatter
settlements and slums of urban and rural areas,
Recognizing that one of the most urgent needs in
developing countries is to upgrade the living and working conditions of low-income and disadvantaged groups
in both rural and urban areas,
Reaffirming that adequate shelter and services are a
basic human right. as proclaimed in the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 134 and that, in
striving to uphold this right, priority must be given to
the needs of the poor, the homeless and the most vulnerable groups of society,
Noting with concern that, in the years that have
elapsed since the convening of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, the conditions of
human settlements in developing countries have, by and
large, worsened, particularly in the urban areas, where
the growth of slums and squatter settlements has continued unabated, in the midst of poverty, squalor, overcrowding and human degradation,
Noting also that an increasing number of Governments are committed to upgrading low-income urban
settlements and to improving the quality of life in rural
'" A/35/533 and Corr.I
'" For the report of the Group of Experts, see A/ 35/533 and
Corr. I, annex I.
'" See Report of Habitat: United Narions Conference on Human Sertlement.1', Vancouver. 3/ Mav-11 June /976 (United Nations publication. Sales No. F.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. I.

136

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

areas and that, although some progress has been
achieved in these directions, much remains to be accomplished,
Recognizing that it is necessary to translate the
recommendations of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements into action-oriented programmes and thereby renew the spirit and sense of
purpose proclaimed at the Conference,
Recognizing also that the provision of housing, infrastructure and services can constitute a major instrument and thrust for combating poverty, improving the
environmental conditions and quality of life, increasing
productivity, generating employment and income and
extending the fruits of economic progress to the poor
and the needy,
Noting with satisfaction that the Commission on
Human Settlements, at its third session, reviewed
especially, as selected themes of importance, the
upgrading of urban slums and squatter settlements and
the development of rural settlements and growth centres,
and requested the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to
continue to give high priority to these two subjects within
the work programme and the medium-term plan of the
Centre and to assist developing countries in related
practical programmes and pilot demonstration projects, 140
Considering that the international community should
take concrete steps to support the efforts of the developing countries to improve living conditions in both
their urban and their rural sectors, especially for the
benefit of underprivileged groups,
I. Urges Member States, within the framework of
their national plans and priorities, to strengthen their
policies regarding human settlements and to undertake
concrete action-oriented programmes to implement the
recommendations adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, with special emphasis on the provision of adequate shelter, infrastructure and services to the people living in squatter settlements and slums of urban and rural areas;
2. Calls upon the Commission on Human Settlements and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to provide all possible support to
Member States in the implementation of the abovementioned programmes;
3. Expresses the view that an international year
devoted to the problems of homeless people in urban
and rural areas in the developing countries could be an
appropriate occasion to focus the attention of the international community on those problems;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements to submit a
report, after appropriate consultations with Governments, to the Economic and Social Council, through the
Commission on Human Settlements at its fourth session, on the implications of declaring an international
year, which would be committed to providing homes for
the poor and the homeless and would focus world-wide
attention on the rehabilitation of the shanty-dweller,
taking into account the guidelines for future international years adopted by the Council in its resolution
1980/67 of 25 July I 980 and by the General Assembly
in its decision 35 /424 of 5 December 1980, and in accordance also with the goals and objectives of the Inter"" See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session. Supplement No. 8 (A/35 /8), annex I. decisions 3/ I 3 and 3/ 14

national Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade in the social field; 141
5. Requests the Commission on Human Settlements
to review the report at its fourth session and to transmit
it, with the Commission's comments, to the Economic
and Social Council for consideration at its second regular session of 1981, taking into account the guidelines
referred to in paragraph 4 above.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/77.

Human settlements
A

REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN
SETTLEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/162 of 19 December 1977
on institutional arrangements for international cooperation in the field of human settlements and its resolution 34/116 of 14 December 1979 on the strengthening of human settlements activities,
Recalling also its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/47 of 23 July 1980 on international cooperation in the field of human settlements,
Affirming that the development of human settlements
should be viewed in the context of national plans and
priorities and the development objectives of all countries, in particular the developing countries,
Recognizing that the Commission on Human Settlements has addressed itself meaningfully to substantive
issues in the field of human settlements, which are of
priority concern to Member States, particularly to developing countries,
Reaffirming the need to enhance the effectiveness and
improve the co-ordination of the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements (Habitat),
Having considered the report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its third session, 14 '
Takes note of the report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its third session.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
B
CO-OPERATION BETWEEN THE UNITED NATIONS
CENTRE FOR HUMAN SETTLEMENTS (HABITAT) AND
THE UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME

The General Assembly,
Recalling section VI, paragraph I, of its resolution
32/162 of 19 December 1977, by which it urged the
'" See resolution 35/56 above. annex, sect. II.
"· Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty:fifth Session.
Supplement No 8 (A/ 15,/8).
