S/PV.9363

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9363rd meeting

Thursday, 29 June 2023, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Diaba
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the Humanitarian needs in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2023/419)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021), 2642
(2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/464)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-18626 (E)
*2318626*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Humanitarian needs in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2023/419)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/464)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Najat Rochdi,
Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/419, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the humanitarian needs in
the Syrian Arab Republic; and document S/2023/464,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139
(2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533
(2020), 2585 (2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023).
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Rochdi.
Ms. Rochdi: The violence and suffering experienced
by the Syrian people in the past month have reminded
us all of what is at stake as diplomatic efforts continue
on Syria. Syrians still face acute and internationalized
conflict. In recent days, we have seen multiple rounds
of pro-Government airstrikes in the north-west. We
have received deeply worrisome reports of a strike
2/22

29/06/2023

on a market in north-west Syria, reportedly killing
and wounding civilians. Russia states that strikes
were carried out on command posts of illegal armed
formations, liquidating militants and arms depots in
the Idlib de-escalation zone. We have also seen multiple
drone strikes into Government-controlled areas from
areas controlled by the listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, reportedly also killing and wounding
civilians. Meanwhile, regular mortar, rocket and artillery
exchanges have continued across the front lines.
We have also seen reports of many other concerning
incidents, including Turkish drone and artillery strikes
on positions of the Syrian Democratic Forces and the
Government of Syria, as well civilian infrastructure; the
shelling of Turkish positions by the Syrian Democratic
Forces; Israeli air strikes; security incidents in southern
and central Syria; and the ongoing attacks by listed
terrorist groups. In recent days, Special Envoy Pedersen
raised with key actors in the ceasefire task force the need
for a restored and sustained calm. Ultimately, we need a
nationwide ceasefire in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Syrians face an ever-worsening humanitarian
crisis. As I stressed to the humanitarian task force this
week in Geneva, Syrians’ needs must be at the centre
of our approach, and humanitarian action must be
depoliticized — and that means that sufficient resources
are needed. We are grateful for the solidarity shown and
the generous pledges made at the Brussels Conference to
support operations in all areas of Syria, and we need swift
disbursements too. That also means ensuring access via
all modalities, including cross-line and cross-border. We
welcome the recent cross-line convoy into north-west
Syria. As we approach the expiration of the Council’s
cross-border resolution, let me underline the words of
the Secretary-General, who has repeatedly called for a
12-month extension, as well as the need for assistance to
be provided across all pillars of the humanitarian response
plan, including by enhancing early recovery. That also
means that sanctioning States should continue to build
on the moves they made in response to the earthquakes
and step-up efforts to counter over-compliance.
Let me note that more children than in the past
crossed combat lines to take exams this past month, a
welcome development signalling that all sides have
it within themselves to depoliticize access to aid and
services when they want to.
Syrians still face an acute economic crisis. The
Syrian pound stabilized for a short period in June.
But ordinary Syrians continue to grapple with rising
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

inflation and energy and fuel shortages. Syrians from
all quarters and all backgrounds are affected, fuelling
rising needs across the country.
The tragedy of the detained, the disappeared and
the missing continues. Their families, particularly
women and girls, are deeply affected. Many are
looking to the General Assembly’s vote today on draft
resolution A/77/L.79 with the hope that a new entity
dedicated to the issue of missing persons in Syria could
bring some measure of relief to families across Syria
and outside of it who have been demanding their right
to know the truth. Nevertheless, let us also remember
that thousands remain subject to arbitrary detention
and at risk every single day. We continue to call for
releases, unilaterally and at scale, without delay. My
colleagues who participated in the latest meeting of the
Astana Working Group on the Release of Detainees/
Abductees, Handover of Bodies and Identification of
Missing Persons appealed to those Member States with
influence to press for action on that issue, at a scale
commensurate with the problem. And we will continue
to raise that issue directly in our dealings with the
Government of Syria and all the relevant parties.
Let us also not forget the millions of Syrians living
in displacement, both inside Syria and abroad. They
have still seen no concrete shift in conditions that could
see them return voluntarily and in safety and dignity.
Many Syrians were among those who tragically
drowned recently when an overcrowded boat sank in
the Mediterranean Sea — a tragic reminder for all of us
of what hopelessness can bring.
All those factors show us why it is so important
for renewed diplomacy to translate into real solutions
to meet the immediate concerns of the Syrian people,
build some trust and confidence among the parties and
move forward towards a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). We have carried that message
to everyone this month. Special Envoy Pedersen has
engaged in Geneva with the Syrian Negotiations
Commission; in Paris, with senior United States, United
Kingdom and European officials; in Brussels, with the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and senior European
officials; and with the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Iraq,
Lebanon and Egypt and high-level officials of Italy.
The Special Envoy looks forward to continuing the
close cooperation with the Contact Group of the League
of Arab States. He travelled to Moscow, where he met
Russia’s Foreign Minister and other senior officials.

S/PV.9363

He attended the high-level meetings in Astana, where
he met with the Deputy Foreign Ministers of Iran,
Russia, Türkiye and the delegations of the Government
of Syria and the Syrian opposition. Iran, Russia, the
Government of Syria and Türkiye held a quadrilateral
meeting in Astana.
From those engagements, it is clear that moving
from intention to action requires genuine engagement,
flexibility and commitments from more than just one
group of actors. Even modest steps to improve the lives
of Syrians and move forward on the political track
will require action from many different sides, each
of whom has easy means to spoil if excluded. That is
why the Special Envoy has welcomed the enhanced
attention to Syria and seeks to maximize the coherence,
coordination and complementarity of the diplomatic
efforts that are under way, as well as to directly engage
the Syrian parties and all key players as the facilitator
of the political process.
In that regard, the Special Envoy continues his
efforts to reconvene the Constitutional Committee. We
must overcome the issues that prevent the Committee
from convening and see that it resumes its work and
develops some substance, and at pace. We continue to
appreciate creative ideas for overcoming the obstacles
and remain engaged with all the relevant parties to
reconvene the Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
On confidence-building, the question of Syrian
refugees and the internally displaced is another issue of
common concern. Our message remains very clear: the
principle of safe, dignified and voluntary refugee returns
must be upheld. The way forward is for the relevant
parties to take concrete steps on the protection and
livelihood issues that refugees themselves say inhibit
them from returning — actions that could also bring us
towards a safer, calmer and more neutral environment.
That is something that Special Envoy Pedersen is
continuing to look at with key players and coordinate
closely with other senior United Nations officials.
As the diplomatic efforts intensify, it is ever-more
important to hear the voices of the Syrians themselves.
It was therefore welcome to hear representatives of the
Civil Society Support Room and the Women’s Advisory
Board, in Brussels, deliver a clear message coordinated
by a wide range of Syrians from inside and outside:
that Syrians want a political solution that preserves the
unity and stability of Syria and aims to rebuild social
cohesion in a way that would respond to the aspirations
of the Syrian people — all of the Syrian people.

23-186263/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

Last week in Beirut, we heard a similar message
from an ad hoc consultative group of Civil Society
Support Room members, who discussed concrete
ways to harness the recent regional dynamics in
support of Syrians themselves and the political process
of resolution 2254 (2015), which they need to see
move urgently.
This month the Women’s Advisory Board convened
in Geneva and Brussels. It is essential to consult with
women because the conflict affects them in specific
ways, and they must play an active role in shaping a
political solution. It is also extremely useful to consult
with those women, who provided sharp insights and
advice on political opportunities and also on potential
pitfalls, such as the need to address protection concerns
in any efforts emanating from regional re-engagement.
As the Special Envoy noted, we will only be able
to say that the current opportunity has been seized
when we see confidence-building on the ground
and a genuine political process being resumed. We
still cannot say that the opportunity has been seized.
Diplomatic moves have yet to produce concrete results.
But the opportunity is still there all the same. The
Special Envoy continues to probe and test possibilities
for diplomatic traction on all aspects of resolution 2254
(2015), including via step-for-step confidence-building
measures and a resumption of the Constitutional
Committee. In the coming weeks, we hope that we can
continue to zone in with greater clarity and specificity
on how to build confidence, resume the intra-Syrian
political process and implement resolution 2254 (2015).
We look forward to continuing our engagement with
the Syrian parties and the Arab, Astana and Western
players on those issues in order to promote coordination
and move towards a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political resolution that restores Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and meets
the legitimate aspirations of all the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Rochdi
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me. I returned from Damascus yesterday with
a greater sense of the profound humanitarian challenges
about which Ms. Rochdi just spoke, but also of the
urgent opportunities facing Syria. The mission was my
third since the February earthquakes devastated the
region. I travelled to Syria to resume discussions with
4/22

29/06/2023

President Al-Assad and Foreign Minister Mekdad. It
was also a very important opportunity to hear about
the challenges and opportunities first-hand from the
United Nations and non-governmental organization
(NGO) leadership, international and national, in
Damascus. In Jordan, I was fortunate enough to have
the chance to exchange views with Foreign Minister
Ayman Safadi about regional dynamics connected to
Syria. The various discussions left me with several
lasting impressions.
First, the people of Syria are suffering more today
than we can truly appreciate. We have said so often in
the Chamber that each year their suffering continues
to increase. Today families across the country want to
celebrate the holy day of Eid Al-Adha, and yet they are
doing so with less food on their plates, little fuel in their
stoves and less water in their homes. Households have
to pool income from every possible source just to cover
basic expenses and often do not succeed. Twelve years
of conflict, the economic collapse associated with it and
other factors have pushed 90 per cent of the population
below the poverty line. There is even some speculation
that the number is now higher. I am therefore sorry to
say that millions of people across Syria — and they will
be listening to this statement — will find little respite
during one of the holiest times of the year.
That hardship comes at a time when the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners have very limited
means to help the vulnerable people of Syria. This
year’s humanitarian response plan — the largest in the
world, incidentally, at $5.4 billion for humanitarian aid
inside Syria — is less than 12 per cent funded, halfway
through the year. It has never been quite so ill-funded in
the history of the conflict. As we were briefed about last
month (see S/PV.9333) and as I heard again in Damascus
from the World Food Programme, a $200 million deficit
will force it to slash its emergency food aid by 40 per
cent, almost half, in other words. Operations outside
that particular plan are also challenged. I heard from the
representative of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East that the
Agency now has funds for only 18 per cent of its annual
budget. It has never had such a bad year. Its operations
for Palestinian refugees, the famous Yarmouk camp, for
example, may grind to a halt in August if the situation
does not change.
Of course, we appreciate the considerable donor
support and pledges made earlier this month at the
seventh Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

of Syria and the Region. As High Commissioner
Grandi, Administrator Steiner and my representative
noted, every contribution helps significantly to alleviate
suffering and bring some measure of hope. What we
are looking to do is to turn those pledges into money
in the bank as soon as possible, given the exceptional
adversity of the funding situation for humanitarian
operations in all parts of Syria.
After more than 12 years of crisis, there is also
the issue of early recovery, which we have much
debated and will continue to. I had lengthy talks
about that in Damascus. Early-recovery needs pose
a defining challenge to the humanitarian response
across Syria. That is not to diminish the many other
pressing humanitarian issues in Syria, and indeed,
as Ms. Rochdi just reminded us, they are legion and
include protection risks for women and girls and other
vulnerable groups. But it is clear to all of us, I imagine,
that further expanding early-recovery activities is the
humanitarian community’s best chance to give support
to the future of the Syrian people.
Any move towards a more sustainable response
will require a different approach, and crucially one
with longer timelines and fewer red lines from donors,
and I heard examples of that in my discussions with
representatives of the United Nations and international
and national NGOs in Damascus. Young people can
receive vocational training but must also be mentored
to turn those capacities into livelihoods. I heard
about irrigation systems that can be constructed
for communities of farmers without qualifying as
development, which is of course taboo. A very vivid
example for me was that the distinctions between
“rehabilitated” and “reconstructed” schools should be
relaxed to provide students with safe places to learn.
At the moment, we can rehabilitate the inside of a
building, but we cannot rehabilitate the building as a
whole in order to restore it to its former purpose as a
school for primary and secondary education. We also
still need a stronger international consensus on this
issue, although it has been building considerably, and
your own country, Madam President, has been very
much at the fore with regard to the importance of earlyrecovery programmes in Syria. In the coming weeks, I
look forward to coming up with ideas on how to forge
new partnerships and perhaps access new sources of
funding on early recovery for Syria, and to discussions,
particularly with the region.

S/PV.9363

As Ms. Rochdi said, in the weeks prior to my arrival
in Syria, we witnessed a marked increase in violence
in the north-west, particularly in Latakia and Idlib. It is
with great sadness that we learned of the deaths of at
least 11 people, including nine individuals who lost their
lives in a bombing near a market in north-western Syria.
Many more have been injured in recent days following an
uptick in hostilities, reminding us that the war continues.
I offer my deepest condolences, through the Council, to
all the families affected by the recent violence.
As we know, the Council’s cross-border resolution
will expire in 11 days, on 10 July. And as we heard, the
Secretary-General has been very clear about his views
on the need to see it renewed to cover 12 months and
to include all and any cross-border points in order to
facilitate humanitarian assistance to the north-west. His
conclusion, of course, is a carefully considered one. It
reflects the latest assessments about the humanitarian
situation on the ground. Since the earthquake, we have
been very pleased to be able to deploy United Nations
staff to north-west Syria, which is extraordinarily
useful. Those daily assessments point to growing needs
and deepening hardship. Food prices in that area exceed
the national average, which is already high. The highest
concentrations of displaced families are along the
Syrian-Turkish border. Cholera, which we often refer
to in the Council, continues to spread. In my view, a
12-month authorization reflects a pragmatic outlook on
the current operations, and it is particularly relevant to
the need of programming early recovery and leveraging
early-recovery funds from donors.
On a monthly basis in the north-west, the United
Nations and its partners reach approximately 2.7 million
of the most vulnerable men, women and children with
essential and life-saving assistance. Most of those
supplies go through the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing,
authorized by the Security Council. Prior to my arrival,
as Ms. Rochdi mentioned earlier, several weeks of
effort culminated in a 10-truck convoy from Aleppo
safely reaching Idlib, with assistance for 22,000 people.
We all know that such efforts to increase that crossline assistance must continue and are essential. The
Council can certainly depend on our commitment to
that end. The cross-line convoy represents an important
moment, but it is also a reminder that it cannot replace
the cross-border volume needed, as we regularly remind
the Council. We will therefore need to continue with
more time, effort and daily contacts in order to enable
cross-line assistance to comprise an increasingly larger
portion of humanitarian assistance in north-west Syria.

23-186265/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

A 12-month authorization will enable us and our
partners to deliver better humanitarian outcomes in
the months ahead. It is as simple as that. Operational
planning, staff recruitment and fundraising can
be undertaken in a more deliberate fashion. An
authorization for another year, until next July, will
ensure aid flows in the desperate winter season, which
will present a risk for a shorter period. As I have
mentioned — and I think that this is the most important
point that I want to emphasize — it is conducive for
early-recovery programmes, which do not function on
six-month cycles, and barely do so for 12 months. We
need to look farther ahead. And the Syrian people, who
have had greater needs every year, depend at least on
that kind of assurance.
We have seen a range of donors, including your
country, Madam President, fully fund — an unusual
and excellent moment for humanitarian funding
globally — the almost $400 million flash appeal in
response to the earthquake. Member States have also
bilaterally dispatched many trucks, boats and planes
full of assistance, of which I heard more details when I
was in Damascus the other day. We recall that President
Al-Assad granted the United Nations access to two
additional border crossings, among other emergency
measures, which have renewed until August. I have no
reason to believe that they will not be further renewed.
I think that the Council sees our views on where we
want the draft resolution to go, and they exactly reflect
the Secretary-General’s statements to that effect. As
Ms. Rochdi has reminded us, the humanitarian response
in Syria is at a critical juncture, as is the future of Syria
itself. On our side, considerable challenges are apparent,
but, frankly, so are the many important opportunities.
We can leverage more early-recovery funding on a
reliable and dependable basis, continue to be present
in north-west and north-east Syria, ensure that our aid
there is not dependent on fluctuations within a shorter
period of time and turn our attention to sectors in Syrian
that, as I was reminded of in Damascus, have such a
central role in determining basic needs, for example
electricity and water — we can, must and should
address those issues — only if we make our presence
one of partnership and support for the people who have
suffered these many years.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
6/22

29/06/2023

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Najat Rochdi, Deputy
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings on, and assessments of,
the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
We are convinced that there is no alternative to
advancing the Syrian-led and Syrian-implemented
political settlement process in Syria with the assistance
of the United Nations, in strict compliance with
resolution 2254 (2015) in respect for Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. That
stance and our consistent position in support of the
Special Envoy’s mediation efforts were reaffirmed in
consultations with Mr. Pedersen in Moscow on 9 June.
At the same time, we believe that is important that he
adhere strictly to the mandate set out in the relevant
Security Council resolution, which is centred upon on
promoting inter-Syrian negotiations, including within
the framework of the Constitutional Committee, which
is the optimal format for direct inter-Syrian dialogue.
We continue to believe that the core decisions on the
parameters and venues for future rounds of inter-Syrian
consultations should be made by the Syrians themselves,
without external interference.
We note with satisfaction the outcome of the
twentieth international meeting on Syria, held in
Astana on 20 and 21 June with our partners — Iran and
Türkiye — within the framework of the Astana process.
At the meeting, the leading role of the Astana format in
promoting a sustainable and long-term solution to the
Syrian crisis was once again underscored. In addition,
productive quadrilateral consultations were held in
Astana among the Deputy Foreign Ministers of Russia,
Iran, Syria and Türkiye on the preparation of a road
map for restoring relations between Syria and Türkiye.
The normalization of Damascus’ relations with
Arab countries, including Syria’s long-awaited
readmission to the League of Arab States (LAS),
has become the focus of international attention. We
believe that Syria’s renewed participation in the work
of the LAS, of which it is a founding member, will
help improve the environment in the Middle East and
to overcome the consequences of the Syrian crisis and
the catastrophic earthquake of 6 February, as soon as
possible. In that regard, we hope that Arab countries
will increase their support for the Syrian Arab Republic
in rebuilding its infrastructure, with a focus on the
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian, commercial and economic areas. Such
work is complicated by the illegitimate unilateral
sanctions imposed by Western countries on Damascus.
As they have been unable to stave off Syria’s return
to the Arab family, our American and European
colleagues are trying to negotiate unilateral political
concessions with Damascus, while they continue
to subscribe to anti-Damascus sentiments. We have
heard about the plans to adopt an anti-normalization
act, which indicates the United States unwillingness
to abandon its neocolonial approaches and policy of
punishing the Syrian people and leadership in their
pursuit of implementing their own independent policy.
To that end, they have wheeled out practical tools like
the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act, the illegal
military presence in the trans-Euphrates and Al-Tanf
regions and the plundering of Syrian natural resources,
including oil and grain. Lofty statements by Washington
and Brussels about easing sanctions and the generosity
of Western donors, including in the aftermath of the
earthquake, have never been translated into actions.
Against that background, the situation on the
ground remains tense. The destabilizing factors remain
the same — the illegal foreign presence in the north, the
north-east and the south of the country, the persistent
hotbeds of terrorism, primarily in Idlib, and regular and
arbitrary Israeli air strikes on Syrian territory. Such
actions, which violate the sovereignty of Syria and
neighbouring Arab countries, as well as the lack of an
appropriate response by the United Nations leadership,
are deeply regrettable and warrant condemnation. For
our part, we continue to work side by side with the
Syrian Arab Army to combat the terrorists entrenched
in Idlib. On 25 June, the Syrian Arab Armed Forces,
together with the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces,
destroyed the command post of the Al-Fatah Al-Mubin
terrorist alliance operating in that governorate under
the umbrella of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, weapons and
ammunition depots and sites used for equipping
unmanned aerial vehicles with explosives and launching
them. More than 30 militants were neutralized,
including several jihadist leaders.
In the context of the humanitarian problems in
Syria, we note the lack of progress in the implementation
of resolution 2672 (2023) on the cross-border aid
mechanism. Even the devastating earthquake in February
has not changed the state of affairs. We are particularly
concerned about the dispiriting situation with regard
to the financing of United Nations operations in the
country. The donors’ attention is focused solely on the

S/PV.9363

areas in the north-west that are not under Damascus’s
control. The emergency humanitarian appeal through
which the United Nations requested $397 million to
assist the areas affected by the earthquake was fully
funded in its first few months, which cannot be said
for the 2023 humanitarian response plan for Syria, with
only 12 per cent of the $5.4 billion required raised by
the middle of the year. With the severe shortfall in its
funding, the World Food Programme will be forced to
cut its coverage of those in need by 40 per cent as early
as next month.
Attempts are being made to convince us that the
cross-border mechanism should be extended for 12
months to enable it to plan its operations better, but
permit me to ask with what means will the United
Nations be planning those operations? Because the
appeals we have been hearing today are sheer hypocrisy.
There should be no question of any talk in this situation
about early-recovery projects. Against that backdrop,
the generosity of Western donors regarding the crisis
in Ukraine that they themselves provoked is simply
duplicitous. As soon as the issue is about Syria, Yemen
or countries in Africa, our Western colleagues either
have no money or allocate it extremely reluctantly and
in small portions.
However, the United States and its allies have
already spent as much on arms for Ukraine as the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
has requested for humanitarian assistance in 2023 to
all in need worldwide, approximately $55 billion, of
which, incidentally, OCHA has so far received only
20 per cent. Imagine how many people in the world
could be helped if the Western donors truly wanted to.
But no, for them it is more important to spend money
on weapons, as a result of which they enrich their own
arms companies. According to data from Ukraine’s
national bank, the total amount of financial, military
and humanitarian aid it received exceeded $120 billion
in 2022 alone. That tells us what Western priorities are.
In that difficult and not very encouraging context,
we will soon have to decide once again on the future of the
cross-border mechanism for humanitarian assistance in
Syria. In anticipation of that, the hypocritical Western
propaganda machine, with the rust scrubbed off it every
six months by our former partners, has been fired up
once again. We are once again being told that without
the cross-border mechanism, millions of Syrians will
starve and freeze and that we have no choice but to once
again extend a scheme that violates Syria’s sovereignty

23-186267/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

and territorial integrity. They tell us that knowing full
well that there is in fact an alternative, which is sending
supplies across the contact line, as provided for in
resolution 2762 (2023), among other such decisions. The
reality is that that is simply no use to the internationally
acknowledged terrorists in Idlib, who would then be
deprived of an opportunity to plunder humanitarian aid
and enrich themselves to the degree to which they can
with the cross-border mechanism. That is why we have
had only one very modest such convoy this year, clearly
timed to coincide with our meeting today. After that,
are we seriously expected to consider the cross-line
convoy situation satisfactory?
In the past six months the unilateral sanctions
imposed by the United States and the European Union
have not even been eased, let alone lifted, and they
continue to stifle the people we are called on to help
by extending the cross-border mechanism. The subject
of early-recovery projects in the territory under the
control of the lawful Syrian authorities is not even
worth discussing. Not only are they mere crumbs,
but in practice the huge numbers of restrictions on
their implementation often make the reconstruction
of facilities impossible. It is all smoke and mirrors, an
imitation of activity.
The notions circulated in the Council that
abolishing the cross-border resolution would lead
donors to withdraw their support for early-recovery
efforts in Syria and claiming that it would deprive the
United Nations of its mandate for early recovery are
unconvincing. That support has barely been enough
over the years to cover the basic urgent needs of Syrians,
an overwhelming majority of whom live in territories
under the control of Government forces. The crossborder mechanism in the current formula is inherently a
zero-sum game that brings the Syrian people no benefit
whatsoever. Instead, we are increasingly hearing from
the United Nations about efforts to strengthen its
position in the rebellious north-west independently of
its interaction with the official authorities in Damascus.
Against that backdrop, our principled assessments
of and approaches to the cross-border mechanism
remain unchanged. The mechanism is only nominally
humanitarian. In fact, it is increasingly being used to
undermine Syria’s sovereignty and deepen territorial
divisions in the country, discriminate against
Government-controlled territories and fuel illegal
armed groups. And with that approach, the question
naturally arises: for whose sake are we really going to
8/22

29/06/2023

adopt a new resolution on the cross-border mechanism?
Not for the Syrians, apparently, but rather for the
terrorists who have taken refuge in Idlib. We believe
it is time our Western colleagues changed their own
hypocritical approach if we are truly looking to help
the people of Syria and Syrian refugees. In that context,
we call on the penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
dossier working on the draft resolution to put the true
interests of the long-suffering Syrian people living in
the territories under the control of the internationally
recognized Government of Syria first. They should
refrain from getting sucked into the politicization of
humanitarian issues and playing to give everything
away with the United Nations and the terrorists in
Idlib, who since February of this year have established
a close and, as far as we can tell, mutually beneficial
cooperation with the Deputy Regional Humanitarian
Coordinator for the Syria Crisis, Mr. David Carden,
who incidentally is a British citizen.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
As the Under-Secretary-General underscored, the
authorization for United Nations cross-border deliveries
of humanitarian assistance through Bab Al-Hawa
expires in just 11 days. Last month in this Chamber (see
S/PV.9333), Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield called
on the Council to extend and expand that mandate
for 12 months and to include the border crossings at
Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai. That is the
only way to ensure that the Syrian people receive the
assistance they need. Since then, several important
voices have endorsed the three crossings, notably the
Foreign Ministers of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Their statement on 8 June
“expressed support for including all currently
open border crossing points — Bab Al-Hawa, Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai — in a Security Council
resolution to be passed this July”.
Their words carry weight. The Secretary-General’s
standalone report of 9 June (S/2023/419) makes it clear
that the humanitarian needs in north-west Syria have
never been greater and that any authorization short of
12 months would be inadequate. We heard the UnderSecretary-General reiterate that point just now. As the
Secretary-General has stated, it remains a moral and
humanitarian imperative. The report also underscores
that early-recovery projects require more than six
months to plan and implement. Recent reporting by the
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
also highlights the fact that over the past 18 months,
more than $750 million has gone to early recovery
across 14 governorates in Syria. That includes over
$112 million for early recovery in the past two months
alone. Non-governmental organizations have also
indicated that 90 per cent of the 4.5 million people in
north-west Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance
to survive.
We have supported all aspects of resolution 2672
(2023) and we welcomed last week’s successful crossline delivery to the north-west, as well as last month’s
successful cross-line mission to Tell Abyad, the first
since 2019. We applaud the United Nations for its
unrelenting advocacy with the parties on the ground.
Even as we encourage further cross-line aid to all parts
of Syria, it is obvious that cross-border aid remains
essential. To be clear, the Al-Assad regime has chosen
to make the Organization’s access unpredictable, and
the Syrian people are suffering the consequences. The
regime also has not shown any indication that it intends
to commit to an indefinite extension of United Nations
access. That is why a Security Council resolution
that includes a 12-month extension, including for all
three crossings — Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai — is essential. The humanitarian community
needs the predictability such a resolution would provide.
Donors, including the United States and other
countries here today, have stepped up to meet needs. On
15 June, they pledged nearly $10 billion at the seventh
Brussels Conference. The United States announced an
additional contribution of $920 million, our largest ever.
Last year, the international community pledged nearly
$7 billion. The year before, it was nearly $6 billion.
Given the needs, we encourage other countries to match
their rhetorical support with financial contributions.
Those funds have helped sustain the Syrian people, who
have experienced more than a decade of insufficient
food, inadequate shelter attacks on health and education
facilities and diminished services as a direct result of
Al-Assad’s war on the Syrian people.
But donations alone are not enough. Beyond donor
support, it is incumbent upon the Security Council to
ensure that aid reaches those in need. The best and most
cost-effective option to provide certainty and flexibility
for humanitarian operations is a 12-month extension,
including all three crossings — Bab Al-Hawa, Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai.

S/PV.9363

The Al-Assad regime remains a major obstacle
to the humanitarian response, undermining the crossborder mechanism and preventing cross-line deliveries
to Rukban. The regime and its Russian backers have
also continued to strike hospitals and other civilian
sites, including attacks just last week that injured
displaced civilians in Idlib. Russia’s role in the recent
upswing in violent attacks in Idlib is a grim reminder
of its long history of brutality against the Syrian people
throughout this 12-year conflict.
We are concerned by the recent violence in northwest and north-east Syria. We condemn any attacks
targeting civilians and urge all parties to condemn
attacks targeting civilians, in violation of international
law. The Syrian people do not need more violence;
they need more constructive dialogue. We note with
frustration that the Constitutional Committee last
met 13 months ago. We urge the regime to resume the
Constitutional Committee meetings in Geneva and
participate in good faith.
Given the situation, conditions are still not in place
for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugee
and will not be until the Al-Assad regime ceases its
killings, arbitrary detentions and forced disappearances,
torture and other ill-treatment of the Syrian people,
including refugee returnees. We urge Russia and the
League of Arab States to press the regime to contribute
to the necessary conditions for returns by clarifying the
status of 135,000 missing persons, waiving conscription
requirements and addressing uncertainty around
housing, land and property issues.
The only way to end the suffering of the Syrian
people remains a political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We encourage Syria’s neighbours to
push Al-Assad to meaningfully engage in the United
Nations-facilitated process and to join us in supporting
civil society in its pursuit of justice and accountability
for human rights violations and abuses.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I wish Eid Mubarak
to all those who have been celebrating.
I deliver this statement on behalf of Brazil
and Switzerland, as co-penholders on the Syrian
humanitarian file.
Let me first thank Ms. Najat Rochdi, Deputy Special
Envoy for Syria, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General and Emergency Relief Coordinator,
for their briefings, and I thank the Secretary-General
for his reports (S/2023/419 and S/2023/464).

23-186269/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

As we just heard from Mr. Griffiths, the humanitarian
situation in Syria is worse than ever before in its 12year history of conflict. The earthquakes in February
compounded the already dire circumstances, and 70 per
cent of the population is in need of humanitarian aid and
protection in every district in Syria — for the first time.
Amid the disheartening statistics presented by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), we are confronted with the stark situation of
children in Syria, who are disproportionately affected
by the drivers of the crisis According to UNICEF, the
education system has been devastated by the conflict,
with over 7,000 damaged or destroyed schools. The
earthquakes further impaired educational facilities,
limiting children’s access to education. More than
2 million children are out of school, and another
1.6 million are at risk of dropping out.
The recruitment and use of children in this conflict
is also an increasingly worrisome trend. We must do
everything we can to stop this situation. It is crucial
that the funding pledges made by donor countries at the
Brussels Conference lead to an increased funding of
the humanitarian response plan. For aid to reach those
in need in the most direct and effective manner, all
modalities, including cross-line and cross-border, need
to be available for the humanitarian actors.
According to the Secretary-General’s special report,
the authorization by Syria for the United Nations to use
Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai has allowed for more direct
and efficient access to affected populations in northern
Aleppo. It is important that this access remain available
for as long as needed. We urge all parties to eliminate
impediments to humanitarian deliveries across Syria
and to allow and facilitate rapid, safe, sustainable and
unhindered access to all civilians in need. We commend
the Organization’s constant efforts to enable cross-line
deliveries, as well as the assistance that reached those
in need through last week’s convoy — the first since the
earthquake. But much more is needed. As the SecretaryGeneral indicates in his special report, cross-line
operations remain essential, although they currently
cannot replace the size or scope of the Organization’s
cross-border mechanism.
The members of the Security Council will soon be
called on to decide on the continuation of the crossborder mechanism, which continues to be a crucial
lifeline for millions of children, women and men in
Syria — even more so after the earthquakes earlier
this year. As co-penholders, Brazil and Switzerland are
10/22

29/06/2023

guided solely by the objective of ensuring that assistance
continues to reach all those in need. The SecretaryGeneral, his Emergency Relief Coordinator, OCHA,
the Special Envoy for Syria and all humanitarian actors
operating on the ground keep underlining that the
12-month timeline is needed for ensuring rapid, safe
sustainable and unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance for all civilians in need. This timeline is also
necessary in order to facilitate the further expansion of
early-recovery activities. It is our shared responsibility
to stand in solidarity with the people of Syria. We call
on all Council members to work constructively over
the coming days in order to live up to our collective
responsibility to the Syrian people.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to add a few points in my national
capacity on the political situation in Syria.
I thank Ms. Rochdi, Deputy Special Envoy for
Syria for her briefing on the recent exchanges of the
Special Envoy with regional and international players,
including the members of the Astana platform last week.
Switzerland shares the conviction that only a political
solution, within the parameters defined by resolution
2254 (2015), can put an end to the conflict in Syria.
We therefore welcome the support expressed for
the implementation of this resolution, both in the Joint
Statement of the Astana meeting on 21 June, as well as
in recent statements by regional actors, including in the
framework of the League of Arab States. We also join
in the calls made by the same actors, and repeatedly by
Council members, for the work of the Constitutional
Committee to be relaunched. Switzerland remains
ready to make Geneva, the main headquarters of
the United Nations in Europe, available to host the
Committee’s meetings.
Among those initiatives, Switzerland supports
the Civil Society Support Room within the Special
Envoy’s office in Geneva. The Support Room brings
together Syrian civil society and helps guide United
Nations efforts to promote intra-Syrian dialogue and
trust between the parties. Those efforts for peace and
dialogue cannot bear fruit without a commitment from
all parties to the establishment and observance of a
nationwide ceasefire. Hostilities, such as the latest
escalation in Idlib, continue to affect the civilian
population, including children. I would like to express
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
this recent violence. We welcome the holding, two days
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

ago, in Geneva, of a meeting of the task force mandated
by resolution 2254 (2015) to verify the implementation
of the urgent ceasefire, of which we have just heard.
In that context, we call on all parties to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian law, in particular
measures to protect the civilian population. Respect for
human rights is also essential — to protect the dignity,
life and freedom of every individual. Switzerland would
like to reiterate its full support for the Human Rights
Council’s commission of inquiry and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism, whose work is
fundamental to the fight against impunity. In Syria, as
elsewhere, there can be no lasting peace without justice.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to make this statement on behalf of
the African members of the Security Council, namely,
Gabon, Ghana and my country, Mozambique (A3).
The A3 would like to thank Ms. Najat Rochdi,
Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for their briefings. We also welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the Republic of Türkiye in today’s meeting.
The persistence of violence and attacks resulting in
security and humanitarian crises in Syria, aggravated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the cholera
epidemic, the impact of climate change and the February
earthquakes has reached its highest level since the
beginning of the conflict in 2011. We encourage the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to pursue his mandate, despite a particularly difficult
context, in favour of stability and a lasting, secure
peace in Syria. We call on all parties to the conflict to
respect the principles of distinction and proportionality,
and to take all measures to spare civilian populations
and infrastructure, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
We call on all Syrian parties to engage in an
inclusive and broad political process, involving all
actors in society, respecting the unity, independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, and
without foreign interference. We also encourage the
Syrian authorities to put particular emphasis on the
issue of the abducted and missing persons, in order to
find a humanitarian way out so that the survivors and
their families can obtain answers.

S/PV.9363

In the same vein, we support progress in mine
clearance. It is nevertheless worth remembering that
those activities must be carried out in a timely manner,
so as to reduce the risks to civilians from such devices
and to clean up the working environment for United
Nations personnel.
(spoke in English)
The dire humanitarian situation in Syria has been
aptly characterized by the Secretary-General as “one of
the world’s most complex humanitarian and protection
emergencies”. The already deplorable humanitarian
situation occasioned by the 12-year-long war was
aggravated by the earthquakes of 6 February 2023. This
natural disaster has claimed the lives of more than 5,900
people, affected about 8.8 million people and caused
extensive damage to housing and other infrastructure.
Due to its complex nature, the international
community and humanitarian agencies urgently need
to expand existing humanitarian measures to be able
to effectively deal with this multipronged crisis. In
that regard, we urge the United Nations and partners
to increase funding for early-recovery programmes,
particularly those that focus on income-generation
projects and livelihood activities. Those projects and
activities may avert an increase in the number of people
in need of humanitarian assistance, strengthen selfreliance, improve individual and community well-being,
and reduce future dependence on external assistance.
We welcome the holding of the recent donors’
conference in Geneva, at which $10 billion was pledged
to provide humanitarian assistance to Syria. We call on
the concerned countries to honour their pledges as soon
as is practicable.
The A3 encourages the United Nations to continue
to do everything in its power and scope to increase
crossline assistance to supplement cross-border aid,
which, admittedly, remains a critical life-saving
support for about 2.7 million people in north-west Syria
each month.
We remain concerned that women, girls and children
continue to be the most vulnerable and disproportionately
affected by the crisis. They are including being exposed
to greater risks of gender-based violence, forced and
early marriages, and restricted access to livelihood
opportunities. As evidence of that, in the first quarter of
2023, more than 320 serious violations were committed
against children. Children are increasingly showing
signs of post-traumatic stress disorder.

23-1862611/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the Government of Syria’s decision to
extend the authorization for the opening of Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai for another three months until August in
order to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in the country. We are hopeful that the cross-border
resolution (resolution 2672 (2023)) will be renewed in a
way that gives the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners ample time to plan and successfully execute the
operation. We have been engaging with the penholders
to ensure an outcome that best serves the interests of the
Syrian people.

29/06/2023

arrangement in response to a specific situation and
should eventually be phased out in an orderly manner.
Promoting the transition from cross-border to cross-line
deliveries is the right way forward for the subsequent
discussions in the Security Council. China hopes that
the Council members will adopt a pragmatic approach
and engage in dialogue and consultations on appropriate
arrangements to that end.

We want to acknowledge and commend the
normalization of relations between Arab nations and
Syria and Syria’s return to the League of Arab States
family. Within the framework of regional cooperation,
the current rapprochement could be critical in addressing
the humanitarian situation in Syria and the issue of
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries.

Secondly, cross-line operations should be the
main channel for humanitarian assistance in Syria.
However, in the past six months, due to obstruction by
the parties in de facto control of north-west Syria, the
cross-line operations were interrupted for four months.
The Council must come up with practical solutions to
remove the barriers to delivering cross-line assistance,
as well as to improve the efficiency and increase the
scale of that assistance, in order to ensure that the relief
work is more stable and predictable.

The A3 would like to express its continued support
to the Special Envoy in finding a political solution to the
conflict in Syria. The political process underpinned by
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the most viable solution
to the conflict and to bringing the suffering of the Syrian
people to an end. It is crucial to ensure that all the
parties involved, including the international community,
approach the situation from a humanitarian standpoint
free of politicization. Ultimately, our individual and joint
actions should be focused on ensuring the well-being of
the Syrian people.

Thirdly, explosive remnants of war in Syria
continue to cause civilian casualties, threaten the safety
and security of humanitarian workers and impede
humanitarian relief efforts. We call for incorporating
the clearing of explosive remnants of war into earlyrecovery projects without delay. The current huge gap
in the humanitarian funding for Syria has already
affected the implementation of relief operations and
early-recovery projects. We hope that the parties
concerned will honour their commitments and further
increase their funding support.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their briefings.
The Syrian Government has so far opened the border
crossings of Bab-Al Salam and Al-Rai, taken positive
measures to facilitate humanitarian access, ended the
case-by case approval procedure for cross-line assistance
and facilitated the issuance of visas for humanitarian
workers. Those initiatives have been welcomed by
the parties concerned, and China commends them. In
the planning for its next phase of work, the Security
Council should take into account the developments in the
situation in Syria and the implementation of resolution
2672 (2023) in a science-based manner in order to
further increase humanitarian assistance to Syria and
to alleviate its humanitarian crisis. I would like to
emphasize four points.
First, Syria’s sovereignty and the Government of
Syria’s ownership must be respected. The cross-border
humanitarian aid mechanism is only an exceptional
12/22

Fourthly, some countries have been expressing
concerns about the humanitarian situation in Syria
and asking that the Council adopt resolutions on
humanitarian issues there. At the same time, they
have been wilfully imposing unilateral sanctions,
exacerbating Syria’s economic and humanitarian
plight. That self-contradictory, hypocritical approach
is tantamount to pretending to give a patient
cardiopulmonary resuscitation while keeping them
in a chokehold. I want to reiterate that all unlawful
unilateral sanctions against Syria should be lifted fully
and unconditionally.
China’s position on the political process in Syria
has been consistent and unequivocal. We welcomed the
twentieth meeting of the Astana format on Syria and its
positive outcome. Syria has returned to the family of
the League of Arab States, and we believe that the unity
and cooperation among the countries of the region
will inject new impetus into the political settlement
of the Syrian issue. The international community
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

should also play a constructive role in creating an
external environment that is conducive to dialogue and
reconciliation among the various factions in Syria. We
once again urge foreign forces to end their unlawful
military presence in Syria and to stop plundering its
natural resources.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rochdi and Mr. Griffiths for their briefings, and I
would like to focus on three points.
The conflict in Syria began 12 years ago, and those
12 years of war can be summed up as follows. More
than 500,000 people are dead, more than 130,000 are
missing and 12 million Syrians have been forcibly
displaced. The regime has used chemical weapons
against its own people, there has been systematic use
of torture and sexual violence in the regime’s detention
facilities and now there is ongoing drug trafficking.
The war is not over, as shown by the recent air strikes in
the province of Idlib. France condemns those acts in the
strongest possible terms. That is why Bashar Al-Assad,
who is at the root of all of it, and of this unprecedented
tragedy, cannot receive unconditional redemption. To
do so would be incompatible with achieving a lasting
peace in Syria. Those responsible for crimes must be
held to account. The specific and sole purpose of the
European sanctions is to restrict the freedom of action
of the perpetrators of those crimes and their sources
of funding.
In the face of that tragedy, France and Europe
have taken action to respond. Since 2011, France, the
European Union and its member States have provided
funding to United Nations agencies and civil-society
actors amounting to €30 billion in Syria and its
neighbours. The seventh Brussels Conference succeeded
in renewing that support, with France announcing a
contribution of €540 million for 2023. Those around
this table who claim to be most concerned about the
modalities of aid, such as Russia, in reality have been
providing little or none, and are content to contribute
in the form of bombardments. Endemic corruption is
at the root of the misappropriation of assistance, and it
is the Syrian people who are the victims. On the other
hand, we commend all those countries in the region that
have been taking in refugees despite all the difficulties.
And it is of course our duty to help them.
Only a political solution can put an end to the
Syrians’ suffering. The earthquakes of 6 February
only exacerbated an already increasingly deteriorating
humanitarian situation. As the Secretary-General has

S/PV.9363

made abundantly clear, the cross-border mechanism
remains essential. Renewing it for an additional 12
months would provide humanitarian actors with the
necessary predictability.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
humanitarian response should not and cannot replace
a political settlement. The restoration of stability in
Syria and the region will be possible only through
a political solution that meets the aspirations of
all Syrians. Resolution 2254 (2015) is a road map with
clearly identified parameters. Regrettably, the Syrian
regime has not allowed any progress to be made on
those parameters. That is why we have continued to be
demanding. The regime must make tangible moves to
enable a genuine political process to begin. In a context
of deliberate obstruction, we reiterate our full support
for the mediation efforts led by Geir Pedersen and call on
all actors to support his step-for-step approach.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I too
thank Deputy Special Envoy Najat Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for their valuable briefings.
As we heard, the needs in Syria are at their highest
levels ever. As the 12-year conflict continues, the United
Kingdom has continued to respond to those humanitarian
needs. Our pledge of $190 million in Brussels brings our
total to more than $4.8 billion to date. Last year that
also included $64 million for early recovery, including
irrigation-facility rehabilitation, agricultural training,
apprenticeships and business grants — in all, 495 earlyrecovery projects across all 14 governorates of Syria. I
look forward to hearing Russia announce its contribution
in due course, following the recent announcement that
the Russian Government spends $2 billion a year on the
Wagner Group. And as this 12-year conflict continues,
we see three ways in which the Council can respond to
support the Syrian people.
First, as we heard, we need to ensure predictable and
sustained humanitarian access to 4.1 million people in
north-western Syria. When I visited the Türkiye-Syria
border earlier this month, front-line humanitarians, the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
local authorities told me consistently and repeatedly that
they needed more access and for longer periods of time.
We welcome the progress of a cross-line convoy of 10
trucks last week, the first since January, but nothing can
replace the scale and scope of the indispensable crossborder operation. I saw that myself. Sixty trucks filled
with life-saving supplies crossed the border on the day
of my visit alone.

23-1862613/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

As Under-Secretary-General Griffiths reminded
us, the Secretary-General has repeatedly stated that
the extension of the Security Council’s cross-border
authorization for at least 12 months is a moral and
humanitarian imperative, and has underlined that all
three crossings, at Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai, are essential to an effective United Nations
response. The United Nations has repeatedly emphasized
the value that the certainty and predictability of a
Council mandate provides, including for donors. That
is why we join the calls on the Council to extend and
expand the Council’s cross-border authorization ahead
of 10 July. Let us be clear. This is not a maximalist
approach but a humanitarian one.
Secondly, attacks on innocent Syrians should
stop and there should be a nationwide ceasefire. The
indiscriminate air attacks on a vegetable market in
Idlib this week, which the Syrian authorities have
confirmed that Russia was involved in, are reported to
have killed nine civilians and injured many more. Our
condolences go to their families and our sympathy and
good wishes to the injured. That shows a total disregard
for the welfare of the Syrian people. We call on all the
parties to abide by international humanitarian law and
protect the civilian population.
Finally, we know that only sustainable and inclusive
peace can end the suffering of the Syrian people and
bring stability to the region. Resolution 2254 (2015)
is the framework for delivering that. We welcome all
efforts that contribute to delivering on its promise, and
we call on the regime to meaningfully engage in the
process to deliver lasting peace for Syria — as Deputy
Special Envoy Rochdi said, with real diplomacy and
real solutions.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): My delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Switzerland, and I would now like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity on the
political aspects of the conflict in Syria.
I thank Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi for her
briefing and Special Envoy Pedersen for his continuing
engagement with key stakeholders.
While the path towards reconciliation presents
countless challenges, we continue to believe firmly
that by addressing the outstanding issues incrementally
and collectively we can and must make significant
steps towards a peaceful resolution. Since the tragic
earthquakes hit Türkiye and Syria in February, there
14/22

29/06/2023

have been some positive developments on the political
track, especially within the region. Notably, the fact
that Syria has rejoined the League of Arab States opens
up avenues for dialogue, which may help address many
outstanding issues.
Brazil welcomes the overall commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular
the plan for a peaceful resolution of the conflict while
respecting Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. We appreciate that the joint
statement adopted at the twentieth round of Astana
talks last week reiterates the belief that there can be no
military solution to the Syrian conflict, as well as the
commitment to advancing a viable and lasting Syrianled and Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
The joint statement also emphasizes the role of the
Syrian Constitutional Committee and calls for a ninth
round of the drafting committee, without further delay.
For that process to succeed, renewed, sustained and
visible political will is needed to change the status
quo. It will be crucial for the Constitutional Committee
to resume its activities, with the firm commitment of
all parties to finding common ground and achieving
concrete results for the benefit of the Syrian people.
A comprehensive ceasefire is also indispensable and
urgent. Rebuilding Syria, in all aspects of that daunting
task, and enabling its citizens to lead the dignified lives
they fully deserve, will be possible only through peace
and reconciliation, no matter how difficult that may be.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Deputy Special Envoy Najat Rochdi and UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Martin
Griffiths for their briefings. I welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representatives of Iran, Syria and
Türkiye in today’s meeting.
We acknowledge the willingness of the Syrian
Government to keep the border crossings at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai open. We reaffirm that the actions
taken to guarantee access to humanitarian assistance
must be accompanied by efforts aimed at ensuring the
security of personnel on the ground. Ecuador supports
the Secretary-General’s proposal to renew access to the
cross-border crossings for an additional 12 months in
order to maintain the sustainability and predictability of
the humanitarian assistance operation. As I mentioned
in my statement at our briefing on cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States (see
S/PV.9343), we believe that Syria’s readmission to that
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

regional organization must come with a commitment
to establishing a definitive ceasefire and a transparent
system of transitional justice, which would enable the
Syrian population to return to a path towards national
and regional reconciliation.
In that regard, we believe it is imperative to
strengthen the joint efforts to curb violent extremism,
terrorism and drug trafficking, which especially affect
the civilian population, undermine the possibility
of laying the groundwork for viable governance and
economic development and represent a threat to peace
and security in the region. We commend the work of
Special Envoy Pedersen, particularly with the Astana
group, and look forward to the swift reconvening of the
Constitutional Committee. We are also confident that
he will be successful in his recent efforts to involve all
actors in the step-for-step negotiation strategy.
We take note of the precarious humanitarian
situation in Syria. The increase in the number of people
who depend on humanitarian assistance for their
survival, the deteriorating state of the infrastructure
needed for the provision of basic services, the growing
numbers of those sick with cholera and other indicators
make the seriousness of the crisis clear. My delegation
is also concerned about the numbers of people displaced
as a result of violence and the lack of a response to the
inquiries of the families of missing and arbitrarily
detained persons. We know that women and children
disproportionately bear the brunt of the conflict. We
therefore acknowledge the full spectrum of the work
being done by the United Nations teams on the ground.
We also acknowledge the effects of implementing earlyrecovery projects, especially those aimed at preventing
and mitigating the impacts of the winter months and
floods and restoring schools and temporary shelters,
which have alleviated the plight of millions of Syrians.
We urge donors to continue contributing with a view
to ensuring sustainable funding for the humanitarian
response plan for Syria, which as of May had raised less
than 12 per cent of the required total amount for 2023.
Ecuador reaffirms that the only possibility for Syria
is to summon the will of all actors with the aim of finding
a negotiated political solution to the crisis, based on
the principles of sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Deputy Special
Envoy Rochdi and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their interventions.

S/PV.9363

As we just heard, humanitarian needs in Syria are at
an all-time high, with 15.3 million people dependent on
aid to survive, which is 40 per cent more than in 2020.
Despite the multiple crises around the world requiring
our attention, we cannot forget the voiceless Syrian
people in need. In that regard, Japan’s State Minister for
Foreign Affairs Yamada attended the seventh Brussels
Conference, where he reiterated our determination to
continue to provide assistance in line with the needs
of Syrian citizens and neighbouring countries. Japan
also welcomed the recent visit by Mr. Griffiths to Syria
to discuss humanitarian assistance and early recovery
with the Syrian leadership. Yet simply sending relief
supplies and supporting early-recovery efforts are not
enough. Ultimately, without a political solution that
addresses the root causes of the protracted conflict, the
humanitarian needs will only worsen. For that reason,
the status quo is not an option for us. Japan therefore
deeply deplores the lack of movement on the Syrian
political track. We reiterate the importance of an
inclusive political process, as envisioned in resolution
2254 (2015) and call for a renewal of dialogue among
all Syrian parties at the Constitutional Committee and
an appropriate handling of the venue issue.
Resolution 2672 (2023) will expire in 10 days.
The cross-border assistance is a lifeline for 4.1 million
people in north-west Syria. While we are pleased that
the eleventh cross-line convoy carrying United Nations
humanitarian supplies has arrived, Japan nonetheless
believes that the Security Council must renew the
cross-border aid mechanism for at least 12 months, as
requested by the Secretary-General. If we fail to act, the
United Nations will no longer be able to provide funding
to the non-governmental organizations operating in
the north-west. The accountability and predictability
that are necessary for humanitarian actors and donors
would be severely disrupted. More than 80 per cent of
the aid to the north-west flows through Bab Al-Hawa.
A failure to reauthorize the cross-border aid mechanism
would be a disaster. It is therefore our duty as members
of the Council to strive to find common ground in a
spirit of compromise.
The 6 million Syrian refugees represent one of
the world’s largest crises, and the burden of hosting
them has fallen on Syria’s neighbours and countries
beyond. Yes, the refugees have a right to return to their
native country, but the conditions for a safe, dignified
and voluntary return are not yet in place. The United
Nations has noted the importance of addressing people’s
economic concerns, including the lack of livelihoods,

23-1862615/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

jobs and basic services, as well as safety and security
concerns, and we call for concrete action by the Syrian
Government in that regard.
Finally, later today the General Assembly will
vote on establishing a new institution to address the
issue of missing persons, as the Secretary-General
recommended in August 2022 (A/76/890). We hope
that the Syrian Government will not reject the initiative
from the outset but will rather sincerely cooperate with
the efforts of the international community.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his briefing following his visit to
Syria and Deputy Special Envoy Rochdi for her insights.
We remain deeply troubled about the persistently
worsening situation in Syria. The air strikes on 25 June
in north-western Syria have reminded us that the war
continues. Albania condemns the attack and calls
for an impartial investigation and accountability. We
deplore the lack of good faith and goodwill shown by
the Al-Assad regime in preventing the Constitutional
Committee from reconvening and starting to make
genuine progress on drafting a democratic constitution.
There can be no alternative to the full and immediate
implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015)
if Syria is ever to begin a political transition towards a
free and democratic country. At the same time, however,
it is only natural that the immediate humanitarian needs
of the Syrian people remain a priority for every one of
us on the Security Council, considering that Syria is
one of the most demanding humanitarian crises in the
world, with 15 million people depending on life-saving
humanitarian aid for their survival and more than
100,000 Syrians missing.
When it comes to missing persons, today we
want to take this opportunity to underline once more
the purely humanitarian nature of the independent
institution proposed in the draft resolution that is before
the General Assembly today (A/77/L.79), which is a key
demand of Syrian families and recommended in the
report of the Secretary-General (A/76/890). We call on
all States Members of the United Nations to support the
draft resolution in the General Assembly today, which
will offer some relief to the families.
The next few weeks will be very important when
it comes to responding to the humanitarian needs of
the Syrian people and with regard to the Council’s
responsibility to deliver, especially after the earthquake
in Syria. In that context, we call on all members to
16/22

29/06/2023

support the renewal of the Bab Al-Hawa cross-border
mandate for another 12 months in order to ensure
predictability and to make sure that the Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai crossings remain open for as long as they are
needed. Keeping in mind what the Secretary-General
underlined in his recent report (S/2023/419), there is
no reason to reduce humanitarian access. As UnderSecretary-General Griffiths mentioned, the 12-month
extension will also help with early-recovery assistance.
Syrians and humanitarian actors are looking to us to
ensure humanitarian access for at least 12 months.
Now is the time to recommit to supporting them and
addressing Syrians’ dire needs. There is no alternative.
We should keep in mind that humanitarian aid must
never be politicized by anyone, and that all must help
to facilitate humanitarian access and the protection of
relief workers. We deeply appreciate the generosity
of donor countries and underscore the importance of
offering them predictability by extending the mandate
by 12 months.
In conclusion, let us repeat that a political solution
is the only way to end the suffering of the Syrian people.
Without it, the humanitarian needs will continue to
further increase.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Deputy Special
Envoy Rochdi and Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
for their briefings. The updates they have given us this
morning underscore the need for the Council to come
together and make sure that Syrians remain supported.
Regrettably, after 12 years of conflict, the depth
and breadth of needs are higher than ever. Continued
fighting, political obstruction and deep distrust have
led to the destruction of the remaining life-sustaining
infrastructure and basic services across much of the
country. Families facing hunger, violence, disease and
a profoundly insecure future have turned to the most
damaging, negative coping mechanisms just to make
ends meet. Women and girls, elderly people and persons
with disabilities are bearing the brunt of that trauma, as
they do in many conflicts around the world.
Despite our divergent views in the Council, we
have the ability to ensure the continued delivery of the
critical protection and medical and humanitarian care
that constitute the difference between life and death for
too many in Syria. Malta is pleased to see the increase
in early recovery, livelihoods and resilience across all of
Syria’s governorates. Whether through the rehabilitation
of a maternal care clinic, the repair of a critical water
pumping and treatment station or capacity-building
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

for schoolteachers, each action restores the innate
dignity of the Syrian people and reduces dependence
on cyclical, emergency humanitarian aid.
Malta welcomed the successful cross-line operation
from Aleppo into the north-west of Syria last Friday, the
first since before the earthquake in February. We also
welcome the agreement between the United Nations
and Damascus for the continued authorization of the
crossings at Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai. While we urge
for their continuation and for support for all modalities
of aid delivery in Syria, we know that the scale,
scope and transparency of the United Nations crossborder mechanism at Bab Al-Hawa cannot be matched
at present. Malta therefore echoes the calls of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Emergency
Relief Coordinator for a renewal of the humanitarian
cross-border mechanism at Bab Al-Hawa for a
minimum of 12 months. Anything less would amount
to the cynical politicization of humanitarian assistance.
What the people of Syria need now is predictable,
safe, reliable humanitarian access for delivering aid,
protection services and early-recovery and livelihood
programmes throughout the country. In that respect,
we were pleased to see members of the international
community step up once again at the seventh Brussels
Conference this month, pledging €5.6 billion to support
humanitarian efforts in Syria and the region. At a time
of great financial strain, those resources are precious,
and every cent must be maximized for the benefit
of those Syrians who need it most. We also note the
extraordinary support that States in the region have
provided by hosting refugees. They too must continue
to be supported. However, Malta reiterates that any
formal returns of refugees and those displaced within
Syria must be safe, legal, voluntary and dignified.
On the political track, we reiterate our support for
the Special Envoy’s work. We urge the parties to take
their obligations seriously, moving the political process
forward in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Securing
Syria’s future requires coordinated, multilateral and
inclusive efforts that engage Syrian civil society and
women peacebuilders. Nothing less will usher in the
change that is so sorely needed, and that is why we
too call for reconvening the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva without further delay. Malta is also deeply
concerned about the air strikes in the past week in the
north-west, which resulted in a dozen civilian casualties.
We once again call for a nationwide ceasefire and the
protection of all civilians across the country.

S/PV.9363

In conclusion, I can only stress and reiterate that at
this critical time, the Council must work together and
set aside its differences to support millions of Syrians
in their hour of continued and clear need in an adequate
and predictable manner. The situation demands
nothing less.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Najat Rochdi
and Mr. Martin Griffiths for their important briefings.
Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted the
cross-border aid mechanism as an exceptional measure
in response to the grave humanitarian repercussions of
the Syrian crisis. Today the presence of the mechanism
remains central to the delivery of relief aid. That is
particularly true following the devastating earthquake
that afflicted Syria at a time when humanitarian needs
were already at their highest levels after 12 years of
the crisis. For that reason, and as we approach the end
of the mandate for the cross-border aid mechanism, in
accordance with resolution 2672 (2023), we stress the
importance of extending it for 12 months, based on
humanitarian principles and immense needs. That is
also pertinent given that the Bab Al-Hawa crossing is
considered essential as the point where 85 per cent of
aid passes through the Syrian-Turkish border. We stress
that we all have a moral responsibility that requires
that we consider our humanitarian duty apart from
any political considerations and solely with regard to
meeting the needs of our brother people of Syria.
We reaffirm the urgent need to deliver aid by every
possible means in order to ensure access to all in need.
In that context, we believe that the Syrian Government’s
recent decision to extend the opening of two additional
crossings for another three months in response to
the urgent needs resulting from the earthquake is a
crucial step. That decision contributed to the transfer
of thousands of tons of humanitarian aid across the
Syrian-Turkish border. As for cross-line aid, we take
note of the passage of an eleventh convoy for the first
time since February this year, just days before the
extension of the cross-border aid mechanism. We repeat
our calls for increasing the number of those convoys
consistently and regularly, with no impediments. We
call on all parties to permit the passage of cross-line
convoys and to refrain from obstructing the delivery
of aid or using it as a bargaining chip. We emphasize
that the obstruction of aid delivery is unacceptable.

23-1862617/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

Appropriate facilities must be provided for the passage
of humanitarian convoys by all the parties concerned.
In that regard, we welcome the Syrian Government’s
decision to grant the United Nations prior approval for
the delivery of cross-line aid as part of its measures to
facilitate aid delivery.
While the United Arab Emirates continues its
humanitarian efforts to alleviate the difficult living
conditions of Syrians, we stress the need to focus
on early-recovery projects, the reconstruction of
infrastructure and the rehabilitation of public facilities.
Syrians are still suffering from chronic shortages of
electricity, fuel and water. More than 12 million people
face acute shortage of food, and more than 15 million
people are in need for aid, half of whom are women
and girls.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates believes
that early-recovery projects are essential to providing
basic services to Syrians. They contribute to building
schools, hospitals and homes and provide job
opportunities. They are essential to addressing the
humanitarian situation through a sustained approach
that will create the conditions conducive to the
voluntary return of refugees and to alleviating pressure
on their host countries.
As part of its efforts to support early-recovery
projects in earthquake-affected areas, the United Arab
Emirates has worked to build 1,000 temporary housing
units and rehabilitate 40 schools. In addition, plans are
under way to start the construction of 500 additional
temporary housing units.
My country also notes the importance of supporting
demining efforts on the Syrian territories as part of
early-recovery projects. Those activities help facilitate
a return to normal life and to avoid the catastrophic
repercussions of those mines on civilians, especially
children and humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, while we emphasize the need to
extend the cross-border aid mechanism, we also stress
that the Council should not be satisfied with addressing
the humanitarian situation and overlooking the need for
finding a peaceful and lasting solution to the Syrian
crisis that addresses its security, humanitarian and
political dimensions. In that context, we also look
forward to continued Arab diplomatic efforts, which we
hope will achieve progress to help Syria overcome the
various challenges it faces.
18/22

29/06/2023

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The
brutal attacks and the criminal practices of the Israeli
occupying forces against the Syrian Arab Republic
have intensified recently, including in the occupied
Syrian Golan. On 20 June, substantial Israeli occupying
forces, accompanied by bulldozers, stormed the area
of Al-Hafayer, east of Masada village, in the occupied
Syrian Golan. They razed agricultural lands in order
to prepare for the implementation of their colonization
project to install wind turbines. Given the seriousness
of that plan and its negative effects, our defenceless
citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan opposed the
occupation forces in order to reject that colonization
plan. The occupying forces responded with a barrage
of bullets and smoke bombs that led to 50 casualties,
some of them very serious. Others were also detained.
The following day, our fellow citizens in the occupied
Syrian Golan declared a general strike and a day of
rage. They rejected the criminal occupation practices
used against them and their land. That strike is part
of general strikes that they organized since 2019 in
order to counter Israeli settlement projects that target
the occupied Syrian Golan. Those projects threaten to
confiscate thousands of dunums of agricultural land, in
stark violation of a number of relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981).
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the strongest
terms all of those crimes, aggressions and illegal
practices. We call on the Security Council to break its
deafening silence and to carry out its responsibilities,
under the Charter of the United Nations, to put an end
to all occupation and aggression policies and to hold
the perpetrators accountable. I would have liked to hear
Ms. Rochdi mention, in her briefing, the suffering of
our people in the occupied Syrian Golan as a result of
the practices of the Israeli occupation. Those Syrians
are a part of the Syrian people.
On 20 and 21 June, the twentieth meeting on Syria
of the guarantor countries of the Astana process was
held in the capital of Kazakhstan. Since its inception,
the Astana process has made important achievements
to push back terrorism in Syria. In their joint statement,
the participating States recalled their firm commitment
to the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic and its
unity, independence and territorial integrity. Those
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

States recalled their commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and their determination
to work together to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. They also recalled their opposition
to the separatist agendas that seek to undermine Syria’s
sovereignty, stability and territorial integrity. Finally,
they condemned the activities of terrorist organizations
and affiliated groups that operate under various names
in various parts of Syria.
We listened to the briefing of Mr. Martin Griffiths.
Last week, during an informal interactive dialogue, we
discussed aspects of the implementation of resolution
2672 (2023). We primarily discussed progress made
in the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrians and
the provision of basic services to them through
early-recovery projects. My delegation would like to
indicate that humanitarian needs are rising. Access to
basic services has become even more limited. That is
compounded by a severe water crisis plaguing nearly
1 million Syrians in Al-Hasakah governorate and
its surroundings. That crisis also contributed to the
cholera outbreak.
In addition, an acute shortage of electricity is
exacerbating the living conditions of the Syrian people.
My delegation underscores that the Syrian Government
has taken exceptional and urgent measures following the
earthquake of 6 February. We have provided approvals
and facilities for the United Nations, including our
sovereign decision to open two more border crossings
and extend their work for a period of three months,
ending on 13 August.
We also wish to refer to several developments that
have had a negative impact on the entire humanitarian
response in Syria. Those developments include the fact
that there has been no progress at all in providing crossline humanitarian assistance to people in need who are
difficult to reach through the borders. Indeed, terrorist
groups have prevented the delivery of that assistance.
Since the beginning of the year, those groups have
prevented any humanitarian convoy from reaching the
north-west of the country through the crossing lines.
Some hostile States, in coordination with their terrorist
accomplices, allowed only one convoy to pass prior
to the extension of the relevant resolution. That is a
dangerous game that manipulates the faith of those who
need humanitarian assistance.
My delegation also stresses that the limited increase
in the number of early-recovery projects and the small
increase in funding will not allow those projects to meet

S/PV.9363

the minimum required of them. They will therefore not
achieve a tangible improvement in responding to the
immense humanitarian needs in Syria. The real impact
of those projects remains unclear.
The reduction of funding is a true source of
concern. The World Food Programme has announced
that it will have to reduce the number of beneficiaries,
which threatens to put an end to the urgent food
assistance that is to be delivered to 2.5 million people
in July. That will affect people in all parts of Syria.
This reduction is due to an acute shortage of financing
because international donors have not honoured their
pledges to the humanitarian response plan in Syria.
Indeed, this year’s funding for the humanitarian
response plan of $5.4 billion stands at only 12 per cent
to date, which hampers the full implementation of
resolution 2672 (2023).
The question we now face is the following. What
could improve predictability: delivery on pledges to
finance the plan or the 12-months period? The answer
is clearly funding the plan. Without this funding, it is
impossible to do anything.
At the seventh donors’ conference in Brussels,
pledges were made that show the willingness and
seriousness of donor countries to honour their
commitments and make sure that humanitarian work
does not follow any political agenda. Yet all donor
conferences cannot compensate for the wealth of the
Syrian people that has been pillaged throughout the
years of the crisis by occupying foreign forces.
I also wish to refer to the impact of unilateral
coercive measures imposed by the United States
and the European Union (EU), affecting various
humanitarian sectors in Syria. The recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/419) describes the impact
of those measures on the payment and procurement
activities of the United Nations. My delegation stresses
once again that all the so-called exemptions that have
been announced by the United States and the EU
after the earthquake have not had any impact on the
ground. Some EU leaders continue to maintain a hostile
position towards Syria and politicize its humanitarian
situation as well as the suffering of the Syrian people.
They also continue to impose coercive measures
that are inhumane and immoral. These leaders are
excluding the Syrian State from the Brussels donors’
conference while it is the Syrian State itself that is first
and foremost concerned about the needs and challenges
of its people.

23-1862619/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

The United States is responsible for the security
and humanitarian situation in areas it controls. It
is worsening in the camps that are in Syrian areas
illegitimately controlled by United States forces,
such as the Al-Rukban and Al-Hol camps. Indeed,
it is the destructive policies of the United States
against Syria that have pushed millions of Syrians
into insecurity and instability. It is those policies that
have turned a significant number of them into refugees
and internally displaced persons, causing them to
lose their food security and putting them in a dire
humanitarian situation.
The repeated claims by the United States that it is
providing humanitarian assistance to Al-Rukban camp
in the Al-Tanf region through its non-governmental
organizations are just an attempt to provide support
to terrorist organizations present in that area, such as
Maghawir Al-Thawrah. It is time that the responsibility
of the United States for the humanitarian situation in
the camp is recognized. My delegation stresses that
the only solution to the worsening conditions in the
Al-Rukban and Al-Hol camps is to close them for good.
My delegation also stresses that Member States
must uphold their responsibility and repatriate their
citizens who are part of the foreign terrorist combatants
group present in Al-Hol camp in order to prosecute
them, and in particular rehabilitate and reintegrate their
women and children.
In conclusion, I would like to state that improving
the humanitarian situation in Syria requires lasting
solutions that support Syrians, especially following the
earthquake. Those solutions must reduce dependency
on life-saving humanitarian assistance and strengthen
people’s resilience. Moreover, avoiding politicization
of the return of refugees or preventing their return is
essential. Their return requires rebuilding necessary
infrastructure so that their return is dignified, which
includes providing financing for de-mining efforts
and clearing explosive remnants. Donors must uphold
their pledges to the humanitarian response plan and
early-recovery projects. As for the immediate and
unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures, it
is a moral and humanitarian obligation of countries that
impose them to lift them in order to stop starving the
people of Syria and their children.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
20/22

29/06/2023

Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We thank
Deputy Special Envoy Najat Rochdi, Mr. Martin
Griffiths and the Secretary-General for their informative
briefings and the update on the humanitarian needs in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
As highlighted by today’s briefers and in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/419),
the humanitarian situation in Syria was significantly
worsened by the devastating earthquake on 6 February
2023, and the needs of the affected population have
reached their highest level since the beginning of
the conflict. Meanwhile, insufficient funding of the
humanitarian response plan is a cause for concern and
requires greater support.
Mr. Griffiths’ recent visit to Damascus, where
he engaged in fruitful discussions with the President
and Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic,
and specifically addressed the humanitarian situation
in the country, is a positive step. We commend
Mr. Griffiths for his tireless efforts and extend our
gratitude to the United Nations and its partners for their
unwavering dedication to assisting the Syrian people
and for diligently working towards alleviating their
immense suffering.
United Nations reports confirm that the Syrian
Government’s decision to open the Bab Al-Salam and
Al-Rai border crossings, along with the subsequent
three-month extension of such opening until 13 August,
has significantly facilitated direct and efficient
access to affected individuals. We commend the
Syrian Government for its constructive cooperation,
which has played a crucial role in enabling enhanced
humanitarian operations.
According to the report of the Secretary-General,
the ongoing unilateral sanctions have impeded
humanitarian assistance and access to vital services.
Specifically, the sanctions have had a significant
impact on two major areas, namely, procurement
and payments, and the compliance sections of banks
have been refusing or delaying the processing of
financial transactions. The report demonstrates that the
alleged humanitarian exemptions are ineffective and
impractical. We strongly emphasize the urgent need to
repeal those illegal measures. We also renew our call for
humanitarian assistance to be provided unconditionally
and in accordance with the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and non-discrimination.
Political considerations should not obstruct the delivery
of assistance to those in need.
23-18626

29/06/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9363

Despite the clear emphasis placed in resolution
2672 (2023) on the need to improve cross-line delivery
throughout the country, there was no significant
improvement in cross-line deliveries over the past
month. Cross-line deliveries serve as an essential legal
means for providing humanitarian assistance, and their
effectiveness is indispensable. We support the provision
of assistance through the cross-border mechanism.
However, we reiterate our position that that mechanism
is a temporary arrangement that must be implemented
in a non-discriminatory manner, while fully respecting
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

insecurity in the country. We call for the immediate and
complete withdrawal of those unlawful forces, which
is essential to creating an environment conducive to
resolving the crisis and restoring peace and stability in
the region.

As one of the three basic pillars of resolution
2672 (2023), early-recovery projects serve a key role
in improving the overall humanitarian situation and
setting the groundwork for a sustained recovery in
Syria. Those projects should aim to restore vital
infrastructure, including water, electricity, sanitation,
health-care facilities and educational institutions,
and to prioritize demining efforts. It is important
that the United Nations and its partners continue to
demonstrate steadfast support for those projects and
to work diligently to ensure their implementation, with
transparency and without any form of discrimination.

In conclusion, we strongly condemn the continuing
acts of aggression and military attacks by the Israeli
regime against Syria, particularly those that target
civilian infrastructure, alongside the persistent
occupation of the Syrian Golan. The Security Council
must abandon its current double standards and address
the malicious activities and acts of aggression by the
Israeli regime, which clearly contravene international
law and international humanitarian law and violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Moreover, those malign activities not only
destabilize the region but also exacerbate tensions.

Iran remains committed to cooperating with its
partners in the Astana process to achieve long-term and
sustainable normalization in Syria. During the recent
meeting held on 20 and 21 June, the representatives of
Iran, Russia and Türkiye, as guarantor countries of the
Astana format, emphasized, among various priorities,
the importance of facilitating the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their respective homes in Syria, while
ensuring their right to return and to receive support.
They also reiterated their opposition to the illegal seizure
and transfer of oil revenues that belong to Syria and
condemned the actions of countries supporting terrorist
groups, including illegitimate self-rule initiatives in
the north-east of Syria. We highlight our support for
the continued Syrian-Turkish dialogue, recognizing its
crucial role in those broader efforts.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.

The fight against terrorism must be carried out
with full respect for Syria’s national sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and without using it as a pretext
to violate those fundamental principles of international
law. The illegal presence of foreign military forces,
including the United States forces in Syria, constitutes
a blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law and is a primary source of

We support the resumption of the Constitutional
Committee meetings at the earliest opportunity to
continue the progress made towards resolving the
crisis. In that context, we are steadfast in our support of
the Special Envoy’s efforts and his active engagement
with all the parties.

Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this meeting. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Deputy Special Envoy
Rochdi for their briefings.
In order to bring an end to the 12-year conflict in
Syria and its destabilizing implications, it is crucial
to effectively address its various dimensions in a
synchronized and gradual manner. It was with that
understanding that we participated in the twentieth
meeting of the Astana format high-level meeting last
week. During the meeting, the importance of preserving
Syria’s territorial integrity and national unity, effectively
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and disrupting separatist agendas were emphasized.
We underlined the need to keep the situation calm on
the ground while creating the conditions for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees, as well as
facilitating the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian
assistance. With a view to overcoming the current
political impasse, the Constitutional Committee should
be reconvened as soon as possible. We support Special
Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to that end.

23-1862621/22

S/PV.9363

The situation in the Middle East

29/06/2023

The terrorism in Syria of the Kurdistan Workers’
Party/People’s Protection Units is a major threat, not
only to the stability and territorial integrity of Syria
but also to our existential national security interests.
Since the beginning of this year, that terrorist
organization perpetrated a total of 67 attacks from
Tell Rifaat and Manbij on targets inside Türkiye and
in the opposition-controlled areas in Syria. Türkiye is
determined to do whatever is necessary to eliminate
that threat and to safeguard its citizens and borders, in
full compliance with international law and international
humanitarian law.

2.5 million people at risk unless additional funding
were provided, is deeply worrisome. We hope that that
undesired outcome can be offset by securing sufficient
financial support. It would also be timely to develop
new modalities of assistance by increasing access to
livelihoods through early-recovery and rehabilitation
activities in accordance with resolution 2672 (2023).
Cross-line aid deliveries are also important to
complement other humanitarian efforts. A cross-line
mission to Idlib was successfully completed last week.
We continue to encourage all the parties to facilitate
regular cross-line missions.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains grim.
This month, we have seen two reports by the SecretaryGeneral demonstrating the devastating consequences
of the earthquake, as well as the extent of the ongoing
humanitarian needs on the ground. We appreciate the
role of United Nations in terms its efforts to alleviate
the plight of the affected people. Since the earthquakes,
more than 3,000 aid trucks and more than 140 United
Nations inter-agency missions have crossed our borders
into north-west Syria. In addition to the ongoing
massive operation at the Bab Al-Hawa crossing, the use
of two additional border crossings — Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai — has also been useful.

Under the current conditions, especially in northwest Syria, which suffered the most damage from
the earthquakes, the United Nations cross-border
mechanism remains the only viable lifeline for millions
of Syrians in need. The Security Council’s extension
of the mandate of the cross-border mechanism for 12
months will therefore be critically important. Expanding
the scope of the mandate to include additional border
crossings would also contribute to predictability, which
is needed to make better use of those crossings. We call
on the members of the Council to remain guided solely
by humanitarian considerations and to act accordingly.

The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
need predictability, with a longer-term perspective to
be able to sustain their crucial operations. The World
Food Programme’s announcement that the number
of beneficiaries would be reduced by half, leaving

22/22

The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

23-18626
