S/PRST/2013/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7011th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 July 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Great Lakes region”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the implementation of the
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the region (PSC Framework),
which is essential to achieving lasting peace and security in eastern DRC and
the Great Lakes region.
“The Security Council welcomes in this regard the actions taken thus far
by the signatories and guarantors of the PSC Framework, including the
convening of the first ‘11+4’ meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of
the PSC Framework in Addis Ababa on 26 May 2013 and the two first
meetings of the Technical Support Committee in Nairobi on 24 June and
22 July 2013, which aimed to make progress on the establishment of
benchmarks to assess the implementation of the PSC Framework by all
signatories. In this context, the Security Council looks forward to the ICGLR
summit, scheduled to take place on 31 July in Nairobi, to further review
developments in the region, including progress on the implementation of the
PSC Framework. The Security Council encourages the UN, AU, ICGLR and
SADC and other relevant international and regional organisations to continue
to work together, with the sustained engagement and support of the
international community, towards the implementation of the PSC Framework.
“The Security Council calls on the DRC and the countries of the region
to implement promptly, fully, and in good faith, their respective commitments
under the PSC Framework. The Security Council calls on the DRC to continue
and expand security sector reform, consolidate state authority, make progress
on decentralization, and further the agenda of reconciliation, tolerance, and
democratization. The Security Council calls on all countries of the region to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring countries, not
to interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring countries, not to harbour
persons accused of violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law or persons listed by United Nations sanctions regimes, and promote
accountability. The Security Council calls on all countries of the region neither
to tolerate nor provide assistance or support of any kind to armed groups.

13-40828 (E) 250713

*1340828*

S/PRST/2013/11

“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of a national
oversight mechanism by President Joseph Kabila of the DRC, as requested by
the PSC Framework and Resolution 2098 (2013), and calls on the President of
the DRC to ensure transparency and inclusiveness in this mechanism. The
Security Council calls on the government of the DRC to implement promptly
its commitment on security sector reform, including through the further
development and implementation of a comprehensive military and police
reform plan and the formation of a well-trained, adequately equipped and
accountable ‘Rapid Reaction Force’ able to take over the responsibilities of the
Intervention Brigade of MONUSCO (United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo). The Security
Council reaffirms in this context the leading role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in coordinating support for security sector reform
provided by international and bilateral partners and the United Nations system,
and his role in assisting the government of the DRC to implement its
commitments under the PSC Framework. The Security Council also reiterates
that the government of the DRC bears the primary responsibility for security,
protection of civilians, promotion and protection of human rights, national
reconciliation, peacebuilding and development in the country.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the DRC as well as
of all countries of the region and emphasizes the need to respect fully the
principles of non-interference, good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation.
“The Security Council commends the joint visit of United Nations
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the President of the World Bank Group
Jim Yong Kim, accompanied by Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region Mary Robinson, to the DRC, Rwanda and Uganda
from 22 to 24 May 2013 in support of the PSC Framework, and welcomes the
announcement made by the World Bank of $1 billion in planned funding for
development projects in the Great Lakes region aiming at the recovery of
livelihoods to reduce the vulnerability of the people of the region and the
revitalisation and expansion of cross-border economic activity. In this regard,
the Security Council encourages multilateral institutions and bilateral partners
to support the objectives of the PSC Framework and stresses the importance of
swiftly delivering concrete peace dividends.
“The Security Council commends the personal diplomatic engagement of
the Secretary-General and reaffirms its strong support to his Special Envoy,
Mary Robinson. The Security Council encourages Special Envoy Mary
Robinson, in coordination with and with appropriate support from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the DRC, to continue to lead,
coordinate and assess the implementation of national and regional
commitments under the PSC Framework, including through the development
of benchmarks and appropriate follow-up measures to be presented for
adoption at the next meeting of the ‘11+4’ Regional Oversight Mechanism in
the margins of the United Nations General Assembly in September 2013. The
Council further commends her efforts to include women and civil society in
the implementation of the PSC Framework and to promote the full and
effective participation of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
including through the implementation of a Subregional Action Plan for the

2

13-40828

S/PRST/2013/11

implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It welcomes in this regard the
Regional Conference on Women, Peace, Security and Development held in
Bujumbura on 9-11 July 2013.
“The Security Council condemns the renewed attacks launched from
20 to 22 May 2013 and again on 14 July 2013 by the ‘March 23 Movement’
(M23) rebel group in the Mutaho area, in the vicinity of Goma in violation of
resolutions 2076 (2012) and 2098 (2013), which caused civilian casualties and
displacements, and undermined regional and international efforts to peacefully
and permanently resolve the crisis in eastern DRC. The Security Council
renews its strong condemnation of the continued presence of the M23 in the
immediate vicinity of Goma and its attempts to establish an illegitimate
parallel administration in North-Kivu and demands that the M23 fully disband
and disarm.
“The Security Council takes note that hundreds of M23 combatants,
including individuals listed by the United Nations sanctions regime concerning
the DRC, fled from the DRC into Rwanda on 18 March 2013. The Security
Council notes with appreciation the initial steps swiftly taken by the
government of Rwanda to handle this situation and encourages the government
of Rwanda to continue to collaborate with the United Nations and relevant
international organizations to ensure that these combatants are permanently
demobilized and are dealt with according to relevant international law, with
special attention to children and women among them.
“The Security Council expresses concern at the increased activity of the
FDLR (Forces démocratiques de liberation du Rwanda) in eastern DRC,
including reports of attacks by the FDLR on Rwandan territory, and demands
that the FDLR fully disband and disarm.
“The Security Council also condemns the renewed attacks by the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF-NALU) on 11 July 2013 against the FARDC in
Kamango and on 14 July 2013 against MONUSCO forces along the MubaKamango axis, which have resulted in 66,000 Congolese refugees and caused
casualties among both the FARDC and MONUSCO.
“The Security Council demands that the M23, the Democratic Forces for
the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), the ADF-NALU, the Mayi Mayi KataKatanga and all other armed groups cease immediately all forms of violence,
including sexual and gender-based violence, continuing recruitment and use of
children, destabilizing activities, human rights abuses, violations of
international humanitarian law, and attempts to undermine or supplant the
DRC government. The Security Council stresses that all perpetrators of such
abuses and violations should be held accountable. The Security Council further
demands that the members of all armed groups immediately and permanently
disband and lay down their arms, and calls for the restoration of state authority
of the government of the DRC in eastern DRC. It strongly condemns the large
scale recruitment and use of children by armed groups. The Council
emphasises the renewed commitment of all countries of the region to neither
tolerate nor provide assistance or support of any kind to armed groups.
“The Security Council condemns the widespread incidents of sexual and
gender based violence in the DRC and emphasizes the importance of effective

13-40828

3

S/PRST/2013/11

steps to prevent and respond to such acts. It further recalls that rape and other
forms of sexual violence in armed conflict are war crimes, and calls for the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible, in order to end impunity for
such crimes.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about the ongoing
humanitarian crisis, including the 2.6 million internally displaced people and
the 6.4 million people in need of food assistance and emergency agricultural
aid, and calls upon all parties to allow safe and unhindered access for the
timely and full delivery of humanitarian aid to all civilians in urgent need of
assistance, in accordance with relevant provisions of international law,
including international humanitarian law and the United Nations guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council further expresses
concern with the over 500,000 refugees from the DRC in neighbouring
countries and calls upon the DRC and all States in the region to work towards
the peaceful environment that will allow for the eventual and voluntary return
of refugees to the DRC, with the support, as appropriate, of UNHCR. The
Security Council commends in this regard the support provided by
neighbouring countries to refugees from the DRC.
“The Security Council condemns the violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law committed by members of the FARDC, including
the mass rapes committed in Minova on 24 November 2012, and calls upon the
government of the DRC to swiftly apprehend, bring to justice, and hold
accountable those responsible for such violations, regardless of military rank.
The Security Council further calls on the government of the DRC to
implement improved vetting mechanisms and establish more effective judicial
mechanisms within its security forces.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern about reports of alleged
mistreatment of M23 detainees and the desecration of corpses of M23
combatants by members of the FARDC. The Security Council welcomes steps
taken by the Congolese armed forces and MONUSCO to investigate these
claims and to hold the perpetrators accountable for these acts, which constitute
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law. The Security
Council takes note of steps taken by MONUSCO to review its support to
FARDC Units suspected of being involved in these incidents in line with the
United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
“The Security Council further calls upon the government of the DRC to
continue to implement its action plan to prevent and end the recruitment and
use of children as well as prevent and end all acts of sexual violence against
children by the FARDC.
“The Security Council encourages Special Envoy Mary Robinson,
building on the PSC Framework, to continue to lead a comprehensive political
process that includes all relevant stakeholders to address the underlying root
causes of the conflict and ensures that those responsible for human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law are held accountable
and are not eligible for integration into the state security forces.
“The Security Council welcomes the contribution of MONUSCO to a
comprehensive approach to addressing the security situation in the DRC and

4

13-40828

S/PRST/2013/11

encourages rapid completion of the deployment of the Intervention Brigade of
MONUSCO. The Security Council acknowledges the commitment of all troop
contributing countries to MONUSCO to implementing the full range of
responsibilities under the mission’s civilian protection mandate, including the
responsibilities assigned to the Intervention Brigade, in line with resolution
2098 (2013).
“The Security Council recognizes the significant sacrifices made by
MONUSCO and the troop contributing countries and expresses appreciation
for their efforts to improve peace and stability in the DRC.
“The Security Council condemns all threats or attacks against
peacekeepers and emphasizes that those responsible for such threats or attacks
must be held accountable. The Security Council recalls in this regard its
intention to consider additional targeted sanctions, in accordance with the
criteria set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 2078 (2012), and its
decision to extend sanctions measures to individuals and entities who plan,
sponsor or participate in attacks against MONUSCO peacekeepers.”

13-40828

5
