VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third C'ommittee

Noting the decision of the Government of Somalia to
facilitate a programme of local settlement of the refugees,
Aware of the consequences of the social and economic
burden placed on the Government and people of Somalia
as a result of the continued presence of refugees and the
consequent impact on the national development and the
infrastructure of the country,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the High Commissioner for his continued efforts to mobilize international
assistance on behalf of the refugees in Somalia;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the assistancc rendered to refugees in Somalia by various Member States,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund and other concerned intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations;
4. Appeals to Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to render maximum material,
financia! and technical assistance to the Government of
Somalia in its efforts to provide ali necessary assistance to
the refugees;
5. Notes with satisfaction the visit of the United
Nations technical inter-agency mission to Somalia from 19
October to 9 November 1983 to review with the Government a comprehensive settlement programme for refugees
who wish to be settled in the country;
6. Notes that the Government of Somalía will indicate
to the Second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa, to be held at Geneva in July 1984, its
additional needs for material and financia) help to assist
the refugees in that country;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to make a further
comprehensive review ofthe overall needs ofthe refugees,
taking into account those aspects relating to their rehabilitation and settlement;
8. A/so requests the High Commissioner, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1984,
ofthe proposed review ofthe refugee situation in Somalia;
9. Further requests the High Commissioner, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
16 December /983

38/89. Humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti 83
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ 182 of 15 December 1980,
36/156 of 16 December 1981 and 37/176 of 17 December
1982 on humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti,
Having heard the statement made on 14 November
1983 by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 84
Having considered with satisfaction the reports of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistance to refugees in Djibouti, 85
83 See also sect. V, resolutions 38/213 and 38/216.

84 See Officia/ Records o.f the General Assemh/v. Thirtv-ei,:hth Sesswn.
Third Committee, 42nd meeting, paras. 28-37.

197

Appreciating the determined efforts made by the Government of Djibouti, despite its limited economic
resources, to cope with the pressing needs of the refugees.
A ware of the social and economic burden placed on the
Government and peopk ofDjibouti as a result ofthe presence of refugees and of the consequent impact on the
development and infrastructure of the country,
Deeply concerned about the continuing plight of the refugees and displaced persons in the country, which has
been aggravated by the devastating effects ofthe prolonged
drought.
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the Government of Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High
Commissioner, to achieve adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions in respect of the refugees.
Also noting with appreciation the concern and unremitting efforts of the Oflice of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Health Organization, the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the intergovcmmental and non-governmental
organizations and the voluntary agencies which have
worked closely with the Government of Djibouti in the
relief and rehabilitation programme for the refugees in that
country.
1. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of thc
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on
humanitarian assistancc to refugees in Djibouti;
2. Appreciates the efforts made by the High Commissioner to keep the situation of the refugees in Djibouti
under constant review;
3. Welcomes the steps taken by the Government of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner. to achieve adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
4. ('alis upan the High Commissioner to mobilize the
necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in
respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
5. Urges the High Commissioner to continue to takc
the necessary measures to ensure that adequate, appropriate and lasting solutions are achieved in respect ofthe refugees in Djibouti and to maintain close contact with the
Member States, intergovemmental and non-governmental
organizations and voluntary agencies concerned with a
view to mobilizing the necessary assistance to enable the
Government of Djibouti to cope effectively with the refugee situation, which has been aggravated by the debilitating effects of the prolonged drought;
6. Appreciates the assistance provided thus far by
Member States, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and voluntary
agencies to the relief and rehabilitation programmes for
the refugees and displaced persons in Djibouti;
7. Calls upan ali Member States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies, intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and
voluntary agencies to continue to support the efforts being
made by the Government ofDjibouti to cope with the current needs of the refugee population and the other victims
of drought in that country;
8. Requests the High Commissioner, in close cooperation with the Secretary-General, to report to the
85 lhzd.. Thzrly-t'lghth Sess1on, Supp/emenl No. I:? (A/38/ l 2 and Corr. l)
and Supp/ement No. /:?A (A 1 18/121Add.l): and A/38/399 and Corr.l.

General Assembly~Thirty-eighth Session

198

General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion on the implementation of the present resolution.

missions as well as on the implementation of thc present
resolution.
IOOth p/enary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

IOOth plenary meeting
16 Decemher 1983

38/90.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan 86

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/181 ofl5 December 1980, 36/
158 of 16 December 1981 and 37 /173 of 17 December 1982
on the situation of refugees in the Sudan,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation of refugees in the Sudan, 87
Taking note of the ever-increasing number of refugees
arriving in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the Govemment of the Sudan and the sacrifices it is making in caring
for the refugees and the need for adequate intemational
assistance to enable it to continue its efforts to provide
assistance to the refugees,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered to
the Sudan by Member Statcs and intergovemmental and
non-govemmental organizations in support of refugee
programmes,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
and the recommendations of the inter-agency technical
follow-up missions contained therein;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
donor countries and voluntary agencies for their cfforts to
assist the refugees in the Sudan;
3. Commends the efforts of the High Commissioner
and the International Labour Office to create incomcgenerating activities for refugees in thc Sudan; 88
4. Appreciates the measures which the Govemment of
the Sudan is taking to provide shelter, food, education and
health and other services to the refugees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary financia! and material assistance for the full implementation of the recommendations of the various interagency missions;
6. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations,
other intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations and the intemational financia! institutions to provide
the Government ofthe Sudan with the necessary resources
for the implementation of development assistance projects
in regions affected by the presence ofrefugees, as envisaged
in the reports of the various inter-agency missions, and to
strengthen its social and economic infrastructure so that
essential services and facilities for refugees can be strengthened and expanded;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in
order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential services to the refugees in their settlements;
8. Also requests the High Commissioner, in cooperation with the Secretary-General, to submit a comprehensive report to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
session on the progress made in the implementation ofthe
recommendations of the inter-agency technical follow-up
86 See also sect. V, resolution 38/216.
87 A/38/427 and Corr. l.
88 !bid., scct. 111.

38/91.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia 86

The General Assnnbl_¡-.
Recalling its resolutions 35/91 of 5 December 1980, 36/
161 of 16 Decembcr 1981 and 37/175 of 17 December
1982 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1980/
54 of 24 July 1980 and 1982/2 of 27 April 1982,
Recalling a/so the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 89 prepared
pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/
8 of 28 April 1980.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 90
Recalling further the appeal of the Secretary-General
contained in his note verbale of 11 November 1980 as well
as those of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.
Having heard the statement made on 14 November
1983 by thc United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 84
Recognizíng the number of voluntary retumees in Ethiopta.

Deeply concerned that the repeated appeals of the Secretary-General. the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council have yet to receive an adequate
response,
Aware of the heavy burden placed on the Govemment
of Ethiopia in caring for displaced persons and victims of
natural disasters,
1. Endorses once again the appeals of the SecretaryGeneral, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council conceming assistance to displaced persons
and voluntary retumees in Ethiopia;
2. Commends the efforts made by various organs of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies in mobilizing humanitarian assistance to the displaced persons and
voluntary retumees in Ethiopia;
3. Appeals once again to the Govemments of Member
States and to intergovemmental and non-govemmental
organizations and ali voluntary agencies to contribute generously to assist the Govemment of Ethiopia in its efforts
to provide relief and rehabilitation to the displaced persons and voluntary retumees in Ethiopia;
4. Requests thc United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to intensify his efforts in mobilizing humanitarian assistance for the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of numbers of voluntary retumees, as well as for displaced persons;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1984, ofthe
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
IOOth plenary meeting
16 Decemher 1983
89 A/351360 and Con 1-3.
o¡, iv,R:428 and Con !
