UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY CoUNC1L

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2617th

MEETING:

.7 OCTOBER

UNLIBR&qy

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2617)

1

. . ..-.................................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17510) . . . . . . . ..*..............*...............................

1

WPV.2617

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
, document: ’
_,s I.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
i.ci :quarterf y. Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
::” .document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
i i’
-The’resolutions
of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

fMozambiaue). Mr. Chamorro Mora (Nicarana), Mr. Garba
iNigeria), ‘Mr. Sarre (Senegal), Mr. ’ von S&it&ding (South
Africa), Mr. Bouziri (Tunisia), Mr. AI-Shaali (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. Majengo (united Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
L.e Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Goiob (Yugoslavia), Mr,
Lusaka (Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende (Zimbabwe) took the
places reserved for them at the side of .the Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2617)
,l.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Complaint

by Angola against South Africa:

3. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG Diet Nam) (internretation
from French): Mr. President, I should first like to ihank all
the members of the Council for allowing my delegation to
take part in the discussion of this item.

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17510)

4. My delegation fully shares the concern of the intemational community in the light of the repeated acts of
aggression that have since 1976 been perpetrated by the
racist settlers of Pretoria against the People’s Republic of
Angola, and specifically the recent armed incursion carried
out in Angola on 28 September.

The meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. Those who have spoken before me, particularly the
representative of Angola, have already very eloquently and
cogently emphasized the exceptional seriousness of this
further act of aggression, which testifies obstinate arrogance of Pretoria and to the ignoble nature of the apartheid
regime, and once again corroborates a view frequently
expressed in the Security Council and on other occasions
by distinguished statesmen such as the late Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India and former
Chairperson of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
namely, that the apartheid regime cannot be reformed but
must be dismantled.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint

by Angola against South Africa:

Letter dated 1 October 1985 from the Permanent Rep
resentative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/17510)
1. The PRESIDENTz In accordance with decisions taken
at the previous meetings on this item [2612th, 2614th and
2616th meetings], I invite the representative of Angola to
take a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Cameroon,
Cuba, Ethiopia, Ghana, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kuwait, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

6. Perpetrated at a time when the anger of the South
African peopie is even now violently shaking the very
foundations of the abhorrent @me of apartheid, this new
act of aggression against Angola demonstrates that Pretoria has, once again, preferred to resort to military adventurism against neighbouring front-line States in the vain
hope of distracting international opinion from the distressing situation inside the country. Such arrogance also
shows the calm confidence Pretoria comfortably enjoys
from its protector and strategic North American ally.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Zarif
(Afghanistan), Mr. Taleb lbrahimi (Algeria), Mr. LegwaiIa
(Botswana), Mr. Engo (Cameroon), Mr. Malmierca Peoli
(Cuba), Mr. Woide (Ethiopia), Mr. Asamoah (Ghana), Mr.
Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. dos Santos

7. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe has
already had occasion last week [2614th meeting].very pertinently to dot the i’s and cross the t’s on this subject when
1

..

/

he denounced in explicit terms the undoubted responsibility borne by those who stand on the side of these-UNITA
(National Union for the Total Independence of Angola)
bandits who persist in trying desperately to topple the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola.
8. The spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam has just made a statement in which he condemned the act of flagrant aggression
committed by South Africa against Angola in the following terms:
“This criminal act further demonstrates that the
South African administration is still pursuing its policy
of brazen aggression against the independence and sovereignty of Angola in gross contravention of intemational law, blatantly challenging public opinion in the
African States, the non-aligned countries and peaceloving forces all over the world.
“South Africa’s act of aggression is also aimed at
aiding the disintegrating UNITA reactionary henchmen
in opposing the Angolan revolution and preventing support from the front-line States to the just struggle of the
Namibian people under the leadership of SWAP0
[South West Africa People’s Organization].

“The Vietnamese people and the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam strongly condemn this
brazen act of aggression committed by the South African authorities against the People’s Republic of Angola
and firmly demand that they immediately halt this act
and respect the independence, sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of Angola.
“The Vietnamese people once again reaffhrn their
militant solidarity with and full support for the fraternal
Angolan people in their struggle against aggression and
in defence of their countries.*‘*
9. In the light of the new challenge that has been so
brazenly hurled at the Security Council by the incorrigible
and insolent racist rigime of Pretoria, all the representatives who have spoken before me have vigorously raised
their voices in indignation at the facts. My delegation
wishes in turn to request the Council this time once and for
all to be resolved to adopt appropriate and effective steps,
including those provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter. At the same time it might be of some use to point out
that it is not resolutions of the Council that are lacking.
What the Council must do is to seek effective ways and
means of implementing its resolutions. In this case, what
must be done is to ensure that South Africa puts an end to
its acts of aggression, immediately and unconditionally
withdraw all its armed forces from Angolan territory and
pay appropriate compensation for all the damage caused
to the Angolan people.
10. My delegation believes that, echoing the universal
condemnation of the new criminal act of Pretoria against
*Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola, a firm and energetic stance by the
Council is more than ever necessary in dealing with Pretoria in order finally to bring to reason those warmongers,
who are staggering desperately under the mortal blows of
the angered South African people and the legitimate wrath
of humanity as a whole.
11. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Peter
Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Relations of the South
West Africa People’s Organization, to whom the Council
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure at the 2614th meeting. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
12. Mr. MUESHIHANGE:
Mr. President, I thank you
and your colleagues of the Security Council for allowing
me to participate in this important debate. I am particularly grateful to Comrade Leandre BassolC, representative
of Burkina Faso, for his timely initiative in facilitating my
appearance before the Council.
13. I speak in the name of the oppressed but struggling
Namibian people and the Central Committee of our movement to express the unflinching support and militant solidarity of SWAP0 to the fraternal people and the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola, which
have come once again, for the third time within a short
period of time, to lodge yet another complaint before the
Council about a massive armed aggression launched by
the racist Pretoria regime against their national territory.
14. ‘Angola, a sovereign and independent country and a
State Member of the United Nations, has known no peace
since the victory of the revolution in 1975. The imperialists, the racists and their mercenary bands of Angolan
traitors and those recruited abroad which are being
directed by the apartheid regime in its continuing campaign of terror throughout southern Africa and beyond,
have, over these many years, subjected Angola to all sorts
of criminal acts which, in the language of the Charter of
the United Nations, clearly constitute a serious threat to
the peace, breach of the peace and aggression against that
peaceful country.
15. Had it not been for the repeated abuse of the veto
power by certain Western permanent members of the
Council, aimed at protecting the racist rulers of the evil
apartheid system and their own misguided economic interests in the region, the Security Council would long ago
have imposed binding economic sanctions and other effective enforcement measures under the Charter, against
racist South Africa to restore peace and security in and
around Angola.
16. South Africa’s record of crimes committed against
the victims of its policies and practices have been catalogued and are well known to all. South Africa’s record of
defiance of the will of the international community, as
reflected, for example, in the resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations, and in particular the decisions of the
Security Council, persists and is becoming worse with each

minority
Africa.

passing day. South Africa’s stubborn refusal to implement
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia,
endorsed in resolution 435 (1978), remains a source of
indignation. South Africa’s bellicose attitude towards independent African States in any part of the continent and its
hostile and expansionist tendencies directed specifically
against the front-line States have provoked strong condemnations and demands for concerted and effective action to
punish the Botha regime and his marauding henchmen.

of the population

in Namibia

and in South

21. In a way, we understand their dilemma. The Pretoria
racists, like their racist predecessors throughout history,
are incurable victims of their own subjective conditioning
based on an outrageous concept of human relations, not
being able to see anything else except a master-servant
relationship between different races. Botha and his henchmen are convinced until death that they know best what is
good for Africa. They are also convinced that they are
innocent victims of imaginary evil forces, at whose bidding
Angola and, by extension, SWAP0 are acting. In other
words, the embattled Angolans, the oppressed Namibians
and South Africans, the peaceful peoples of Mozambique,
Zimbabwe, Botswana, Zambia, Lesotho, Swaziland, Seychelles and other African States are considered by them as
perpetrators of certain crimes against the Boer regime.

17. In other words, the source of the conflict in our
region is and has always been the evil system of apartheid,
perpetuating itself at home by meansbf intensified repression, seeking, although in vain, to prevent the independence of Namibia by stationing more than 100,000 troops
in our country, perpetrating repeated acts of aggression,
destabilization and sabotage against the front-line States
and other African States, particularly the People’s Republic of Angola.

22. We do not feel any empathy for the racists. They will
certainly perish by their own sword if they refuse to adapt to
the demands of the majority. Time is fast running out, and
the African majority has virtually no more patience to
spare. Blood is flowing. The vexing question is, how many
rivers will it fill and in the end, how many people will have
died?

18. The racist spokesmen of the minority Pretoria regime
had the audacity to tell the world that the reason for their
latest armed aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola was to carry out a pre-emptive military attack
against SWAP0 forces which, in their words, were preparing to attack the civilian population in Namibia. What a
blatant lie. The racist Boers and their supporters have
unsuccessfully tried to depict SWAP0 as an enemy of the
Namibian people. They have failed to convince anybody,
certainly not the Namibian people, which continues to
rally behind SWAP0 and to provide the backbone of and
ensure popular support for our movement, which
expresses the unity and determination of our people in the
struggle.

23. During the earlier debates on Angola on 20 September, and again at the beginning of this debate, Botha’s
messenger expressed in the Council the view that “The
United States Congress, by repealing the Clark Amendment, has already recognized the admissibility of aiding
UNITA.”
[2612th meeting, para. 31.1
24. Are the Boers shooting in the dark, or are they letting
the cat out of the bag? We know the history of the Clark
Amendment and the widely reported imperialist conspiracy aimed at denying the Angolan people the fruits of
their revolution. We have also learned from some offtcial
United States State Department documents that have been
leaked in the past few years that there is a strong community of interests between Washington and Pretoria to see to
it that the renegade Savimbi and his fellow traitors are not
wiped out. Continuing public statements and comments
by United States officials, who consider Savimbi and his
cohorts as “freedom fighters,” confirm the fact that there
is an enduring interest in protecting Savimbi. Of course,
the larger framework for pursuing this campaign is the
widely condemned policy of “constructive engagement,*’
together with its notorious offshoot, “linkage”.

19. Now, of course, we all know the reason for the latest
aggression against Angola. This reason was given on 20
September by the racist War Minister of Botha, namely,
Magnus Malan. If ever there was any need for proof about
Pretoria’s active involvement with and direct military and
other forms of support for renegade Savimbi and his mercenary bandits of UNITA, Malan has put it on record. He
confirmed that the racist troops launched their military
offensive emanating from Namibia-which
they occupy
illegally-as
a rescue operation to bail out the bandits of
UNITA. That was the reason, not the falsehoods and lies
about SWAPO.
20. Needless to say, it is quite obvious who the criminal
is. But let it be said once again that no amount of constant
repetition of distortions, disinformation, name-calling and
red-herrings will change the situation. Apartheid South
Africa, which is public enemy number one of Africa and
its people, cannot claim for itself the right to speak for the
interests and security of the African people, making insulting utterances about “our continent” and “fellow Africans”. The racists have made themselves the central
problem facing Africa. Their actions remind us daily of
this fact. Who gave them the right to speak for the masses
of the African people, particularly the black people? They
despise us, treating us like dogs, denying us our humanity
and dignity, enslaving us in the land of our birth, monopolizing State power and economic benefits for a tiny white

25. It was not too long ago that a group of reactionaries
and counter-revolutionaries from Africa, Asia and Latin
America were brought together in southern Angola at a
secret meeting by the racists and their friends, with the
blessing of none other than the President of the United
States. At the end of the jamboree something called a
“Democratic International” was formed to serve the interests of international imperialism, apartheidand colonialism.
26. I know some people do not like us to point out these
things. I also expect that we will face even more problems
and official harassment. The reason why we say these
3

things is that the independence of our country is held at
ransom and our people are forced to continue to suffer
owing to the fact that the legitimate struggle of our people,
which is now 101 years old, has been turned into an aspect
of the East/West conflict. How can we afford to be quiet
in such a situation?

35. We have heard many small countries like our own
state in this body that they come to the Council because
it is the sole means they have of seeking some concrete
action from the international community to halt aggression by the powerful.
36. Our colleague and brother the representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola has told us that since 1976 his
people and Government have been appearing before the
Council to denounce aggression and that they would continue to do so and to call for action by the Council because
that was their right, just as it was the Council’s responsibility to take concrete action that. could bring an end to
aggressions.

27. The Botha regime is treating the Security Council
with utter contempt. Pretoria and its friends are only too
quick to call for free elections as long as they are not in
occupied ,Namibia and apartheid South Africa itself. This
is sheer hypocrisy and insincerity. The so<alled draft resolution submitted by Botha’s messenger is an insult to the
Council. It must be rejected and thrown into a dustbin,
where it belongs.

37. How will the Council respond on this occasion to the
fraternal people and Government of Angola? The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which includes the majority of the international community, has already responded.
We have not only repeatedly taken a stand in this connection; we have also taken measures on an individual basis,
measures that have obviously not been enough, because it
is clear that it is not we non-aligned that are contributing
to the economic, military and nuclear strength of the racist
Pretoria regime.

28. There is a similar pattern .of behaviour, that of arrogance, cynicism and bellicosity, which characterizes the
two racist States, apartheid South Africa and Zionist
Israel. The intermittent debates resulting from the complaints lodged by the aggressed African countries, Angola
and Tunisia, amply attest to this identical behaviour by the
two pariah States in the Middle East and in southern
Africa.
29. The Council is faced with an unprecedented challenge, as one speaker after another has pointed out. Now is
the time for the. Council to respond promptly and in an
appropriate manner consistent with its primary responsibilities to restore peace and security in the respective
regions and to pave the way for the total emancipation of
the oppressed peoples of Namibia, South Africa and
Palestine.

38. We regret that in this commemorative year of the
Organization, a year in which we should be taking the last
steps towards the independence of Namibia and the total
elimination of the odious system of apartheid, what we see,
unfortunately, is more aggression by South Africa against
Angola and the front-iine States, more intransigence and
refusals to implement resolution 435 (1978) and more
actions committed with impunity by South Africa as a
result of the‘ continued collaboration- of a permanent
member of this Council through its insistence on maintaining the policy of constructive engagement.

30. Your leadership, Mr. President, your reputed diplomatic skills and much-needed objectivity, should serve to
guide the Council towards assuming its responsibilities
fully in the service of humanity, for liberation, justice and
peace, sooner rather than later.
31.

39. The responsibility is in the hands of the Council, and
primarily in-the hands of its permanent members. The
members of the Council have the floor.

The struggle continues! Victory is certain!

40. On 20 June of this year, the Council considered the
complaint of Angola on an incursion into the province of
Cabinda in Angola. On that occasion, the Council
adopted resolution 567 (1985), condemning South Africa
for those acts and demanding the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all South African troops from Angolan territory.

32. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nicaragua. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
33. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) (interprefation from Spanish): Scarcely a week had gone by in this
month of October commemorative of the founding of the
Organization than the Security Council was convened at
the request of -two Member States to denounce barbarous
acts of aggression that violate the most fundamental principles of international law and constitute serious threats to
international peace and security.

4 1. Just two weeks ago, we once again heard here a statement by the representative of Angola, who denounced
another massive invasion by, South African troops, supported by bombing carried out by South African Mirage
jets, in the Angolan provinces of Cunene, CuandoCubango and Mexico, 275 kilometres north of the Namibian border and 180 kilometres from the Zambian
border. At that time, the Council adopted resolution 571
(1985), through which it “Strongly condemns the racist
regime of South Africa for its premeditated, persistent and
sustained armed invasions of the People’s Republic of
Angola”. Furthermore, the Council strongly condemned

34. On both occasions-and even before the Council had
taken action on the issues-we heard the defendants not
only impugn the Council but also cynically make a
mockery of any decisions that might be taken and declare
that the acts of aggression they have committed are legitimate .and justifiable.
4

South Africa for its use of Namibia, an illegally occupied
Territory, as a springboard for these armed invasions and
for the third time demanded that that country immediately
and unconditionally withdraw all its troops from Angolan
territory and that it put an end to these acts of aggression.
42. There has not even been time to implement the mandate contained in this most recent resolution-that
is, to
send to Angola a commission of investigation composed
of three members of this Council to evaluate the damage
resulting from the aggression-when once again we are
compelled to meet. Just a few days ago, on 3 October
[26Z2?h meering], we heard another complaint by the representative of Angola on further air attacks committed by
South African planes on the town of Mavinga, 250 kilometres from the Namibian border in Angolan territory, causing 65 deaths and wounding hundreds more. This new and
brutal act of aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola is characteristic of the way that
the South African regime usually responds to the resolutions adopted by the Council.
43. The constant acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola are aimed at containing the offensive
launched by the FAPLA (People’s Armed Forces for the
Liberation of Angola) troops against the UNITA mercenaries deployed in the south of its territory and at distracting the international
community’s attention from the
killings and mass imprisonments carried out by the racist
regime of South Africa against the black South African
population, which is involved in a growing and indomitable struggle that will ultimately put an end to the odious
system of apartheid. They are, moreover, as we have
already said, a proof of the arrogance and disdain with
which Pretoria responds to the Council and its decisions.
44. How many times more will Angola have to appear
before the Security Council to denounce the acts of aggression of which it is a victim? How many times more will the
Council deplore these unjustifiable acts of aggression and
adopt resolutions that are defiantly disobeyed? When will
the so-called policy of constructive engagement be put
aside, as its only results have been the escalation of aggression and of force, the institutionalization
of apartheid and
the massacre of the South African population, the prolongation of the illegal occupation of Namibia, the intensification of acts of aggression and the sowing of death and
destruction among the Angolan population?
45. We welcome the unilateral measures that have been
taken by a series of countries to increase pressure on South
Africa, but we believe that this is not enough. We have had
enough of mere reprimands and advice, enough of minor
punishments for a party that is nothing but a blind and
maddened monster, cornered today by the indomitable
thrust of history and the struggle of peoples for freedom
and justice.
46. It is necessary that the Council, doing honour to the
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, honour to its
responsibilities under the Charter, honour to the solemn
commitments expressed through its verbal declarations,

now demand an immediate cessation of any direct or indirect intervention in the internal affairs of Angola and the
other front-line States by South Africa and its powerful
allies; condemn the illegal occupation of Namibia and
demand the immediate and unconditional implementation
of resolution 435 (1978); strongly condemn the policy of
“constructive engagement” of the Government of the
United States and demand that it be abandoned; unequivocally condemn South Africa and take immediate action in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter in order to
celebrate, together with the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the fortieth anniversary with its theme “United
Nations for a better world”-in
other words, a world
which has completely eliminated the odious regime of
apartheid.

47. We reiterate the need to give all due attention to the
complaint of the fraternal people and Government of
Angola. We wish to convey to the Council the feelings of
our countries as expressed in the Final Political Declaration [see S/17610 and Corr.1, annex I’j of the ministerial
Conference held at Luanda in September 1985 and, especially, as expressed in the special communique of that
meeting on the situation in South Africa [ibidj. We hope
that the Council will add its voice in full support of the
demand of the majority of the international community .
48. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Mr. Obed Asamoah, whom
I welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
49. Mr. ASAMOAH (Ghana): May I fmt extend to you,
Sir, my sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of October. I have no doubt that the Council and the United
Nations as a whole will reap lasting benefit during your
tenure of oflice from your wisdom and wide experience.
50. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
the appreciation of my delegation to Sir John Thomson,
the representative of the United Kingdom, for the able
manner in which he, and also the British Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, Sir Geoffrey Howe, conducted the
affairs of the Council during September.
51. The Government and people of Ghana are profoundly shocked by South Africa’s brazen arrogance and
continued defiance of the Security Council. Only two
weeks ago the Council met and unanimously adopted resolution 571 (1985) condemning South Africa for its flagrant
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola. At the very least one would have expected South
Africa to respect the unanimous decision of the Council.
But quite the contrary has happened. South Africa has not
only paid no heed, but has continued to commit further
acts of aggression against Angola in flagrant violation of
international law, thus posing a serious threat to intertiational peace and security. In doing so, it is undermining
basic principles of the Charter, and those who support
South Africa are encouraging international anarchy. The
present act of aggression confirms that the racist regime is

an international outlaw prepared to indulge in State terrorism against its peaceful neighbours.

border violence”. Surely the time has come for even those
members to see in South Africa’s actions a deliberate and
systematic pattern of aggression calculated to destabilize
Angola and to destroy its economic infrastructure.

52. My delegation is left in no doubt that the recent dastardly act was committed by South Africa in an attempt to
shore up the bandit forces of Jonas Savimbi, which have
been on the retreat from the legitimate offensive recently
launched against them by the Angolan Government. To
those who support Savimbi we say that he is a puppet; he
compromises the dignity of Africans and the black man
everywhere, and he is an outlaw whom all Africans must
fight against. Those who extol the virtues of UNITA in the
name of the much abused word “democracy” only want to
introduce a Trojan hotie in the midst of Africa’s struggle
for true independence, dignity and respect. No matter
what interpretation is given to the recent history of Africa,
Ghana accepts the MPLA (People’s Liberation Movement
of Angola) as a true nationalist movement and the present
Government as the legitimate Government of Angola.

56. It is time for all members of the Council to recognize
without equivocation that South Africa is engaged in
nothing but gross and blatant acts of aggression in defence
of its colonial stranglehold on Namibia and the doctrine of
tlie supremacy of the whites, a doctrine that brings to mind
nazism and the untold misery that Hitler-who
was, incidentally, admired by the Afrikaners-brought
upon mankind. It cannot, we hope, be claimed by even South
Africa’s most ardent defenders that their objective in inst.ituting the discredited constructive engagement policy was
to give South Africa that licence to engage at will and with
impunity in so-called cross-border violence. Yet that is
what that policy has produced; it has engendered in South
Africa an aggressive arrogance paralleled in our present-.
day world only by the expansionist violence and terrorism
practised by Israel against its neighbours in the Middle
East, of which the peace-loving people of Tunisia and their
Palestinian guests are the latest victims.

53. As I said earlier, this is not the first time racist South
Africa has attacked Angolan territory, leading to the loss
of life, and, in keeping with its character of bigotry and
contempt for the black man, it will most likely repeat the
same barbarous acts in the future. The Council, in the
discharge of its obligations under the Charter, must not
appear helpless in the face df such violation of intemational law and contempt for values shared by the vast
majority of mankind. The members of the Council have a
duty to posterity to sacrifice parochial interests for a harmonious future. The Council must fulfil its mandate and
maintain its credibility by the use of the appropriate pro+
sions of the Charter to maintain international peace and
security in that part of the world. In that regard, Articles
41 and 42 of the Charter, which provide measures a step
short of the use of armed force, are appropriate to underscore firmly the determination of the international community not to condone the continuous acts of armed terror
and carnage by South Africa against neighbouring countries, especially Angola.

57. The second point I want to raise in connection with
the statement made in this Ch’amber by the South African
representative is this: since he claims that “South Africa is
committed to peace and stability in southern Africa” [iE#.,
par-u. 34, does he mean to tell the Council that South
Africa’s continued acts .of aggression and destabilization
are in keeping with that objective?
58. I have pondered over the statement made by the
South African representative in an effort to find one shred
of good sense, an iota of justification for his country’s
present invasion of Angola. I have found none. This latest
South African aggression has been committed not because
of the standard Pretoria excuse of infiltration by SWAP0
into Namibia, but quite simply, as has been the objective
all along, to support puppets that will assist in the preservation of apartheid. The call for the withdrawal of foreis
forces from Angola is intended to conjure up the spectre of
communism in southern Africa for the benefit of those
who think communism represents evil. Such propaganda
does not impress us. For the African, the socialist countries have been a vital factor in the liberation process, while
the so-called democracies only exhibit bigotry and want
every opportunity to exploit. Their conversion to the liberation process, where that has been the case, has been involuntary ‘and grudgivg.

54. On 3 October [2612th meeting3, we heard a surprising
statement from the representative of South Africa. First,
he accused the Council of fomenting violence in Angola by
appealing, in resolution 571 (1985), to Member States to
assist Angola in the defence of its territorial integrity. One
would want’ to know from the South Africans why it
should be necessary for anyone to do that if the Government and people of Angola were left alone to live in peace.
Who, may we ask, is arming and training Savimbi’s criminal ‘gang to kill and maim innocent civilians in Angola?
Who sent a commando group into Angola in an aborted
attempt to blow up oil installations in Cabinda Province?
And who has twice in less than a fortnight invaded AngoIah territory and violated its sovereignty? In the face of
these blatant acts of aggression by South Afrida against
Angola, can anyone legitimately deny Angola its right to
defend its sovereignty and td receive assistance for that
purpose from whatever source it desires?

59. It is the view of my Government that the Council
should not allow itself to be fooled by this vile propaganda
campaign by $outh Africa and its supporters to discredit
the Government of Angola, whose only desire, like that of
the rest of Africa, is to be left in peace to develop its
resources for the benefit of its people in true freedom and
independence and not as a vassal or dependency of racist
South Africa. We call on the Council not to prevaricate
and waver this time. The fact of South Africa’s aggression
against Angola is ciear and incontestable. It demands an
appropriate
and effective response from the Council, a
-.

55, Some influential members of the Council have the
habit of describing South Africa’s’ Acts of aggression
against Angola and other front-line States as mere “cross6

response which should not fall short of the immediate
imposition of comprehensive and mandatory economic
sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Council
should also request South Africa to withdraw forthwith all
its occupation forces from every inch of Angolan territory
and give an undertaking not to commit any further acts of
aggression against Angola, as well as to respect scrupulously Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Council should also request South Africa to pay appropriate compensation for the human and material damage it
has caused in Angola.

the presence of Cuban forces in Angola but the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the pestilence
of apartheid and racial tyranny in South Africa. Not only
that: Cuban forces in Angola, about which Pretoria has
been raving and ranting so pretentiously in the past few
years, are in Angola because of South Africa’s thwarted
attempt to destroy the People’s Republic of Angola at
birth. If South Africa had not invaded a nascent Angola in
1975, there would have been no Cuban forces in Angola to
rant and rave about. But the fact that they are there does
not give South Africa or anybody else the right to violate
Angola’s territorial integrity. South Africa has never produced evidence-not a shred of evidence-to show how
the presence of Cuban forces is a threat to its security.
Angola does not share a border with South Africa.
Between the two, countries lies a vast country called Namibia, which is in no way, form or shape part of South
Africa. No Cuban soldier has ever set foot on Namibia, let
alone gone anywhere near South Africa.

60. In this fortieth anniversary year of the United
Nations, my delegation would like to urge the Council to
reflect on the consequences of its weaknesses in the past
and resolve to enhance its authority in the future as
intended by the Charter.
61. In conclusion, allow me to convey the sincere.sympathy and condolences of the Government and people of
Ghana to the Government and people of Angola in this
hour of tragedy. We shall be prepared to play our part in
defence of Angola if called upon to do so. We hope that
the international community will assist with the necessary
resources to enable Angola to recover quickly from the
consequences of continued South African aggression.

67. So we ask: Why these repeated violations of Angola’s
territorial integrity, the massacre of innocent refugees resident in that country, the wanton destruction of economic
infrastructure, and the senseless mass murder of Angolan
civilians? Why?
68. Just imagine the cynicism with which the deliberations of this Council are regarded by a country whose evil
policies would shame even the devil himself. The other day
the Council was treated to a charade in the form of a draft
resolution [S/17522], all of whose operative paragraphs
cry for implementation
by Pretoria itself. Cuban troops
are in Angola by invitation. South African troops are not.
Cuban troops are not violating the territorial integrity of
Angola. South African troops are. In any case, what right
does South Africa have to teach Angola lessons in political
righteousness and constitutional probity? Is it not South
Africa itself which must learn all these lessons in order that
it can at long last be rehabilitated into the comity of free
and civiiized nations?

62. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Botswana. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
63. Mr. LEGWAILA
(Botswana): You can be sure that
we are very much encouraged, Sir, to see so eminent a
person in the chair of the presidency of the Security Council in a month that already promises to be very difficult
indeed. You have both our congratulations and our commiseration. We have no reason whatsoever to doubt that
you are more than equal to the tasks that lie ahead.
64. With consummate skill your predecessor guided the
deliberations of the Council last month. We congratulate
him and the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the
United Kingdom, Sir Geoffrey Howe, for a job well done.

69. It is in South Africa, more than anywhere else in our
region, that operative paragraph 3 of South Africa’s cynical draft resolution must be implemented without delay;
for there is in that country today not simply a polarization
of factions feuding about political differences but a very
serious situation whose likely consequences we shudder to
contemplate. For, even as we sit here debating South Africa’s wanton aggression against Angola, the very same
South Africa is busy murdering its own black citizens,
whose only crime, if crime it is, is to agitate peacefully for
the restoration of their right to selfdetermination-a
right
which South Africa denies with brutal tyranny and yet has
the nerve to try to teach others to respect.

65. It is a little more than two weeks since the Security
Council demanded by its resolution 571 (1985) the withdrawal of South African troops from Angola. There would
not even have been time for that resolution to be implemented, and yet we find ourselves back at the Council in
an atmosphere of heightening crisis to discuss once again
the brutal violation by South Africa of Angola’s territorial
integrity and national sovereignty. Once again South
Africa has demonstrated unashamedly what a rogue elephant it has turned itself into. That it has never at any time
in the past shown any respect for the decisions of the
Council is a painful and frustrating fact we all know only
too well, but that it has grown accustomed to showing that
disrespect with such wanton exuberance is an ominous
development which the Council can ignore only at great
peril to peace and stability in southern Africa.

70. No moral lessons can be learned from an immoral
racial tyranny. The people of Angola, like any other free
people, have chosen a political path which is theirs alone,
whether South Africa or anyone else likes it or not. At
least Angola does not murder its own citizens for their love
of freedom. South Africa does so daily, as the past year has
shown. So there is absolutely nothing of positive. and

66. We have said on numerous occasions before, and we
say now, that the problem in southern Africa today is not
7

moral substance that South Africa can teach Angola. The
Security Council should therefore reject with the contempt
it deserves South Africa’s draft resolution, which is
nothirig but an insult to the Council’s intelligence.

itself in the geographical position of having to shape a
destiny in the belly of vicious tyranny?
75. In the final analysis, apartheid is far beyond redemption. Its evil genius belongs to an antedeluvian era and
must soon face the flood of black nationalism and the
consuming fury of its frustrated aspirations. The end is
near. The question is no longer when apartheid and racial
tyranny will end in South Africa, but how. To date, all
signs point to a ghastly demise for that evil system, for the
system can be neither reformed nor improved. There is no
such thing as reformed or improved evil. Only from the
ashes of apartheid and racial tyranny can the people of
South Africa-al1 of them, regardless of race, colour or
creed-build a new South Africa and fulfil their calling in
peace, freedom and justice.

71. Southern Africa wants peace, not the sort of madness
we are witnessing today in South Africa and the region at
large. For peace to prevail in the region, the madness must
end. South Africa must learn to respect the right of its
neighbours to be themselves, to organ& their own lives in
accordance with their own social and political values and
to choose friends and identify enemies as they please, so
long as the peace and stability of the region are not
disturbed.
72. Indeed, none of the free countries of the region is
responsible for the bloody strife so commonplace in that
part of the world today. The undeniable fact is that the
rulers of South Africa have singlehandedly transformed
our region into a veritable cockpit of conflict. Maddened
by racial bigotry and a blind determination to preserve
apartheid and racism in our sub-continent at all costs, they
seem also to be irredeemably committed to reducing the
region to scorched earth. No, the source of conflict in our
region is not the presence of Cuban troops in Angola or
the granting of political asylum to South African refugees
by South Africa’s neighbours. It is the pestilence of apartheid and racism in South Africa. It is the denial of the right
of self-determination to the people of Namibia. It is acts of
aggression such as ,those that are. being committed by
South Africa .with such sickening regularity against
Angola and other front-line States. It is the sort of racial
arrogance and bad faith that have become so much of an
article of faith in Pretoria.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
77. Mr. BOUZIRI (Tunisia) (interpretationf
Bench):
First of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
to wish you every success. You have demonstrated remarkable authority and great wisdom in your guidance of the
work of the Council.
78. I wish also to convey my congratulations to Sir John
Thomson, representative of the United Kingdom, who
demonstrated a subtle intelligence and great ability as
President of the Council last month.
79. I am .speakmg today to afIirm Tunisia’s solidarity
with Angola, a fraternal, friendly African country which,
like Tunisia, fell victim last week to armed foreign aggression. I convey to the Angolan people the shock and the
deep condolences of the Tunisian people.

73. We must ask, what about the spawning of dissident
movements everywhere in the region? All roads to dissident camps in Mozambique and Angola begin in Pretoria.
South Africa, as we all know, also hosts the so-called Lesotho Liberation Army, a motley of murderous dissidents
whose pernicious aim is to destabilize and, if they can,
overthrow the legitimate Government of the Kingdom of
Lesotho. The Council knows only too well of the havoc
the marauding dissidents in our region have wreaked, not
only on the economic~infrastructure of the countries concerned but on human life as well. Not even a momentous
accord such as the Nkomati accord [S/16451 of30 March
1984, annex fi has been able to restrain South Africa’s
madness. The racist regime in Pretoria implacably remains
the godfather .of the dissident movements in the region. It
has confessed to being so only recently.

80. On 28 September 1985, South African aircraft, with
utter scorn for the norms of international law, carried out
a lethal raid 250 kilometres inside the Angolan border.
That attack by the Pretoria armed forces was launched
only eight days after the Security Council had strongly
condemned the racist regime of South Africa for its “premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions” of
Angola, which constitute a flagrant violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity and causing a considerable
loss of human life. It is thus that South Africa responded
to resolution 571(1985) of 20 September which demanded
that it withdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its military forces from the territory of Angola. By its action,
Pretoria has once again demonstrated to the international
community its contempt for the United Nations body with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of intemational peace and security. Thus, the Security Council is
considering for the third time this year a complaint by
Angola about South African armed incursions into its
territory.

74. Incredibly, even as the Council prepares to conclude
this debate on South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola, I received news this morning to
the effect that another State in the region is under attack
by South Africa. I am told that about 10 o’clock last night,
bazookas were fired into Lesotho from South African territory by people identified as soldiers by their military uniforms. What has Lesotho done to warrant such
aggression? Is it not more than enough that this small
peace-loving country is not only land-locked but also finds

81. In this connection, it would be appropriate to note
that the Pretoria regime is all the more worthy of condem8

nation as it is launching these armed attacks from
Namibia, a Territory it occupies illegally. Apart from its
aggression against Angola, that regime has constantly
defied the various United Nations resolutions calling upon
it to put an immediate, unconditional end to its illegal
occupation of that Territory and to grant the Namibian
people its right of self-determination and independence.

presiding over the work of the Security Council for October and of congratulating your predecessor, Sir John
Thomson, for the skilful and competent way in which he
conducted the work of the Council last month.
88. I should also like to thank the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to express our solidarity
with the People’s Republic of Angola.

82. However, despite the near-immunity it enjoys at present, South Africa must understand once and for all that its
policy of out and out aggression against the countries of
the region, particularly Angola, can not supply it with an
appropriate framework for it to set up at Windhoek a
constitutional and political system that would enable it to
perpetuate its colonial domination over Namibia and to
delay selfdetermination
and independence indefinitely.

89. Just two weeks ago the Council adopted resolution
571 (1985), demanding that South Africa immediately and
unconditionally withdraw its military forces from Angola,
cease all acts of aggression against that State and scrupulously respect its sovereignty territorial integrity. Today
the Council is convened once again to consider one more
unjustified act of aggression, a premeditated act by the
Government of South Africa against the People’s Republic
of Angola.

83. At this point I should like to take the opportunity to
quote some passages from the statement. made by Mr.
Habib Bourguiba, President of the Republic of Tunisia,
when commemorating Namibia Day last August. He said:

90. The facts presented by the representative of the People’s Republic of Angola at the beginning of this debate
are overwhelming and speak for themselves. The South
African air force deliberately violated Angolan airspace
and bombed the Mavinga region, killing over 65 persons
and leaving
, hundreds wounded. ._

“Tunisia finds it intolerable that at a time when the
United Nations is about to celebrate its fortieth anniversary there should still remain in existence the aberration
constituted by the occupation of Namibia by racist
South Africa. South Africa’s tactics of aggression and
repression-which
we once again condemn-cannot
delay indefinitely the attainment of independence by the
Namibian people. In this regard, Tunisia feels that
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) is the comerstone and the sole valid framework for any just and
lasting settlement of the Namibian problem.“’

91. Thus, in spite of universal repudiation and repeated
condemnation by the Security Council, South Africa continues to treat with contempt the territorial integrity of a
sovereign State, a Member of the Organization, and uses
every possible pretext to strengthen its policy of hegemony
in the region. The persistence with which the Pretoria
Government defies the international
community
and
endangers the peace and security of neighbouring States
inevitably recalls the policy of aggression and expansion of
Israel, whose raid on‘Tunisia
was unequivocally condemned by the Council.

84.’ Nevertheless it transpires that the armed incursions
of South Africa into Angola are not simply designed to
compromise the independence of Namibia but also, and
this has become quite obvious, to distract the attention of
international public opinion from the deteriorating situation in South Africa as a result of the progressive and
inexorable break-up of the odious regime of apartheid.

92. Unfortunately, such acts may well recur if the Organization does not tackle the roots of the evil by compelling
South Africa to repudiate its degrading policy of apartheid
and if it does not,’ put an end, through the adoption of
appropriate measures, to the illegal presence of the racist
regime in Namibia, whose territory has once again been
used to launch this most recent act of aggression against
Angola.
__..’
.

85. Tunisia cannot but condemn the Pretoria regime for
its armed aggressions against Angola, which are irrefutable
proof that Pretoria is, today as yesterday, not prepared to
conform with international law. Numerous appeals have
been made, numerous condemnations have been meted
out to it by. the Security Council, but to no avail. Consequently it is time for the Council to take the necessary
effective steps by acting decisively to induce the racist
South African regime to put an end to its armed attacks
against Angola and to grant independence to Namibia, in
accordance with its resolution 435 (1978).

93. The Kingdom of Morocco energetically denounces
and condemns this further act of brazen violence and tills
upon the Council to take decisive, energetic action to put
an end to South Africa’s violations of the sovereignty of
neighbouring countries and its flagrant breaches of international peace and security.
94. I should also like to express to my colleague and
friend the representative of Angola the sympathy and solidarity of Morocco in this trying situation, and to reaffirm
our constant support for the defence of the territorial integrity of Angola.

86. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
87. Mr. ALAOUI (Morocco) (interpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, may I first of all personally discharge the
pleasant duty of telling you how pleased we are to see you

95. The support that Angola and the other front-line
States are unceasingly giving to the struggle of the Na9

mibian people and to the oppressed masses of South
Africa places a heavy burden on those States, and thus
they require united and supportive action by the Organization to safeguard their territorial integrity and to reaffirm
the trust they place in the United Nations and in its role in
the defence of international peace and security wherever
they are threatened.
96. It is the duty of the Security Council to respond positively to the expectations of the peoples of southern Africa
and the entire international community by taking the
necessary measures to prevent any recurrence of action by
South Africa against the peaceful States of the region.
97. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Mfanafuthi Makatini, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at the
2616th meeting. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

again repeated Pretoria’s claim arrogating to itself the
right to intervene militarily in all African countries.
103. It is evident to us that the apartheid regime has been
emboldened by the knowledge that, whatever else the
international community might say, effective action to
make Pretoria comply has been repeatedly blocked by
some permanent members of the Council, especially the
United States. It is time that Pretoria’s friends and allies
realized that they will have to share responsibility with that
regime as long as they maintain this universally condemned course of action.
104. There can be no double standards on questions of
international law and morality. Aggression must not be
seen as permissible for the Pretoria regime because it
enjoys the favour of certain Governments. Appeasement
has never proved a formula for deterring aggression. History and the events that led to the creation of this Organization teach us that.

98. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, I sincerely thank
you and all the meinbers of the Council for giving us the
opportunity to add the voice of the African National Congress to those that in unison in this chamber and around
the world have strongly condemned the Pretoria regime
for the latest unprovoked, premeditated and dastardly act
of aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.

105. The Pretoria regime has shamelessly proclaimed
that it has consistently violated every article of the solemn
undertakings it made at Nkomati in 1984; it openly
declares. that it finances, equips and maintains a bandit
army inside Angola; indeed, it claims the right to perpetrate such criminal actions in any country in southern
Africa if that State does not comply with its dictates.

99. Allow us also to congratulate you, Sir, on the
assumption of the presidency of the Council during this
important month of October and to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Sir John Thomson, for his outstanding
performance.

106. Pretoria’s war of aggression in the region finds its
parallel in the murderous repression of our people inside
South Africa. the unrepented intransigence of this regime
underlines the correctness of the, non-aligned countries’
determination that there will never be peace, security and
stability in southern Africa until the entire apartheid systern is uprooted and replaced by a democratic system of
government based on the will of all South Africans.

100. Several speakers who have preceded us have
stressed that racist South Africa’s latest act of aggression
against Angola was launched even before the ink was dry
on resolution 571 (1985) in which, inter &a, the Council
reiterates the demand that South Africa withdraw forthwith and unconditionally all its military forces from the
territory of the People’s Republic of Angola, cease all acts
of aggression against that State and scrupulously respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola.

107. We are confident that the mendacious draft resolution proposed by the representative of the Pretoria regime
will be treated by the Council with the contempt it
deserves. Like its diabolical actions, the words of Pretoria
bespeak its arrogant contempt for the rest of humanity.
108. Alarmed at the international ground-swell against
racist minority rule and in favour of sanctions, as well as
the ever-growing strength of the mass democratic movement inside our country, the regime seeks to embroil the
region in war as a means of purchasing a longer lease of
life. There could be no more fitting way of marking the
fortieth anniversary of the defeat of fascism and the founding of the United Nations than by the Security Council’s
imposing against racist South Africa comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

10 1. The African National Congress fully shares the view
expressed by the representative of India, that the Council’s
response to the Pretoria regime’s arrogant defiance should
be “unequivocal condemnation . . . and unanimous and
swift action to make it comply with its Charter obligations”. [2612th meeting, para. 22.1
102. Recently the Pretoria regime put the world on
notice that it was brazenly determined to defy the Council
by rejecting in advance any decisions that emerged from its
deliberations. This attitude was again underscored in the
statement made here by Pretoria’s spokesman last Thursday. On that occasion, the representative of the South
African regime had the temerity to use this Council
chamber as a podium from which to pronounce bellicose
threats against the front-line and neighbouring States. He

109. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers,
and I shall now speak in my capacity as representative of
the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
in exercise of the
right of reply.
10

i%e draft resolution was adopted unanimously [resolution
574 (1985)].

110. Once again 1 have listened to a litany of one-sided
and mendacious accusations against my country describing it as supplying “aid and comfort” to the Republic of
South Africa and even of supplying arms to that country. I
would remind the Council and the invited speakers that
the United States placed an embargo on the sales of arms
to the Republic of South Africa many years before the
United Nations did. This is a well-known fact clearly
ignored by a number of the speakers here today.

119. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement
as the representative of the United States in connection
with the vote.
120. Once again, we find ourselves gathered around this
table to consider a violation of the integrity of Angola’s
borders. Once again, I shall set forth United States policy
towards South African operations of this sort. We condemn them. They serve to exacerbate an already volatile
situation. Besides their negative consequences on chances
for a negotiated solution to the problems besetting the
region, they cause misery and death. So long as they continue they will frustrate the aspirations of all those in
southern Africa longing to enjoy their simple, inalienable
right to a life without war and bloodshed.

111. I was frankly astonished to hear the representative
of Viet Nam express his horror over aggression against
neighbouring States. He is particularly qualified to speak
on this matter. His country has many thousands of troops
in a neighbouring country supporting a puppet regime,
and, as he does this, he is receiving “aid and comfort”
from the member of the Council.
112. People are not fleeing from my country; they are
clamouring to get into this nest of imperialism, and that
speaks for itself.
113. I shall now resume my function as PRESIDENT
the Council.

121. The diplomacy of the United States in the region is
geared to peaceful, negotiated solutions. It is the road to a
deeper and more lasting settlement than gunpowder can
ever offer. My Government asks all parties to recognize
the folly of this strife. They should realize the necessity of
turning back forthwith, in their own interests, to the negotiating track.

of

II4
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution submitted by
Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago [S/1753& Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

122. There is a clear and unmistakable contrast between
this policy of negotiation-supported
without reservations
by my Government-and
the policy of certain forces outside the region which fuel the conflict in the benighted
belief that their own interests are served. Why do these
distant forces fear peaceful negotiations among the parties
involved, unless for self-serving reasons? Theirs is a selfish
and. myopic policy. It ieads ineluctably to more bloodletting for the Angolans, more hardship for civilians which
have been so long under the yoke of Mars. And it is a
devious policy that feigns concern for the interests of the
Angolans, that distorts realities to serve its own expansionist goals and that, under the guise of disinterest, has a clear
mission for the region which does not incorporate the
hopes of all for peace, freedom and security.

115. As the representative of the UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA,
I request that a separate vote be taken on
operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution.
116. I resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

of the

117. If I hear no objection, I shall first put operative
paragraph 6 of the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

123. My delegation welcomes this resolution as an occasion to reiterate our call for an immediate withdrawal of
South African troops from Angola. We join once again all
members of the Council in deploring this latest incursion.

In favour: Australia; Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

124. But, as I stated a little over two weeks ago, my
Government believes that the introduction of more weapons of war into the area will result in an escalation of
violence, more deaths, more misery. Angola needs peace,
not more foreign troops, foreign intervention
and
imported arms.

Against: None.
Abstaining: United States of America.
Operative paragraph 6 of the draft resoIution was adopted
by 14 votes to none, with I abstention.

125. The United States supports the territorial integrity
of Angola. We call on South Africa, yet again, to halt
further acts of aggression. We could not, however, vote in
favour of paragraph 6 for the same reason that we could
not vote in favour of a similar call to arms in resolution
571(1985). For that reason my delegation abstained in the

118. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put the draft resolution as a whole to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
11

voting on paragraph 6. Since the rest of the resolution was
acceptable to us, I had no hesitation in voting for it.
126. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Council.

cratic countries” [2612th meetifig,- _para. 2.Q What would
he or his regime know of democracy when-apartheid is its
very antithesis? What would he or his regime know of
“true Africans” [ibidJ? Who does he mean? Are the 22
million disenfranchised majority inhabitants of South
Africa included in that term? If so, why are they denied
their rights in their homeland?

of the

127. I call on the representative of the United Kingdom,
who wishes to make a statement following the voting.

135. I must, however, concede the truth of one phrase in
the opening remarks of the Pretoria representative, when
he referred to the people of Angola who “fought on alone
against foreign interventionists” [ibid.]. Yes, the courageous FAPLA, the Angolan armed forces, supported by the
Angolan people, have fought on alone against the foreign
racist interventionists from South Africa intervening on
behalf of their proteges. We heard the representative of
racist South Africa refer to the racist regime’s “regional
responsibilities” [ibid., para. 29’J. Indeed, it is responsible as
a regional policeman of Western imperialism; it is responsible for its apartheid policies and structures; it is responsible for creating and maintaining
State terrorism. His
reference to the racist regime’s “responsibilities for the
security of its own people” [ibid] is such an apt phrase, for
the elitist white minority’s security and privilege are built
upon the oppression and the blood of the majority. And,
of course, “the security of the people of . . . Namibia”
refers to turning Namibia into a garrison State, illegally
occupied and its people enslaved by the racist rulers.

128. Mr. MAXEY (United Kingdom): I must once again
pay a tribute to the representative of Angola for the way in
which he has helped the Council to reach a unanimous
position.
129. The unanimous adoption of resolution 574 (1985),
like the unanimous vote on 20 September for resolution
571 (1985), is of the greatest importance in demonstrating
the total inadmissibility of South Africa’s attacks upon
Angola. The South African Government would be well
advised to heed the unanimous demands of the Council.
130.. The United Kingdom wishes to see an immediate
end to the fighting within Angola and the beginning of
reconciliation and reconstruction after years of conflict
there. Lest there be any ambiguity about the present resolution, I would refer to the statement made in the Council
on 20 September by Sir John Thomson [2607th meeting].
The United Kingdom does not interpret paragraph 6 of the
resolution as endorsing the intervention of foreign combat
troops. We would like to see all foreign forces withdrawn
from Angola as soon as possible.

136. The Council has recently held a debate at the request
of Tunisia. On behalf of my delegation, I should like to
extend sympathy to my Tunisian colleague and, through
him, to his Government and to the victims of that air
massacre. My delegation cannot help speculating about the
specific and general similarities in the two cases: in each
case, a racist attacker whose Government rests on the principles of racism and racial discrimination; in each case, a
regime which justifies its acts on ideological grounds. In
each case, the regime is in illegal occupation of territory; in
each case, the regime is the military Power in the area; in
each case, the regime is guilty of violating the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring and not-soneighbouring States; in each case, many of its citizens are
disenfranchised and treated as second-class citizens; in each
case, the regime practises a form of settler colonialism; in
each case, the regime has put thousands of patriots into
prison or sent them into exile; in each case, the regime bases
itself on so-called God-given dispensation; in each case, the
regime is made up mainly of European settlers and their
descendants; in each case, the regime has virtually an identical list of enemies and friends; in each case, the regime
enjoys the support of the same very powerful patrons, in
each case, the regime is the regional policeman for a distant
imperialist Power; in each case, the regime pays lip-service
to a political solution but simultaneously undertakes terrorist military action to sabotage those efforts.

131. The Security Council has an important role to play
in keeping the situation in Angola under close review and
in promoting efforts to build peace there. In this connection I trust that the Commission of Investigation established under resolution 571 (1985) will soon be in a
position to visit Angola and report back to the Council.
Their assessment will be of considerable value to us all.
132. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Angola
has asked to make a statement, and I call upon him.
133. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank the Council for the effort
it has put into the meetings called at the request of the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola once
again to draw international attention to the most recent
violations of the Charter of the United Nations by the
outcasts of the international community, the racist apartheid regime of South Africa.
134. The representative of the racist minority regime-a
regime guilty of the most terrible violation of the most
fun&mental
rights mside South Africa itself, a regime
which is in illegal occupation of a Territory under the
administration of the United Nations, a regime guilty of
violations of international law, a regime which invades the
territory of neighbouring sovereign States, a regime which
even as we meet has its troops entrenched on the soil of
Angola-the
representative of that regime refers to “demo-

137. Whether now or in the near future or in some distant future, the situation will and must change. Article 35
of the Charter states that any Member of the United
Nations may bring any dispute, or any situation of the
nature referred to in Article 34, to the attention of the
12

Security Council or of the General Assembly. Article 34
states:
“The Security Council may investigate any dispute,
or any situation which might lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine
whether the continuance of the dispute or situation is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security.”
138. I beg the Council’s pardon for reading out the Charter, but obviously the racist Pretoria regime and its representatives seem not to have read it. On the basis of the
statement made a few days ago by the representative of the
racist Pretoria regime and the ridiculous document circulated by him, it seems that they are unaware that what the
Council is charged with are issues affecting international
peace and security and not domestic and national issues,
which neither concern nor affect. nor involve anyone outside the borders of Angola. What is under discussion is the
question of South African aggression against Angola and
not any other matter.

139. The current international vendetta against South
Africa referred to by the representative of the apartheid
system has its genesis solely in the activities of the apartheid
regime inside and outside South Africa. And this, may I
remind that representative, is but the beginning of the end.
140. The racist leader’s assurance quoted by the South
African representative regarding the containment of South
African forces inside South Africa is analogous to Hitler
saying to the Jews “Trust me, trust me.”
141. The struggle continues. Victory is certain.
142. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
i%e meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

No=
’ A/AC.131/PV.446,

p. 52.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
maybeobtained
frombookstores
anddistributors
throughout
the
world.Consult
yourbookstore
or write.to: UnitedNations,
Sales
Section,NewYorkor Geneva.
COMMENT SEPROCURERLES PUBLICATIONSDESNATIONSUNlES
Lcspublications
desNatjonsUniessentenventedamIts librairieset lesagences
dkpositaires
dumonde
entier.Informez-vous
auprtsdevotrelibraireouadressez-vous
P: NationsUnies,
Section desventes,NewYork auGentve.
noJxYwfrb
MJJAHWf OPI-AHH3A~H Ol?b~HHblX
HAr(m
HsnamtxOpraxu3anmi06aenmexibrx
HasHaMOXKBO
xynnrb e.PHUX(H~IX
bfara%iHax
HareHTcTBax
a0sax pafio~tixMHpa.Hasome cnpae~~
06IIZI(BRH!?~
BsauxeM
I;HH)ICHOM
Mara3mteRIM mmni~e no anpecy:OpraWi3atW06%eDmemtbrx
HauW Ce~mn no
KAK

npog~ea3naHHR,fIbK)-ttopRu~~

Xenesa.

COMO CONSECUIRPUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UMDAS
Laspublicaciones
delasNaciones
Unidas
e&n enventaenlibrerfasy casas
distribuidoras
en
t&s partes
de1mundo.ConsuIte
dsulibreroo dirfjasea: Naciones
Unidas,
Secci6n
deVentas.
NuevaYork o Ginebra.

Litho

in United Nations, New York

90-61439-March

00300

.

1995-1.925
