S/PRST/2010/15

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6364th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 July 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls its previous statements and resolutions on
Guinea-Bissau and further recalls the events of 1 April 2010. The Council
notes the efforts of the government of Guinea-Bissau towards achieving
stability in the country, but expresses concern at the current security situation
and threats to constitutional order. The Council stresses the critical importance
of the President, government, political leaders, armed forces and people of
Guinea-Bissau meeting their responsibilities to work towards national
reconciliation, maintaining stability and constitutional order, fighting
impunity, and respecting the rule of law.
The Security Council calls upon the government of Guinea-Bissau to
release immediately all those detained in the events of 1 April 2010 or
prosecute them with full respect for due process.
The Security Council stresses that genuine security sector reform
requires the creation of effective professional and accountable security forces
and respect for the rule of law. The Council therefore calls upon the
government of Guinea-Bissau to create the conditions for reform of the
security services, calls upon the security forces, in particular the military, to
fulfil their commitment to abide by civilian control and calls upon both to
implement current programmes for security sector reform on schedule.
The Security Council expresses serious concern about the continued
growth in drug trafficking, as well as organized crime, which threatens peace
and security in Guinea-Bissau and in the sub-region. The Council calls upon
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to create the necessary environment to ensure
that actions to tackle drug trafficking and organized crime, including actions
supported by the international community, are effective.
The Security Council also recognizes the shared responsibility of states
where drugs are produced and consumed, as well as transit states, to take
measures to hold accountable those who engage in, or otherwise facilitate,
drug trafficking through Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, the Council welcomes
the commitment of the Economic Community of West African States

10-46092 (E) 220710

*1046092*

S/PRST/2010/15

(ECOWAS) with the European Union (EU), the UN and other partners for the
immediate implementation of the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan on Drug
Trafficking and Organized Crime, including options for targeted sanctions
against those individuals identified as members or supporters of the drug
trafficking network. The Council agrees to keep the situation under active
review, and to consider appropriate action.
The Security Council welcomes the Final Communiqué of the 38th
Ordinary Session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
ECOWAS, expressing the need to promptly establish a mechanism for
ensuring the safety of state civilian institutions in Guinea-Bissau. The Council
invites the government of Guinea-Bissau and the international community to
cooperate fully with ECOWAS to that effect.
The Security Council welcomes the continued engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission and also calls for the swift implementation of the
United Nations Framework for Peace and Development in Guinea-Bissau. The
Council further welcomes the role of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau’s efforts to coordinate actions by
partners, in particular the African Union, ECOWAS, the EU and the
Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), for their assistance in
the area of security sector reform.
The Security Council acknowledges the National Assembly’s plans to
convene a national conference on ‘Conflicts in Guinea-Bissau: Causes
Prevention, Resolution and Consequences’, scheduled for January 2011 and
underscores the need to conduct a genuine and inclusive political dialogue
aimed at ensuring effective functioning of state institutions and national
reconciliation. The Council welcomes, in that regard, efforts made by regional
leaders, in particular President Pedro Pires of Cape Verde, to engage in a
constructive dialogue with the leadership of Guinea-Bissau.
The Council requests the Secretary-General to brief the Security Council,
as appropriate, on progress made in addressing these issues as well as what
further action may be required to support their continued implementation.”

2

10-46092
