30

General Assembly

1. Recom'1'1Wnds that Governments of Member
States assess the adequacy of measures dealing with
various aspects of the urbanization process and review
their national policies and programmes affecting urbanization ;
2. Recommends further that Governments designate
existing, or establish new, organizations as national
centres on urbanization in accordance with Economic
and Social Council resolution 830 B (XXXII);
3. Requests the · Secretary-General to suggest appropriate ways of organizing among such centres an
international exchange of the results of research and
studies and of practical experience in the field of urbanization;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, the Special
Fund, the regional economic commissions and the
specialized agencies concerned to co-operate with Governments in carrying out the necessary basic research
and studies, in formulating comprehensive plans for
urban and regional development and in establishing
and expanding the required community service and
facilities;

5. Invites Governments to enlist citizens' participation in such programmes.
1081st plenary '11UJeting,
18 December 1961.

1677 (XVI). Co-operation for the eradication of
illiteracy throughout the world
The General Assembly,
Expressing its concern at the fact that there at present
exists, in many countries of the world, mass illiteracy
which, in several countries, extends to a great part of
the population and acts as a brake upon the advance,
both of individual countries and of human society as
a whole, along the path of economic and social progress,
Confirming its resolutions 330 (IV) of 2 December
1949, 743 (VIII) of 27 November 1953, 1049 (XI)
of 20 February 1957 and 1463 (XIV) of 12 December
1959, recommending the establishment of free and compulsory primary education and the raising of such
education to the level enjoyed by the peoples of the
advanced countries,
Having regard to its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 and recalling Economic and Social
Council resolutions 768 (XXX) of 21 July 1960 on
co-operation on behalf of newly independent countries
and 837 (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 on African educational development,
Convinced of the great importance of literacy and
general education to the development of peaceful and
friendly relations among nations and peoples,
Sharing the view that the literacy campaign and
assistance in all fields of education should be the responsibility of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Bearing in mind the usefulness of the efforts made
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the promotion of literacy aQd
education in general, and particularly of the decision
taken by that organization, at the eleventh session of
its General Conference, in resolution 8.63 of 15 December 1960,

Sixteenth Session

Noting that even greater efforts are called for, at the
present time, with a view to eradicating mass illiteracy
throughout the world as speedily as possible,
1. Invites the United Nations, Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization :
(a) To make a general review, at a regular session
of its General Conference, of the question of the eradication of mass illiteracy throughout the world, with the
object of working out concrete and effective measures,
at the international and national levels, for such eradication;
( b) To present, through the Economic and Social
Council, to the General Assembly at a regular session a
survey of the position in the world with regard to the
extension of universal literacy, together with recommendations on the measures which might be taken,
within the framework of the United Nations, for cooperation in the eradication of illiteracy;
2. Calls for the extension of effective assistance for
the eradication of illiteracy and the promotion of education of all kinds to the developing countries both
bilaterally and within the framework of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies;
3. Expresses the hope that the Governments of
those countries will assign, in their programmes of
social development, prime importance to the problem
of eradicating illiteracy.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1678 (XVI). United Nations Children's Fund
The General Assembly,
R.ecognizing the basic importance of child welfare
programmes, not only to the future well-being of
children but also to the role they will play as useful
and productive members of society,
Noting the report of th~ Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund entitled "Survey of
the needs of children", 6 the decisions of the Executive
Board of the Fund following from his report, and Economic and Social Council resolution 827 (XXXII) of
28 July 1961 by which the Council endorsed those
decisions,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Fund has thus
taken steps to translate still more effectively the provisions of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child 7
into improved programmes of welfare for children,
1. Endorses the new emphasis and approach represented by those decisions, in particular those aspects
which will assist developing countries desiring to:
(a) Make intensive and integrated surveys of child
needs for the purpose of identifying those priority needs
which might most effectively be met by national and
international action ;
( b) Draw up long-term plans and programmes for
child welfare on the basis of such surveys ;
• Report by the Executive Director (E/ICEF /410 and Add.l)
and supplementary reports by the Bureau of Social Affairs of
the United Nations Secretariat, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (E/ICEF/411-415 and 415/Add.l.).
7
Resolution 1386 (XIV) of 20 November 1959.

·Resolutions adopted on the reportl of the Third Committee

(c) Formulate projects which offer additional opportunities for the increasingly effective integration
in such national programmes of external assistance;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to support the
United Nations Children's Fund in this policy, especially by making available adequate and appropriate
technical services, including in particular those relating
to social services for children and to training programmes;
3. Commends the report entitled "Survey of the
needs of children" to Governments for study and for
distribution to their national agencies which have
responsibilities in the field of child welfare i
4. Commends the Secretary-General and the specialized agencies for their continued collaboration with the
Fund in programmes for the promotion of child welfare ;
5. Expresses the hope that those agencies will cooperate fully with the implementation of the new emphasis and approach of the programmes of the Fund,
particularly by assisting countries wishing to draw up
and implement longer-term programmes for child welfare within the framework of their economic and social
development plans ;
6. Requests the resident representatives of the Technical Assistance Board, in promoting the co-ordination
of these efforts, to continue to offer every possible
assistance to the Governments and agencies concerned ;
7. Expresses its conviction that the progressive outlook of the Fund, the new emphasis and approach in
its policy and its capacity to adapt programmes to the
evolving needs of the developing countries will be
recognized by a continuation and strengthening of the
financial support necessary to sustain both its traditiom1.l and its extended activities;
8. Expresses its appreciation of, and encourages,
the participation of the non-governmental organizations
both in efforts to promote the work of the Fund in
developing countries and in the task of increasing the
resources available to the Fund.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1679 (XVI). Human rights fellowships
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 926 (X) of 14 December
1955 authorizing the Secretary-General to provide advisory services in the field of human rights in the
form of advisory services of experts, fellowships and
scholarships, and seminars,
N qting that a number of seminars have been successfully organized under that programme, and also that
services of experts are available in response to requests
from Member States, but that thus far seminars are
the only part of the programme that has been developed,
Believing that fellowships can further contribute to
the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms by providing opportunities for qualified persons concerned with matters relating to human
rights to enlarge their knowledge and experience,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council has
expressed similar views in its resolution 825 (XXXII)
of 27 July 1961, adopted on the recommendation of
the Commission on Human Rights,

31

Noting further that the present resources of the
programme of advisory ~ervices in the field of ~uman
rights have proved sufficient only for the convening of
three seminars each year,
1. Decides, therefore, that the resources for the
programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights should be increased to permit the provision of
a number of human rights fellowships each year, in
addition to the seminars ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in publicizing
that programme, to draw the attention of Member
States to the fact that funds are available for fellowships under the programme anq to the reports of the
seminars already held, as well as to the problems and
questions discussed in those seminars, as a sourc~ of
suggestions for topics which may be usefully exami_ned
and studied by recipients of human rights fellowships;

3. Further requests the Secretary-General to draw
the attention of Member States to the reports of the
various seminars thus far convened in the hope that
they will provide information and stimuli to Members
with similar interests who did not participate in the
seminars.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1680 (XVI). Draft Convention and draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age of Marriage and Registration of
Marriages
The General Assembly,
Having noted the progress made in the preparation
of a draft Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age of Marriage and Registration of Marriages,
Decides to assign priority, at its seventeenth session,
to the consideration of the remaining articles of the
draft Convention on Consent to Marriage, Minimum
Age of Marriage and Registration of Marriages and
to that of the draft Recommendation approved by the
Commission on the Status of Women, devoting to that
consideration the number of meetings necessary for its
completion.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.

1681 (XVI). Draft Convention on Freedom
of Information
The General Assembly,
Having made progress in the preparation of the draft
Convention on Freedom of Information at its fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
Nat having been able, however, to complete the draft
Convention,
Decides to take up the item entitled "Draft Convention on Freedom of Information" as soon as possible at its seventeenth session and at that session to
devote as many meetings as pos:;ible to the consideration
of that item.
1081st plenary meeting,
18 December 1961.
