TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 22 MARCH 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1405) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

. ..... ... ...... ....,.......... ... .. ...

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
fb) Letter dated 2 1 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1405 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).
Present: The representatives
of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary,
India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 405)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Adoption

of the agenda

AND FIFTH

MEETING

22 March 1968, at 4 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The Security Council will now proceed with its consideration of the
item before it. The first speaker on my list is the
representativeof the Soviet Union, on whom I now call.
4. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfrom Russian): In the courseof the discussionin
the Security Council of the latest act of aggression
committed by Israel against Jordan, the majority of
membershave strongly condemnedthe criminal actsof the
Israel militarists, and have askedthat the Security Council
should take immediate stepsto halt the aggression.
5. The representatives of the United States and certain
other Western countries which are membersof the Council
were unable to make such a decisivecondemnation of the
aggressorand confined themselvesto expressionsof regret
and, following their normal tactics in suchcases,attempted
more or less to propound the thesis of the so-called
identical approach to the aggressorand to the victim, But
this is nothing more than an attempt to shield and justify
the aggression,

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
(6) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8486)

6. All this againclearly shows,asdo the consultationsnow
taking place between members of the Council, that those
delegations-and, of course, the United States delegationin
particular-are trying to give moral support to and to
protect the aggressivepolicy of Tel Aviv, by making it
impossiblefor the Council to condemn that policy decisively and unreservedly and to adopt effective measures
againstthe aggressor.

I . The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council yesterday, I
propose to invite the representativesof the two countries
which requested this meeting of the Security Council,
Jordan and Israel, to take placesat the Council table for the
duration of the discussionof the item before us.

7. The United States representative’s vague statements
about his country’s alleged desire to restore peace and
justice in the Middle East are in sharpcontradiction to the
facts of American diplomacy. Anyone can judge the true
value of the verbal assurancesabout desirefor peacein the
Middle East emanating from Washington.

2. I also propose to invite the representatives of the
United Arab Republic, Iraq, Morocco and Syria to take the
piaces that have been reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber, with the understanding that, when it is
their turn to address the Council, they will be invited to
take placesat the Council table.

8. In this connexion, I think I should repeat what wassaid
in the Soviet delegation’sfirst statement-that if Israel did
not rely on the political, economic, military and diplomatic
support of the United States and certain other Western
Powers, it would not have risked pursuing its aggressive
policy against the Arab countries, neither would it have
ventured to violate Security Council decisionsand commit
this new act of aggression[1402nd meeting].

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. I% El-Fan-a
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco) and Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) took the places
reserved for them.

9. The statements made in the Security Council by the
Israel representative are further clear evidence of the fact
that Tel Aviv hasno intention of renouncingits provocative
and aggressivepolicy, No verbal acrobatics on the part of

the Israel representative can help him to refute the facts,
which show clearly that it is Israel which bears the whole
responsibility, both for the latest act of piratical aggression
against Jordan, and for the delay in implementing Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.
10. Israel is disregarding the General Assembly resolutions
on the question of Jerusalem (2253 (ES-V), 2254 (ES-V)].
Israel’s rulers have issued decrees annexing the seized Arab
territories. Israel is opposing the clearing of the Suez Canal
and the removal of blockaded foreign vessels. Israel is
driving out Arab inhabitants from these territories. Israel is
responsible for the armed clashes on the cease-fireline and
is constantly committing acts of aggression.
11, These are the true facts and in these circumstances, if
the members of the Security Council really wish to do their
duty under the United Nations Charter, they must severely
condemn Israel for its latest acts of aggression, take
effective measures to prevent a repetition of such acts, and
‘compel Israel to abide by the decisions of the Council.
12. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation would now
like to bring to the Security Council’s attention the
statement made by the Soviet Government, published in
today’s Soviet press, which reads as follows:
“The situation in the Middle East continues to attract
the close attention of the peoples. The tension of the
crisis brought about last summer by Israel’s adventuristic
policy is not subsiding. Israel, an imperialist State, is
continuing its aggression against neighbouring Arab
States, thereby increasing the scale of the crisis and its
dangerous international consequences.
“Again and again the Government of Israel has been
organizing military provocations against Arab States, This
is confirmed by reports that, in violation of the Security
Council’s decision calling for the cessation of military
actions, Israel troops committed a new bandit attack on
Jordan on 21 March 1968, using large ground and air
forces,
“In the occupied territories Israel militarists are perpetrating arbitrary acts and crimes, and are conducting
large-scale punitive operations against the local population.
“Definite steps are being taken with the aim of
integrating indigenous Arab territories, which were
captured as a result of the aggression, into the State of
Israel. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Israel officially
announced on 29 February 1968 that the Sinai Peninsula,
the Gaza area, the territory to the west of the River
Jordan captured from Jordan, and the Golan Heights in
Syria will from now on ‘not be regarded as enemy
territory’. By this unlawful act Israel is attempting to turn
the cease-fireline into its State frontier.
“Even earlier the Israel authorities had begun to grant
permission to numerous groups of Israel settlers to
establish themselves on occupied Arab lands, including
the west bank of the River Jordan. Military settlements of
so-called ‘farmer-soldiers’ are being set up. The native

Arab population is being driven away from the lands
taken over by Israel settlers and its property is being
seized or destroyed.
“The number of Arab refugees is growing from day to
day. Israel is deliberately pursuing this policy of driving
the Arab population out of Israel-occupied territories in
order to prepare conditions for the annexation and
colonization of this land by Israel.
“In defiance of the unanimous decision of the United
Nations General Assembly [resolution
2253 (ES-V)/
Israel is continuing its acts of conquest against the Arab
part of Jerusalem.
“The aim of the present actions of Israel, which is
supported by the United States Government and inter.
national Zionism, is to delay as long as possible a political
settlement in the Middle East, to impose Israel’s imperialist terms on the Arabs and to force them to surrender
and renounce the territories belonging to them. In this
the Israel leaders are taking advantage of the fact that
their patron, the United States of America, is itself
playing the role of an aggressor in Viet-Nam, as a State
grossly flouting the principles of the United Nations
Charter and of international agreements. What exists both
in the Middle East and in Viet-Nam is an attempt by
aggressive imperialist forces to strike a blbw at the
national liberation movement and its advanced detachments.
“The colonialist policy of Israel, and of the forces of
world reaction which are supporting it, is a serious cause
of the present dangerous international tension. As a result
of this policy the Suez Canal, a major international
waterway, has been out of action for more than nine
months, causing considerable economic damage to States
whose ships use the Canal and to internationa1 trade in
general.
“AS a demonstration of goodwill, the Government of
the United Arab Republic expressed its readiness to
remove from the canal zone the ships that were trapped
there as a result of Israel’s aggression, and to start
preparatory work for clearing the Suez Canal so that it
can be used for navigation again as soon as possible. The
Israel authorities, however, prevented this by resorting to
armed provocations.
“Israel’s continuing aggressive line cannot remain without consequences. By adopting its resolution on the
Middle East on 22 November 1967 [242 (.29G7)], the
Security Council set States a clear task-to achieve the
withdrawal of Israel troops from all captured Arab
territories and to take other measures necessary to bring
about the speediest political settlement of the problems
of this area. The principle of the ‘inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war’ and the demand for the
‘withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories
occupied in the recent conflict’ are given prominence in
the resolution and are the main and indispensable
conditions for the restoration of peace in the Middle East.
It is only on this basis that secure and recognized
frontiers of States in this area can be ensured.

territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in this area.

“The Security Council resolution on the Middle East is
not a recommendation or an opinion that Governments
are free to follow or to ignore, In joining the United
Nations, every State has undertaken to fulfil unconditionally the decisions of the Security Council adopted in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. Not to fulfil
these obIigations means to oppose the United Nations,
and to challenge the Organization responsible for maintaining international peace.

“The Israel Government must strictly comply with the
provisions of the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967, and must first withdraw its troops from
all occupied Arab territories. It must know that its
challenge to the interests of international peace and
security and its sabotaging of a political settlement in the
Middle East cannot go unpunished.

“The United Nations has been officially informed that
the Arab States which suffered most from Israel’s
aggression are ready to comply with the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 and to co-operate with
the Secretary-General’s Representative in the Middle East
who has been empowered to facilitate the implementation of this resolution.

“So long as Israel’s leaders, with support from outside,
adhere to the position of annexing Arab territories the
Soviet Union and other countries which are friends of
Arab States and advocate a stable peace in the Middle
East, will help the victims of aggression, for in so doing
they are fulfilling their duty in accordance with the
United Nations Charter and the interests of maintaining
peace. This must be clear to everybody.” (S/849.5.]

‘(Israel, on the contrary, has from the start pursued and
is still pursuing a line aimed at obstructing the Security
Council and General Assembly decisions on the Middle
East. Israel’s adventurism is such that, in response to the
appeals of States Members of the United Nations to
respect the Organization’s principles and the Security
Council’s decision, it puts forward arrogant territorial
claims to Arab States, threatening them with further acts
of aggression and resorting to the use of armed force.

13. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): As I
have done on previous occasions, I must reject as unwarranted the gratuitous comments of the representatives of
Jordan and Syria concerning the activities of private
American citizens in groups. My country is a pluralistic
society. This is a principal source of our strength as a nation
and we are very proud of the various strains from which our
country derives that strength. We have among our citizens,
citizens of Jewish and Arab origin. They are free individually .and in groups to express their views and lend their
financial assistance to causes they support. This is their
privilege and constitutional right-and we would not have it
otherwise.

“The Israel Government has hindered in every way and
is hindering the activities of Mr. Jarring, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in the Middle East,
whose task it is to find the shortest ways to a political
settlement of the conflict on the basis of the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and the United
Nations Charter. Israel would like to use Jarring’s mission
to distort the meaning of the Security Council resolution.
Giving no hint of its readiness to withdraw its troops
from all the Arab territories occupied during the recent
conflict-that
is, to withdraw them behind the line
existing prior to 5 June 1967-Israel and those who
support it are trying to impose negotiations on Arab
countries on conditions which are incompatible with their
lawful national interests and with their sovereignty, and
are attempting to delude world public opinion.

14. What is pertinent here is the fact that under the
Charter the differing views of these groups, constitutionally
protected, are matters of domestic jurisdiction and not an
appropriate matter for discussion here. What is relevant
under the Charter are governmental actions, and I am
always prepared to discuss as I have been doing throughout
these many months the policies of the United States
Government.
15. In this context I should like to recall the statement
made by President Johnson in which he said:

“Israel is following in the footsteps of the Hitlerite
criminals. As is known, fascist Germany also captured
foreign territories and then trjed to dictate its own terms
of ‘settlement’ to the victim of the aggression. But such
actions were branded by the peoples as banditry, and
those who engaged in them were condemned as international criminals after the rout of Hilter’s Reich. Those
who today covet the lands of others and like to interfere
in the domestic affairs of States would do well to
remember this.

“The United States has consistently sought to have
good relations with all the States of the Near East.
Regrettably, this has not always been possible, but we are
convinced that our differences with individual States of
the area and their differences with each other must be
worked out peacefully and in accordance with accepted
international practice.”
16. If the nations of the Middle East will turn towards the
works of peace they can count with confidence upon the
friendship and the help of all the peoples of the United
States of America. This continues to be the attitude of the
United States Government and the basis for the policy
which I have enunciated in the Council during this and
previous debates.

“The Soviet Union states with the utmost firmness that
it is determined, together with other peace-loving States,
to strive for the cessation of Israel aggression and for the
liquidation of all its aftermaths, for the return to their
rightful owners of the territories captured from Arab
States as a result of the aggression of 1967, and for the
achievement of the necessary political settlement in the
Middle East on the basis of respect for the sovereignty,

17. I have also listened with great interest to the statement
just made by the representative of the Soviet Union;
3

Ambassador Malik. I regret to state that his anti-cold war,
arrival statement policy has lasted about ninety-six hours.
But I shall continue‘ in the hope that perhaps it will be
resurrected and given more practical application than his
intervention today would indicate.
18. The representative of the Soviet Union has referred to
United States policy in the Middle East. The records of this
Council disclose that policy. It has been clear, explicit and
even-handed throughout. We favour the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We do not favour
return to improvisation, a state of belligerence, uncertain
boundaries or hostilities, major or minor. In other words,
we stand on the text and in full support of resolution
242 (1967) adopted by the Council on 22 November 1967.
We have used and are continuing to use our full political
influence in support of that resolution and of Mr. Jarring’s
mission, and if the Soviet Union would truly USB its
political influence in the direction of a just and lasting
peace in the area it could make a major contribution.
19. We also are opposed to the use of violence in the
Middle East, regardless of the direction from which it
comes. We have by our votes shown that this is more than a
verbal statement. It is a deep commitment of the American
Government, We have not cast any vetoes of resolutions of
this Council which decried violence. The Soviet Union has.
We are quite prepared to let our record stand under
examination at any time.
20. We hope that policy of standing against the use of
violence in the Middle East will be reiterated by the Council
in the present debate. We shall, in consultation with our
colleagues in .&heCouncil, show every evidence of arriving at
a reiteration of what the Charter commands, which is to
stand against any form of violence, disruptive of peace and
security. To this we pledge our earnest efforts. We have
displayed in the consul,tations already taking place, and
shall display in the consultations which are going to take
place, every effort to arrive at a common agreement so as to
clearly express this point of view. We have not, however,
felt at any point that it is useful to view problems in the
Middle East with one blind eye, as some members of the
Council have done for so long. Such a view does not
contribute to peace.

tions, either in the United States or When they are given
opportunities similar to the ones that are given in the
United States. In fact, my piece of evidence is derived from
the Status Law of the State of Israel, passed on 24
November 1952; article 3 of this Israel I&W says the
following:
“The World Zionist Organization, Which
is also
the
Agency for Palestine, takes care as before of
immigration
and directs absorption and settlement projects in the State.“’

Jewish

The important words here are those which clearly state that
the World Zionist Organization and the Jewish Agency are
one and the same structure and organization.
24. I ask my colleagues here to bear this fact in mind,
because there is no other situation obtaining in the world in
which a government acknowledges another organization,
with other citizens of a foreign country, to be responsible
towards the government of that country or part of the
government of that country. We have no objection to the
Zionist Organization working in the United States. It is
their privilege; it is the privilege of the United States
Government to permit any organization to work. But when
that organization works and acts as part of a foreign
government, which is the Israel Government, then the legal
question arises how is this permitted, because it is really
beyond my understanding to see this possibility. When that
Government, or the part of it which resides in the United
States, is permitted to collect hundreds of millions of
dollars as tax-free money, not to be spent on charity but
for military and other purposes-such as the one which I
mentioned here, according to that law, which refers to the
settlement of Jewish immigrants in Israel-certainly we are
not only immediately and directly concerned, but immediately touched by the situation, because it pertains to some
basic principles that relate to the very existence of our own
country.
25. Therefore, it is on a legal basis that I have raised and
still raise my objection, and maintain it. Certainly, the
representative of the United States cannot have it both
ways-to serve his purposes and at the same time to be
damaging to another government, whether that government
is a friendly government or not.

21. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Syria.
22. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to exercise my right of reply, It
is not the first time that the representative of the United
States has seen fit to remind us of our obligations as
Member States and of the fact that we should not interfere
in each other’s affairs. I entirely agree with that in SOfar as
it concerns the present situation. But I address myself to
the representative of the United States as a legal man
Primarily and basically. That is why I shall raise this
question not from the point of view of quoting newspapers,
and so on, but by quoting legal documents.

26. I wish also to direct two other questions to the
representative of the United States. In his statement of
yesterday and in explanation of the stand of the United
States Government he said: “We oppose acts of terrorism,
which are in violation of the cease-fire resolutions of the
Council, and we are not blind to the additional problems
they create.” [1402nd meeting, para. 5.j But what acts of
terrorism are spoken of here? To whom is this reference
made? The Government of Jordan, which has complained
to the Security Council, cannot be accused of acts of
terrorism. Those so-called acts of terrorism are being carried
out by individuals who feel themselves to have been the
victims of an aggression, the Israel aggression. They are not

23. In this connexion, the point that I would raise is the
following. There is legal evidence supporting our attitude
when we object to the activities of the Zionist organiza-

1 world Zionist Organisation-JewishAgencyfor Palestine
(Status)
Law, 5713-1952.(See: GovernmentYear-book, 5714 (1953.4).
Jerusalem,
Government
Printer,1953,p, 243.)
4

31. I wish to take up the word “cease-fire”. The cease-fire
has been arranged by the Security Council. In a previous
report submitted by the Secretary-General on 21 March
1968 we were very clearly informed by the SecretaryGeneral of the following:

responsible to the Government. Neither is the Government
responsible to them.
I

27. Then the representative of the United States went on
counter-actions,
suchas that which has just taken place on a scale out of
proportion”4
underline the words “out of proportion”---(‘to the acts of violence that preceded it, are greatly
to be deplored.”
[Ibid./ The expression here is “out of
proportion”. Does it imply that there is a proportion which
the representative of the United States would tolerate or
accept?
to say: “We believe, further, that military

“At 2130 hours GMT, Major Levinson”-that is the
Israel Major-“responded that he was ready to meet
Colonel Daoud on Thursday, 21 March, at 1100 hours
GMT at Allenby Bridge without United Nations presence.
In this connexion Major Levinson stated that ‘Israel’s
stand has always been that such talks should be direct
without United Nations presence and that even in this
particular case they would not be able to change their
attitude’. General Bull reported that he had transmitted
Major Levinson’s reply to Colonel Daoud. In the circumstances, Major Levinson’s reply, rejecting any United
Nations presence, seemed unnecessarily negative and
rigid.” [S/793O/Add. 64, para. 3.1
The contradiction, the utter negation of each other’s
attitude in the two letters of the Israel representative dated
18 and 21 March (S/8475, S/8486] addressed to the
Security Council and in this answer of Major Levinson are
too clear and too obvious to need any further stress.

28. Then he goes on to say: “the parties must scrupulously comply with the cease-fire arrangements” [ibid.,
pm. 151. Here again there is an ambiguity in the statement, Which parties are meant? Is it the Government of
Jordan or the Government of Israel? If it is the Government of Jordan, that Government has seized every possible
opportunity to prove its co-operation with the United
Nations, with the Security Council, with the Mixed
Armistice Commission on the spot. If there is a party that
has denied the United Nations presence-as I will show
later-it is the Israel Government and not the Jordanian
Government. Therefore, to put on a par of equality the two
parties to the cease-fire arrangements is, to say the least,
ambiguous.

32. In spite of all the evidence that I submitted this
morning, the Israel representative again wanted to go into
the history of Arab-Israel relations. I listened carefully to
his long statement but, to the best of my recollection,
nowhere in it was there any mention of United Nations
resolutions, of the Security Council resolutions. He said
that Syria did not accept the Security Council resolution.

29. I come now to the statement that was given today, in
a very detailed manner, by the Israel representative, I
certainly would not tax the patience of the Council or take
the time of the members by going into the details of
everything that the representative of Israel stated this
morning. But one thing I would stress, and that is the utter
cynicism with which, time and again, the Israel representalive is approaching this very grave situation, and, indeed,
the utter disregard shown for the Security Council and the
international community.

33. But what about Israel’s behaviour after the Security
Council’s resolution? The representative of the Soviet
Union at this very meeting has gone into the details of the
flagrant violations by Israel of Security Council resolutions,
which sparesme the need to take it up again.
34. With regard to his alleged accusations about Arab
terrorists, here we must look into a very basic fact from
two points of view, first historically and second fundamentally. Historically there is not a shadow of doubt that
Israel terrorism and the Zionist underground in Palestine
was established-as shown in the books which I quoted,
Israel and Zionist references-as of 1913. For what purpose? For the purpose of driving the Arabs out of
Palestine.

30. Let’us take, for instance, his letter of 21 March 1968
submitted to the Security Council. This was submitted after
the representative of Jordan submitted his letter of the
samedate [S/8484/.
In the last paragraph of his letter, the
representative of Israel says:
“In bringing this development to your attention, I have
the honour
to request that the Security Council be
urgently convened in order to deal with the continuous
actsof aggression . . .“. /S/8486.]

35. He went on in the usual manner to speak about peace
and to deplore the attitude of the Arabs, But the United
Nations has adopted at least nineteen resolutions in the
General Assembly in twenty years confirming and reaffirming the rights of the Arab refugees of Palestine. The
Security Council has in the past adopted resolutions
concerning the intermediate refugees, those who were
driven from the demilitarized zones. What did Israel do
with those resolutions? Then again, which Israel, is he
speaking about? Is it the Israel of 1947, the Israel of 1948,
the Israel of 1956 or the Israel after the 5 June 1967 war?
One answer is given-I have many-by the Government
Year-book of Israel which states:
“Every State consists of a land and a people. Israel is no
exception, but it is a State identical neither with its land

But if he is really concerned, to the extent of calling for an
urgent meeting of the Security Council, he should have
called for this meeting before the dastardly wanton attack
rvhlch was perpetrated by the Israel army against the
innocent civilians in Jordan, and not after. If this means
anything, it means utter disregard of and even an insult to
lhe intelligence
of the members of the Council and the
international community. Again, let us take the second
paragraph of his letter. He says:

“I stressed that these acts imposed a heavy strain on the
structure of the cease-fire and that my Government must
maintain its right and duty to take all necessary measures . . .” [Ibid.].
5

“Any such Israel reaction to continued

nor with its people . . . The truth is that the State
inherited a wasted and desert land which must be rebuilt
almost in entirety, yet it has not the means, either
financial or technical-materials, tools, instruments, machinery-or in manpower. All three requirements-capital,
materials and equipment, and manpower-must come
from outside.“2

infiltration

probably would be of considerable strength but of short

duration and limited in area.
“This has become apparent in talks with highly qualified and informed Israelis who have spoken in recent days
against a background of mounting border violence.”
39. On that same day I went to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and showed this article to him. As a
result of that a statement to the press was issued at 2 p.m.
on 13 May 1967 as follows:

36. When we are faced with a situation of this sort, are we
supposed to bow down and welcome those who have taken
such a position, who themselves recognize that they are
identical neither with their land nor with their people? In
fact, what we are concerned with now is the same Status
Law which I cited a while ago in putting the question to the
representative of the United States; the very first article
states :

“In reply to questions regarding the reports emanating
from Israel on contemplated use of force against Syria, a
United Nations spokesman said today that the SecretaryGeneral had expressed very serious concern over such
reports.”

“The State of Israel regards itself as the creation of the
entire Jewish people, and its gates are open, in accordance
with its laws, to every Jew wishing to immigrate into it.“3

Then the Secretary-General went into a great many things
and mentioned statements made by Syrian leaders.

Between 1947 and 1968 we have seen the State of Israel
expand to four times its area and its gates are wide open to
immigrants from all over the world while the legal
inhabitants, the owners of Palestine, ‘are in exile living
outside of Palestine. How can the Israel representative
create all those things and addresshimself in this manner in
full cognizance of the cause? It certainly stems from a
basic philosophy which is the Zionist philosophy.

40. Here again, apparently the new Israel representative is
not fully acquainted with the documents of the United
Nations, and I refer him to document S/7896 of 19 May
1967, a report by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council, paragraph 8 of which states the following:
“Intemperate and bellicose utterances, by other off?cials and non-officials, eagerly reported by Press and
radio, are unforturlately more or less routine on both
sides of the lines in the Near East. In recent weeks,
however, reports emanating from Israel have attributed to
some high officials in that State statements so threatening
as to be particularly inflammatory in the sense that they
could only heighten emotions and thereby increase
tensions on the other side of the lines.”

37. I should like here to quote an address that was made
in Jerusalem during the Session of the Zionist General
Council (Fifth Session after the Twenty-third Congress)
held in Jerusalem from 21 to 29 July 1954. So that the
representative of Israel will not think that I am quoting
from the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, the address was
given by Mr. Berl Locker who said inter alia:

41. I could go on and on, citing quotation after quotation,
but I am sure it would lead nowhere because the very basic
principles by which the Israel representative is inspired are
based on distortion and falsification. The appeals for peace
do not deceive anyone. You cannot force peace by
occupying someone’s house and then asking him to submit
to your own terms. You cannot make peace by speaking
beautiful words about peace. Deeds speak much better than
words.

“The World Zionist Organization exists and must
continue to exist. Every Zionist must be a member of this
organization through his territorial Zionist organization.“-So far so good, but listen to this-“In the event of
there being legislation in any country hindering Jews
from fulfilling their tasks towards the Zionist Movement,
the Jews of that country must endeavour to have such
legislation amended.”
That speaks for itself.

42. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United States of America in
exercise of his right of reply.

38. The Israel representative spoke a great deal about the
belligerency of my country, Syria. But he forgot the record
of his country, Israel, in the Security Council and in the
United Nations. I shall not go into that. But taking the
events with which we have been dealing as from 5 June
1967, I wish to quote from The New York Times of 13
May 1967:

43. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Ambassador Tomeh, the representative of Syria, has asked some
questions, and in all courtesy I owe him a brief reply,
44. Ambassador Tomeh asked me a legal question about
our tax laws, and then he purported to answer it. In so
doing, he reminded me of some of my former clients. If it
will comfort Ambassador Tomeh, I can assurehim that our
tax laws are enforced impartially with respect to all groups
and across the board,

“Some Israel leaders have decided that the use of force
against Syria may be the only way to curtail increasing
terrorism.
2 Government Year-book 5713 (1952) (Jerusalem, Government
Printer, 1952), p. 15.
3 Op. cit., p. 243.

45. He also asked what acts of terrorism I referred to
when I made my intervention yesterday. I refer him to the
6

he completely ignored its central and most important
provisions, that of withdrawal
and that of the inadmissibility of territorial
conquests by military force. The
problem before the Council now is really a simple one: Has
there been a serious violation of the cease-fire as a result of
Israel’s attack on Jordan yesterday? I think there is not
one single representative at this table who would deny that
the Israel attack was in fact a grave and serious violation of
the Council’s cease-fire resolution /233 (1967)].

details in official Security Council documents which have
been circulated and I leave them to his expert appraisal.
46. Thirdly, he asked what I meant in my intervention
yesterday. I shall repeat what I said yesterday:
“We oppose military actions in violation of the ceasefire resolutions of the Council; such actions create further
complications in an already complicated situation. We
oppose acts of terrorism, which are in violation of the
cease-fire resolutions of the Council, and we are not blind
to the additional problems they create. We believe,
further, that military counter-actions, such as that which
has just taken place on a scale out of proportion to the
acts of violence that preceded it, are greatly to be
deplored.” [1402nd meeting, para. 5.1

52. And the second question is: Are the activities of the
freedom fighters-or,
as some representatives call them, the
terrorists-violations
of the cease-fire?
53. In our submission, these activities cannot be considered, for many reasons, as violations of the cease-fire
resolution.
First of all, the cease-fire resolution was
addressed to the Governments concerned. The activities of
the freedom fighters are not instigated by, and are not
under the control of, the Government of Jordan.

I think it is quite clear what I meant when I said that and I
have nothing to add to that statement.
47. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
the representative of Iraq.

I call on
54. The representative of the United States quoted a
resolution adopted by this Council on 19 August 1948
/a56 (1948/l
which asked that all the Governments
concerned should deter the activities of individuals under
their control or residing in their territories. But the
representative of the United States failed to mention the
circumstances under which that resolution was adopted.
That resolution was adopted on the basis of a report by the
late mediator, Count Bernadotte, on the situation in
Jerusalem when fighting was still going on and sniping was
continuing in view of the fact that no cease-fire line as such
had been clearly defined.4 The situation in 1967 was quite
different, and I might say in passing that that report of
Count Bernadotte mentioned, among other things, that it
was the Jewish side in Jerusalem which had been sniping at
the Arabs and that most of the firing had come from their
side. I say this in passing to remind the Council that less
than a month after that report Count Bernadotte was
brutally murdered by Zionist gangsters in Jerusalem; and I
am sure the representative of the United States, a former
judge of the Supreme Court of the United States, must have
a feeling of repugnance and revulsion at the fact that the
perpetrators of that crime not only have escaped justice but
have been hailed as heroes in Israel and that some of them
have even become members of the Israel Parliament.

48. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): A little while ago the representative of the United States, Ambassador Goldberg, spoke
about resolution 242 (1967) adopted by the Council on 22
1~ vember 1967 and reminded the Council of what he
considered to be its principal provisions. I think his
statement was conspicuous for what it omitted to say
rather than for what it said. Ambassador Goldberg mentioned non-belligerence, secure and permanent boundaries,
and the necessity not to return to the ambiguous situation
which existed before the war. He failed to mention two
important provisions of that resolution, in fact the essential
provisions, perhaps: the emphasis that it is inadmissible
under the Charter to make territorial gains through military
force, and the necessity for the withdrawal of Israel troops
from occupied Arab territories.
49. It is, I think, revealing that the representative of the
United States repeated the stock phraseology of the Israel
side, who always speak about non-belligerence and secure
boundaries but never speak about withdrawal
or the
inadmissibility of territorial expansion by military means. It
must have been a slip of the tongue, but it is revealing none
the less and it is a serious revelation in view of the fact that
the representative of the United States himself, when the
resolution was adopted last November, assured the’council
that the United States Government would use all its
diplomatic and political influence to help the special
representative of the Secretary-General in his task..

55. But even if we consider the actions of Israel on 21
March this year as an act of reprisal, how many times has
the Council stated that reprisals and acts of retaliation are
not permissible under the Charter and under the various
resolutions adopted by the Council? The fact, of course, is
that the Chief of Staff of the Israel ;4rmy himself said
yesterday that this was not an act of reprisal; he said-and
this was on the news broadcasts-that
it was a carefully
prepared military operation with specific and clear-cut
objectives, It was not a spontaneous reaction to provocation, as we are led to believe. The representative of the
United States himself admitted that really there can be no
comparison between the scale of the attack of the Israel
Army on Jordan yesterday and the alleged acts of

50. The question that arises is: What influence has been
exerted on Israel for it to announce at least its acceptance
of the resolution, its readiness to implement it and its
willingness to co-operate with Mr. Jarring for its implementation?
51. We all know that if the influence of the United States
was needed at all, it was not with the Arab States that it
was needed, it was with Israel. That that influence has
failed to change the attitude of Israel is borne out by the
astonishing statement we heard this afternoon from
Ambassador Goldberg when, in describing the resolution,

4 See Official Records of the Security Council, Third
No. 107, 354th meeting,pp.40-41.

7

Year,

on the population of the occupied territories in order to
persuade the people to leave those territories; the
dynamiting and blowing up of homes, and SOforth.

provocation. I think it is grotesque even to suggest that
there is any relationship between the blowing up of a water
pump or the placing of a mine in some deserted country
road and the dispatch of 15,000 regular troops supported
by artillery, aircraft and tanks, and the wholesale and
indiscriminate slaughter of civilian population.

60. These inhuman acts have aroused a wave of
indignation in Israel itself. I have before me a news item
from the French newspaperLe Monde, dated 12 March. I
shouldlike to read it out to the Council:

56. Another point which has been raised in this debate
concerns the necessity of dispatching observers to the
Israel-Jordan cease-fire line. But the case before US is one, I
know, where there was no necessity for United Nations
verification of the facts. The representative of Israel himself
furnished the Council with the facts yesterday and read to
us the official announcement of the Government of Israel
about sending its troops across the armistice lines. There
was no question of conflicting reports or conflicting
allegations; one side said it sent troops, and that was that.

“About a hundred Israel intellectuals-novelists, COm
posers, journalists, priests, professors, doctors, lawyers
and cinema producers-have just published a statement
protesting againstthe violation of human rights in Israel
and the occupied territories. Referring to information
publishedin the Israel press, the signatoriesstate, among
other things, the following:
“ ‘Israel citizens, Jews and Arabs, are kept under house
arrestor detained without trial.

57. Therefore, the action to be taken by the Council
should be based on the following: It should be an
expression of its opposition to bloodshed and’ slaughter; it
should be a warning for the future against the perpetration
of such acts; it should be an expression of concern for the
principles of this Organization and its own resolutions; it
should be a warning that such acts will only result in the
weakening of the peace-making process of the United
Nations. Any resolution which does not contain these main
elements and which tries to confuse the issue by
introducing the question of the so-called terrorists can only
encourage the aggressors to undertake similar actions in the
future and undermine the authority of this Organization
and the resolutions of the Security Council.

“ ‘Collective punishment, including the dynamiting of
housesand the imposing of a curfew, continue to be
applied to the inhabitants of the occupied territories at an
alarmingrate. Families of workers and peasants,women,
children and old people are being deprived of shelter and
of a means of existence. The flood of refugees fleeing
from the Gaza zone and the west bank of Jordan
continues. An increasingnumber of Arabs has been driven
away from the west banlc on the order of the Israel
Military Governor,
“ ‘Where are these methods leading us if not towards a
gulf of ha.tred? Such actions can only strengthen
clandestineresistance,create new victims on both sides
and encouragea fresh outbreak of war with unforeseeable
consequences.A people that dominates another exposes
itself to moral degeneration and impairs its own
democratic system. A people which oppressesanother
losesits own freedom and that of its citizens in the end.

58. It is particularly important that a strong resolution be
adopted in view of the background of the situation.
Politically, Israel has undertaken in the last few months the
following
measures: its annexation of Jerusalem; its
expropriation of Arab lands in Jerusalem in order to alter
permanently the character of the city; the expulsion of a
large number of Arabs from Caza, for example, to facilitate
its eventual annexation; its decision not to consider the
occupied territories as enemy territories, and the changing
even of the names given to those territories; its cynical and
unilateral action to prevent the opening of the Suez Canal
to international shipping; its refusal to declare unequivocally its acceptance of Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967; and its undisguised efforts to subvert and
destroy the efforts of the special representative of the
Secretary-General.

“ ‘Jewishcitizens: Rememberthat courageousnon-Jews
were at your side in times of distress.The evil has now
struck our brother Arab people. Do you think that it is
fair for you to washyour hands of that people, to remain
silent? ’ “6
61. That is the background against which our work has to
proceed and the Council hasto take its decisions.
62. Finally, I should like to say a few words in respect of
the statement made this morning by the representative of
Israel, in which he referred to me personally and to my
country. He spokeof the 1948 and 1967 aggression-ashe
called it-of the Arab Statesand allegedthat Iraq had taken
part therein.

59. On the humanitarian side, we have already been told
of the curfews, the beatings, the searches, the detentions,
the arbitrary arrests and the inhuman treatment of the
people of the occupied territories-on such a scale that even
the Government of the United States drew the attention of
the Government of Israel to the necessity of applying the
Geneva Conventions5 to the occupied territories. It is
things like that which we should like to hear from
Ambassador Goldberg, things his Government has already
done, which I think the Council should know about. It
should know about the economic squeeze deliberately put

63. Yesterday 1had occasionto inform the Council that in
1948 the Arab armies entered Palestine only after a
considerable part of the area allotted to the Arab State
under the partition plan had been overrun by the Zionist
forces. In fact, the fighting which took place between the
Arab armies,including the Iraqi army, and the Israel forces

5 Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection of

war victims,

6 Quotedin Frenchby the speaker.

8

71. The PRESIDENT (translated from Bench):
the representative of Israel.

took place not on the land allotted to the Jewish State
under the partition plan, but completely and exclusively in
the area allotted to the Arab State under that plan. The
result of the Arab intervention in 1948 WBSto prevent the
complete annexation of the area allotted to the Arab State
under the partition plan. It was therefore, as I stated, not
an act of aggression but an act of salvation, which in fact
resulted in saving some part of the area allotted to the
Arabs under the partition plan.

I call on

72. Mr. TEkOAH (Israel) (trurzslated frmz Russian): The
representative of the Soviet Union and I are old
acquaintances; at one time we were even friends, and we
understand one another very well. But in order to make
him understand me even more clearly, I should like to say a
few words in his language.

64. In 1967, I need hardly remind the Council, the Arabs
entered into a defensive war. It was Israel which started
that war. It was Israel which launched an attack on the
Arab countries. The right of self-defence is guaranteed
under the Charter and international law. In fact we are
constantly being reminded by Israel military leaders what a
disastrous mistake the Arabs made in not attacking first.
General Dayan reminded us of that, and so did the present
Israel Ambassador in Washington, General Rabin.

73. When I listened to the speech of the Soviet
representative, I was reminded of the words with which he
is no doubt very familiar: “Beat the Jews, save Russia.” We
are in no way opposed to everything being done to ensure
the prosperity of Russia, but I am sure that the Soviet
people do not think that in our time one can beat Jews
with impunity.

65. Therefore, in 1967 it was clearly a war of defence
against a premeditated attack, an attack which even the
Israelis do not conceal was planned and was the result of
more than twenty years of careful and meticulous
preparation.

74. The statement just made by the Soviet representative
reminds me of nne of Krylov’s fables, the one about the fox
which accused the sheep of killing chickens. The fox then
set himself up as the judge and pronounced the verdict:
“Put the sheep to death; and its meat-hand it over to the
Court .”

[The speaker con timed in English.]

66. I do not want to enter into a historical argument with
the representative of Israel. He said that my references to
history were based on what was taught in Baghdad-or
something to that effect; I do not remember his exact
words. But all I said was that the Jews were not the first
people to inhabit Palestine, nor, were they the last. I
referred the representative of Israel to his own Bible, where
it is said that when the Hebrews came into Palestine it was
called the Land of Canaan and was inhabited by a people
called the Canaanites, That is a fact which is based not only
on history but on divine revelation also.

75. Again we heard today a Soviet reference to Zionism
and to Zionists. I am very much surprised by’this reference.
After all, following the recent developments in Poland, it
has become quite clear what the term “Zionist” means in
the present-day Soviet lexicon. “Zionists” to them means
freedom fighters, those who strive for the dignity of man
and for the rights of the people. I am proud to be a
representative.of a Zionist Government,
76. The Soviet representative referred to a number of
administrative regulations issued by the Israel authorities
with a view to facilitating freedom of movement of Jews
and Arabs alike. In all due respect, may I suggest that when
the Soviet Government desires to make observations on
Israel regulations it should not rely on the texts or
interpretations of these texts transmitted to it from Arab
sources.

67. In conclusion, I would again urge the Security Council
not to let this opportunity pass without warning against the
perpetration of similar acts in the future; I would again urge
it to advance the cause of peace in the world.
68. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United States in exercise of his
right of reply.

77. On 29 February 1968 four administrative orders were
promulgated. Briefly, they declare that it is now legal for
Israelis to travel to the areas under Israel’s control and for
residents of those areas to visit Israel. The directives are all
technical in content, simply giving legal sanction to a
situation that already existed in fact. Their promulgation
was designed to remove juridical anomalies, a principal one
being that up until the issuing of these administrative orders
passage to and fro between the areas of Israel proper and
the areas under Israel control could be construed as a
technical offence. There has for a long time been freedom
of movement between the areas in question, and the recent
regulations now give that movement retroactive sanction.
They in no way deal with the status of the areas nor do
they establish new political facts with regard to them. The
orders make no mention at all of the term “enemy
territory”.

69. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I
apologize for taking this time and I do not intend to make
it a practice to reply on each occasion. I did, however, want
to apologize to Ambassador Pachachi, the representative of
Iraq, for stepping out when he started, I had an urgent
telephone call which I had to take. I should like to say this
to him, however, that in talking about resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, I referred to that
resolution in all of its parts and aspects. Withdrawal is a
part of that resolution. I did not take the time of the
Council to read the whole resolution. I assure him,
however, that we support the entire resolution, in all of its
parts, in all of its aspects.
70. I reaffirm the statements I made in this respect at the
time, both before and after the vote, and-to use a practice
we use in our Congress-incorporate them by reference at
this point.

78. In malicious disrespect for the memory of 6 million
innocent Jews cruelly murdered by -the Hitlerite hordes, the
9

opportunity
to make a few brief remarks 011 the point
by the representative
of the United States and on

statement of the Soviet representative, whose country
signed the infamous pact with Hitler that triggered off the
Second World War again made comparisons between 1nY
people and its oppressors. Let me repeat what I said
yesterday: The Nazis called us Communists. The Communists cdl us Nazis. I leave it to history to pronounce
judgement on this unholy alliance of hate.

raised

which he addressed himself to me.
88. If I understood him correctly, Mr. Goldberg mentioned in his speech the question of the Soviet UsliOn
exerting
its influence in the matter of the peaceful
settlement of the situation in the Middle East. However, he
did not specify in what particular matter, On WI10111 this
influence was to be exerted or in what direction.

79. Finally, the Soviet represehtative showed particular
concern about the well-being of the Arab inhabitants in
areas under Israel control. May I make a simple suggestion.
I am certain that if the Soviet Government were to grant to
the Jewish citizens of the USSR the same rights, privileges,
facilities and freedom of expression and confession in
schooling, language, literature, work and communication
with the outside world as are enjoyed by the Arab
population in all the areas under Israel jurisdiction, all
would recognize this as a magnanimous act ending the
disabilities, discrimination and suffering to which the Jews
of the Soviet Union are subjected today.

89. It is no accident that this question was raised in SUCK
general terms. The United States representative is clearly
attempting to evade the main issue which must be settled
before a peaceful settlement in the Middle East can be
achieved, This main issue, as everyone knows, iS the
acceptance by Israel of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) adopted on 22 November 1967, agreement as
to its implementation and co-operation with the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jarring, And
the crucial point of this resolution is, as we all know, the
question of the immediate withdrawal of Israel troops from
Arab territories occupied by Israel.

80. As for the statements made just now by the Arab
representatives . .
8 1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union on a point of order.
82. Mr. MALIK

90. The question will, of course, be asked: is it necessary
to exert influence on the Arab side in this matter? I do not
think so, because it has already been made clear in the
statement of the Soviet Government of 22 March 1968
that:

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I think it is quite obvious that

the purpose of such a slanderous statement just made by
the Israel representative is to divert the Security Council’s
attention from the substance of the problem. With such
slanderous statements he would be well suited for the Voice
of America but not for the Security Council meetings.
83. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
again on the representative of Israel.

“The United Nations has been officially informed that
the Arab States which suffered most from Israel’s
aggression are ready to comply with the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967 and to co-operate with
the Secretary-General’s representative to the Middle East
who has been empowered to facilitate the implementation of this resolution .” /S/8495./

I call

84. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As for the statements made just
now by the Arab representatives, the hour is late and I
would only refer to an ominous idea suggested by the Iraqi
representative who spoke last. The thesis put forward by
the Iraqi representative concerning the cease-fire is not a
new one. He suggeststhat acts of aggression carried out by
Small
military or paramilitary units or by individual
marauders are not violations of the cease-fire.

91. I would also draw Mr. Goldberg’s attention to the
letter in the Secretariat document S/8479 of 19 March,
signed by the representative of the United Arab Republic,
Mr. El Kony, in which we find an official statement made
on behalf of the Republic to the effect that:
“The United Arab Republic on its part has informed
Mr. Jarring of its readiness to implement the Security
Council resolution adopted on 22 November 1967.”

85. This is precisely the thesis iyhich was used to justify
the warfare continued against Israel during the truce, under
the armistice, and now under the cease-fire. This is the
thesis which brought about the renewal of hostilities in
1956 and again last June in 1967. This is the thesis that has
been repeatedly rejected by the Security Council and the
General Assembly. I trust that the Security Council will
recognize it for what it is: an attempt to gain immunity for
the continuation of war, terror and murder.

92. I would ask whether Israel has made such a direct,
Clear categorical official statement in the United Nations,
whether it has stated, firstly, that it agrees with this
resolution, secondly, that it is prepared to put this
resolution into effect and thirdly, that it is ready
immediately to carry out the main clause of the resolution,
which is the withdrawal of its troops from the Arab
territories it has occupied to the positions they held on 5
June I967? Such official statements are not to be found in
the documents. There lies the difficulty, the main difficulty
causing the deadlock which has come about in the Middle
East. This is the main obstacle to the fulfilment of
Mr. Jarring’s mission.

86. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call On
the representative of the Soviet Union in exercise of his
right of reply.
87. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I have already answered the
representative of Israel, and therefore I shall t&e this
(translated

porn Russian):

93. SO 1 would address myself in the same way to Mr.
Goldberg: let the United States exert its influence on Israel
10

in Jlese matters to ensure that Israel officially declares that
it recognizes the resolution, that it is ready to put it into
effect and that it is ready immediately to proceed to
withdraw its troops from Arab territories occupied by
Israel. Exert your influence on Israel-your country has all
the facilities for doing so.
94. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call 011
the representative of Israel in the exercise of his right of
reply.
9.5. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union has left me no alternative but to read into the
record of this meeting a letter submitted by me yesterday
to the Secretary-General and distributed in document
S/8494. It reads:

interpreter of Egyptian policy), has stated, on 8 March
1968, that the Security Council resolution of 22
November (242 (1967)J is “inadequate to promote a
solution of the Middle Eastern problem, quite apart from
its being obscure”. Egyptian official spokesmen have let it
be known, publicly and otherwise, that the United Arab
Republic rejects the United Nations proposal to convene
the United Arab Republic and Israel for a conference in
which they would negotiate a mutually accepted peace
settlement.
“ ‘We have made a careful study of the real intentions
of the United Arab Republic as expressed in public
utterances and various diplomatic contacts.
“ ‘The United Arab Republic’s policy is as follows: The
United Arab Republic rejects the principle of binding
engagement, a commitment establishing a peace agreement with Israel.

“I have the honour to refer to the letter addressed to
you by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Republic to the United Nations on 19 March 1968
lS,/8479J in which he transmitted to you a statement
made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United
Arab Republic on 13 March 1968. Upon instructions
from my Government I have the honour to draw your
attention to excerpts from a statement made by Mr. Abba
Eban, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, at a press
conference in Jerusalem on 12 March 1968:

” ‘The United Arab Republic does not intend to meet
Israel representatives in order to negotiate a settlement of
differences with Israel.’ ”
96. The PRESIDENT (transkted from French): I apologise for interrupting the speaker, but the representative of
the Soviet Union asks to speak on a point of order. This is
in order. I call on him to speak.
97. Mr. MALIK

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I wish to bring to the attention
of the Israel representative the fact that literate people are
sitting around this table and that they have all read this
document. Therefore I do not think there is any need to
read it again here, particularly since no mention is made in
this document of the questions which I asked.

“ ‘Recent Cairo statements shed light on policies and
attitudes of the United Arab Republic. I refer especially
to the addresses by President Nasser and articles in the
Egyptian Government press. Everything received from
other sources indicates these to be authentic expressions
of the United Arab Republic’s policy.

(Union

(translated from Russian):

“ ‘The position is clear. The peace effort of the United
Nations has not advanced and responsibility lies squarely
on the shoulders of the United Arab Republic. Cairo
policy, as formulated and practised, is quite incompatible
with Charter principles and with the ideas behind the
United Nations peace effort.

98. But I should like the representative of the United
States to specify in which document and when the
Government of Israel officially stated that it accepted the
resolution adopted by the Security Council on 22
November 1967, and that it was ready to implement it and
to withdraw its troops immediately from foreign territory.
These are the questions I am asking the United States
representative, and I am waiting for an answer.

“ ‘Israel’s policy is to seek the replacement of the
cease-fire arrangements by permanent peace, negotiated,
accepted and contractually ratified by the States
concerned in accordance with normal international
practice. Such a peace would eliminate the threat or the
use of force, establish agreed secure political territorial
boundaries, ensure freedom of navigation for Israel’s ships
and cargoes in all waterways leading to and from the Red
Sea, commit all signatories to permanent, explicit, mutual
recognition, the respect of sovereignty, security and the
national identity of all Middle Eastern States.

99. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French):
representative of Israel may continue his statement.

The

100. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): As I said, the Soviet
representative left me with no alternative but to request
that the official stand of the Government of Israel, as
expounded in the letter submitted by me yesterday, should
be included in the records of this meeting. However, I
should be grateful if this could be done without my having
to read it fully.7 If my understanding on this is correct, I
shall of course waive the right to continue with the reading
out of this text.

“ ‘For nineteen years, relations between States in the
East have been fragile, anomalous, ambiguous,
indeterminate
and unresolved. The hour is ripe for
building a stable and durable edifice within which the
peoples of this region can pursue separate national
vocations and a common regional destiny.
Middle

101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of the United States in the exercise of his
right of reply.

“ ‘What is the policy of the United Arab Republic?
President Nasser has spoken of restoring the previous
situation by force. Hasnein Heikal (regarded as the public

7 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third
Year, Supplement

ment S/8494.
11

for

January, February and March 1968, docu-

of resolution

242 (1967) which states that he is: “to
East to establish and maintain
contacts with the States concerned in order to promote
agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and 1
accepted settlement in accordance with the provisions and
principles in this resolution”.

102. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America) : I speak
for the United States; I speak for no other country in this
Council.

proceed to the Middle

103. 1 think that the Council has the right to consider that
points of order relating to the reading of documents are
very inappropriately raised by the representative of the
Soviet Union. We listened with great patience to his readillg
of the statement of his Government, all of which we had
read earlier today as a public release by the Government: of
the Soviet Union.

109. If the Soviet Union would say the same thing clearly
and explicitly, then I think that Mr. Jarring would have the
type of support he really needs, and that is the
whole-hearted support of this Council behind the resolution
as a whole-which is the way the Council adopted the
resolution.

104. The representative of the Soviet Union inquired what
type of influence we were talking about and with respect to
whom. When that resolution was adopted I made a
statement in that respect, and I should like to read it. I
hope that no point of order will be raised on it. I stated:

110. The PRESIDENT (translated j?onz French): I call on
the representative of Morocco.
111. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (tramlated from Freuchj:
Although I have been invited to appear before this Council
as a non-member, seeing that I represent a country which is
directly concerned in the general situation in the Middle
East, I shall beg the President’s indulgence and ask him to
allow me to draw the Council’s attention to certain facts,

“I have already given my Government’s pledge on this
score and I wish to reiterate it today-a pledge to this
Council and to the parties concerned’ that the diplomatic
and political influence of the United States Government
will be exerted in support of the efforts of the United
Nations special representative to achieve a fair, equitable
and dignified settlement so that all in the area can live in
peace, security and tranquillity. Similar pledges from
other members of the Council and the United Nations
membership, particularly those with great diplomatic and
political influence, would be invaluable . . .” [1382nd

112. The present discussion is being held at the request of
Jordan, which asked for urgent consideration of a specific
situation. The facts have been established in the clearest
possible way, The highest authorities of Israel do not in any
way dispute the terms of Jordan’s letter [S/8484/, and
there is also an extremely lucid account of the course of
events in the report of the United Nations Observer which
was submitted to us yesterday morning [S/793O/Add.64).

meeting, para. 102.1

105. The representative of the Soviet Union should know
that the United States has used its political and diplomatic
influence in support of the resolution of the Security
Council and Mr. Jarring’s mission, Our diplomatic efforts
have been directed with respect to all countries concerned,
and we would hope and still continue to hope that the
Soviet Union will similarly use its diplomatic influence in
that direction.

113. For the past two days, the Council has allowed itself
to be led into discussions which serve only to document
still further the general background to this wretched Middle
Eastern question that has occupied our attention for the 1
last twenty years. Some representatives retrace for our ,
benefit the entire course of history over the last 2,000
years; others speak in reply to criticisms and comments :
which have no direct bearing on the problem before the
Council. We give them our close attention; we respect the 1
right of each to make whatever observations he considers
necessary and to reply to any interlocutor, But I think it
has been established already-and certainly to the satisfsction of the delegation of Israel-that such a flagrant and
violent punitive expedition as has just been carried out is
still producing no reaction whatsoever from the Security
Council after two days of discussion. So, after the murder
of the inhabitants of Karameh, Israel has scored another
diplomatic victory, for which, in my view, the Council is
entirely to blame,

106. I do not want to burden the records of the Council
with a recapitulation of the statements that were made at
the time that the resolution wasadopted. But those records
will show that the resolution was adopted as an entire
resolution, and the main point of the resolution is the
achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
That is the main point of the resolution.
107. There are principles set forth in that resolution, not
only one principle; the principle that has been talked about,
withdrawal, is a principle that is stated in resolution
language. There are other principles involved in the
resolution, and if anything is clear from the records of this
Council the principles that are set forth are interdependent
and there is nothing artificial about this interdependence.
We did not manufacture it. It is in the nature of the
situation and of the history of this conflict.

114. We are talking about the general situation in the
Middle East. A resolution was adopted several months after
the outbreak of the war. It was the subject of endless
negotiations, manoeuvring and pressure. It wasadopted and
it has a meaning and significance. In the first place, it is a
text which is binding on those who voted for it, and it is
also a decision which must be imposed on those to whom it
is addressed,

108. I shall say in the strongest terms for my country-and
I should like to hear the same expression from the
representative of the Soviet Union-that we support the
resolution in all its parts. We support it as a resolution of
the Security Council. We support the efforts of Mr. Jarring
pursuant to the mandate contained in operative paragraph 3

115. What has happened since that resolution was
adopted? It is perhaps unnecessary to recall every event,
12

y”.,

’
E
I
1
I

i

but
I believe it would be difficult to deny that, in all his
efforts,
the Secretary-General’s special representative has
nlet
with direct or covert opposition and with delaying
tactics,
all with the effect of hindering him as much as
Possible
from seriously seeking the kind of solution that the
Council
wished to produce.

121. I believe that the Council should not hesitate when
faced with the facts. Nor should it take into donsideration
the identity of the guilty party or that of the victim. There
are precise facts before us which no one here disputes, not
even the Israel delegation. Forty-eight hours have gone by
and the entire world, which has its eyes on the Council, can
plainly see that it has been unable to take a decision on the
basis of precise facts.

116.
In the meantime, this has enabled Israel to commit
with
impunity
certain acts of the utmost gravity, without
Provoking
the slightest reaction al the international level.

122. I remember other occasions when the Council was
convened, occasions on which it immediately found the
political and moral strength to face up to the necessary
decisions without delay and without time-wasting manoeuvres. When the Council is convened urgently, what is urgent
is not only the discussion but the decision,

117.
We talk about influence in the Middle East. Who is
Supposed
to be exerting influence and on whom? It has
been
generally recognized that the countries of that region
are sovereign States. There are Powers there which have
comr-nitt,ed
themselves to seeing that the Council’s
resolution
is carried out. We are waiting for their answersto
the questions which have been asked. We are waiting for
them
to tell us what has been done at such a level of
international
political and moral responsibility, for a start
to be made on implementing this resolution. We can talk
about
that again later.

123. I apologize, in view of the conditions in which I have
been invited to speak before the Council, for interposing
this reminder in what may be a discourteous way; but I
believe that we are in the process of adding zo the crimes of
Israel a crime of indifference, which is utterly unworthy of
the Council. I regret to say that Friday evenings have a
particular importance for the tactical experts of the
Security Council because they can use them to defer the
discussion until the following week. In the interval, the
ground will have been strewn with two hundred corpses,
five or six days will have passed before the highest
international authority reaches its verdict, and Israel will
presumably have triumphed once again, but the Council
will certainly have lost.

118.
llas

The special representative of the Secretary-General
not given up hope, and his recent visit to United
Nations
Headquarters must certainly have shown him there
are other encouraging elements favouring a solution. But a
new
event has occurred since that visit.; I refer to the
deliberate
attack, acknowledged by the Govermnent of
Israel,
which has described it as a punitive expedition. This
matter
has finally come before the Security Council, which
Was
convened urgently and has not yet found a way of
sc->Iving the problem and of taking the necessary decisions in
this inatter.
119.
dealing

124. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I call on
the representative of the Soviet Union in the exercise of his
right of reply.

Every judicial body has emergency procedures for
with flagrante delicto. I have not stated why the

125. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian):I shall be very brief. I am quite

Council-the

facts having been established, the situation
clear and the guilty party, with great presumption
and
audacity, having admitted its responsibility-why the
four
great Powers, which are permanent members, and the
representatives
of many other States have not yet managed
L-o reach a decision on this problem.

justified in saying at this meeting of the Security Council
Ihat we have received no answer from the United States
representative to the three direct questions which I
asked-whether Israel agreeswith the resolution adopted by
the Security Council on 22 November 1967 /242 (1967)/,
whether it agreesto implement it, and whether it agrees to
withdraw its troops to the positions they occupied before
5 June 1967.

being

If it is thought in some quarters that the right of
is a facility provided for refuting this or that aspect of
tile
international
policy of this or that country, or of the
philosophy
of this or that country interested in the
problem,
I say that the Council must first address itself to a
study
of this question. Two hundred people have been
a village has been destroyed; a United Nations
killed;
resolution
has been violated; international law has been
breached.
There have been no such precedents in any other
war no matter who may have committed war crimes. We
never
saw the Germans crossing the line of the unoccupied
zo~le
to take action against resistance movements. We never
ileard
in the United States a radio broadcast calling on the
European
resistance fighters to abandon their efforts to free
tIl&r
territory. We have never heard in London a radio
broadcast
to the effect that the resistance movements to
f-ree the occupied territories should stop. Is there one kind
<)f freedom
on one side of the Mediterranean and another
kind
on the other side? On the line of demarcation
separating
the great Powers from Ihe rest, is there justice
for one victim and injustice for another?
120.

reply

126. As for his question regarding the attitude of the
Soviet Union to the resolution, Mr. Goldberg should know
by now that the Soviet Union does not vote for ,resolutions
which it does not accept and does not recognize. The Soviet
Union voted for the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967 .s
127. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I am
aware that the Soviet Union voted for the resolution, but
we have had no answer to the question whether the Soviet
Union will support lhc resolution in all its parts.
8 The English text of this paragraph which appeared on page 60 of
the provisional verbatim record of the meeting read as follows:
“In so far as concerns his question regarding the attitude of the
Soviet Union to this resolution, Mr. Goldberg should know that
the Soviet Union does not vote for resolutions it does not
recognize. The Soviet Union voted for the resolution concerned.”
On 25 March 1968 a corrigendum (S/PV.1405/Corr.l) was issued to
change the English text to read as paragraph 126 above.

13

engagedin a very delicate missionon behalf of the Counc.i.
we all knew when we adopted the resolution that it woul(
not be an easy task. I do not think that we canaccept an!
interpretation of the resolution that is madeby the Sovle
Union alone. At the appropriate time, Mr. Jarring wil
finally report to this Council, and we will have animpartis
assessmentof what is the attitude of the parties wit1
respect to his mission and with respect to the resolution
and at that time, I think, I.---speakingfor my Govern
ment-will be prepared to take appropriate action in thr
light of Mr. Jarring’sreport.

128. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Soviet Union voted for all
parts of the resolution in question; it follows that it
recognizes all parts of the resolution.9
129. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I
welcome that statement very much, because it was not
apparent from the prior statements.
130. Now, with respect to the attitude of the parties to
the resolution, I said I was speaking for my own
Government, and that is my responsibility. Mr. Jarring is

131. The PRESIDENT (translated fi-onz French): Frorr
the consultations which I have had with membersof the
Council, it appears that a large number of them are in
favour of adjourning now and reconvening at 9.30 p.m. lj
there is no objection, I shall adjourn the meeting,and we
will resume discussion of the item on our agendaat
9.30 p.m.

9 The English text of this paragraph which appeared on page 61 of
the provisional verbatim record of the meeting read as follov,s:
“The Soviet Union voted for all parts of that resolution; it
therefore recognizes all the parts.”
On 25 March 1968 a corrigendum (S/PV.1405/Corr.l) was issued to
change the English text to read as paragraph 128 above, and to
complete the Russian text which, on page 15 of the provisional
verbatim record, had appeared without the phrase corresponding to
“it follows that it recognizes all parts of the resolution”.

14
Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S. O.SO(or equivalent in other currencies)
