TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 22 MARCH 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1404) . , , . , . , . , , . , , . , . , , . , . , . , . , . . . ,
Adoption of the agenda

Pay

.. ,.. ..,,..... ,.,...,......, ,.. ,... ,.,

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 2 1 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . I . . . . . . , I .

1

SlPV.1404

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, , .) are normally published in quarterly
Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiw

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York, on Friday,
President:

Mr. Ousmane So& DIOP (Senegal).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 404)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(6) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
/.I letter
dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8486)

1, The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken at the 1401st meeting, I
propose to invite the representatives of the two countries
which have requested a meeting of the Security Council,
Jordan and Israel, to take places at the Council table for the
duration of the discussion on the question before us.
2. I also propose to invite the representatives of the
United Arab Republic, Iraq, Morocco and Syria to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber, on the understanding that when it is their turn to
address the Council they will be invited to take places at
the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farm
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
CourmY table, and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic),
Mr. A. Puchachi (Iraq), Mr. A.T. Benhim
(Morocco)
nnd Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) took the Places
reserved .for them.

AND FOURTH

MEETING

22 March 1968, at 12 noon
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The first
speaker on my list is the representative of Jordan, on whom
I now call.
4. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): In my statement yesterday
meeting] I pointed out that it was never our
intention to disturb the mission of the Special Representative. We continue to wish Ambassador Jarring success
in his efforts, but I am sure that he does not want to be the
shield protecting Israel violations and defiance, If the
Security Council does not strengthen the hand of Arnbassador Jarring by condemning the aggressor and invoking
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, it will by its
inaction encourage Israel to commit one violation after
another.

[1401st

5. We wanted to come to the Council earlier to present the
very many serious casesof Israel violations and contempt
for the world community. On many occasions we expressed
our fears that permitting Israel defiance to continue
without United Nations sanctions would be detrimental to
peace. Our policy of maximum restraint and patience is
evident from the fact that not until this very moment did
we request an urgent meeting of the Security Council to
deal effectively with Israel’s utter contempt for and
defiance of the two General Assembly resolutions on
Jerusalem (22.53 (ES- VI and 2254 (ES- VI]. We were motivated by our constructive attitude towards the mission of
the Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring, and also
we heeded the appeal of our friends in this regard. This
example of our policy of a constructive and positive
approach towards peace is more than enough to show to
the whole world the real and genuine motives of the
Government of Jordan and its hopes for the successof the
mission of the Special Representative.
6. What is more, when Israel arbitrarily expelled Jordanian
citizens from the west bank of Jordan, including so
prominent a leader as the Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib, who was deported ten or twelve days ago, and
when it deported the former Foreign Minister of Jordan,
Mr. Anton Attalah and others, we did not bring these
flagrant violations to the Security Council for the same
reason.
7. When Israel enlarged the municipal area of the City of
Jerusalem and illegally expropriated 838 acres of the Arab
lands adjacent to the Old City, we were advised to be
patient and not let it be said that Jordan frustrated all
peace efforts in the area. When the President of Israel,
Mr. Shazar, called for more Jewish immigrants to Jerusalem
to take over Arab property, occupy Arab houses and reap

American leaders no doubt share our view and we give the1
credit for being fair and objective. In this connexion,
agree with my colleague, Mr. Goldberg, who reminded th
Council yesterday [1402nd meeting] that no useful pu
pose is served by name calling. Certainly, no one wan!l
name calling, but you cannot describe a crime with swet
words. I wonder whether the name bestowed on Israe
despite its crimes and its wicked massive attack on I
yesterday, serves any useful purposes. TO what extent
Israel encouraged by such names? Are not these name
one wonders, together with the continued tax-exemi
donations which are used for war and destruction, the cam
of much of Israel arrogance and conceit? Is not this feediln
Israel terrorism in our area?

what the Arabs had sown, we still kept to our attitude of
restraint and patience.
8. When Israel three times attacked the same Karameh
camp, using fragmentation bombs, murdering forty-six
innocent civilians and ten soldiers and mortally injuring
fifty-five peaceful refugees and thirty-seven soldiers, again
we were told to refrain from bringing the question to the
Council because it would not produce fruitful results.
9. When the Israelis embarked on bulldozing Arab property in the Jerusalem area in order to build 1,400 units for
Jewish immigrants, we were told by some of our friends
around this table that we should keep the right atmosphere
prevailing in the area in order to give the Special Representative a chance to reach a result with the parties.

15. We hope that our American friends who make sue
judgements will have more opportunity to see the truth, t
see the problem and judge it on its merits.

10. Thus, for six months we accepted the counsel of many
friends around this table only to discover later that our
worst fears had been justified. Our land is subjected to mass
attacks, our people in Karameh and in other parts of the
Jordan valley were subjected to Israel massacres. Our
villages were shelled and bombarded; our innocent citizens
were killed, Thus the Council can see for itself how our
restraint did not stop Israel aggression. It is Israel which did
not want to see an atmosphere of peace, but preferred to
create conditions which would further tension and unrest.

16. The Israel representative did not hesitate to impute I
me yesterday something I never said. I am not surprisle
that he would resort to misrepresentation of facts or dece
in order to score a point. I checked his statement th
morning to make sure and found that he said the foliowin.
“I am not surprised by the concoction served to tl
Council now by the representative of Jordan from tl
Protocols of the Elders of Zion.” [1401st
meetiq
para. 68.1

11. It is obvious, therefore, that Israel with three brigadedivisions, jet fighters and helicopters freely invaded
Jordanian villages and freely looted and destroyed, plundered and murdered at will,,and bombed and committed all
sorts of acts of genocide in the Karameh village and camp
and in other places, This is the question now before the
Security Council. We were asked to be patient in the name
of peace; but apparently no one could prevail upon
arrogant Israel to heed United Nations decisions. And now
we hope that many of the members around this table have
come to see where the responsibility lies and who is
responsible for the massive attacks against innocent Jordanian civilians.

17. The Protocols of the Elders of Zion were nev(
mentioned by me in this important body or anywhere :
the United Nations. I was referring in my interventilc
yesterday to the Round-Table Conference which took plal
in Israel in 1963. Time and again I referred to the names I
the leaders and officials who participated in that cc):
ference. For the information of the Israel representativ
the reference to the conference and the minutes of tl
conference and the statements made in the conference ci
be found not in an Arab or Jordanian book or magazin
but in an Israel publication, an Israel magazine calk
Ma’~riv under the heading “Round-Table”. They appear
the issue of Ma’ativ published in Tel-Aviv and dated 1
August 1963.

12. I must say with regret that this tragedy which befell
Jordan was exploited yesterday evening by some American
politicians for their own ends.

18. If Mr. Tekoah will go back to his Israel sources, he w
filid that that conference did take place, that some of tl
officials were there participating in it and that what.
quoted yesterday was taken from some of the statement
where they said: “We are planning for a third conflict wil
the Arabs”. [ibid., para. 59.1 They also said: “We mu
fight, fight in the entire area, The conflict must be a ne
war of independence, but not independence of son
additional ‘triangle’-independence
of the Promised Lar
within her geopolitical borders.” [ibid.] Those are not rr
words; they are not taken from the Protocols of the Efde
of Zion; they are from the minutes of the Round-Tab
Conference,

13. While Israel jet fighters were bombing the refugee
tents and dwellings in utter contempt of every human
value, the United Jewish Appeal here in New York was
celebrating this at a dinner which was the opening of a
campaign for tax-exempt donations. Over $16 million was
collected last night. No allusion, no reference, wasmade by
those who competed for Israel favour to the Israel
lawlessness and banditry against my country and people.
Instead, competition in praising Israel took place; earlier
Israel was called a sister democracy. Let me ask: Was this
dictated by American sense of fairness vis-&vis those who
invaded Jordan yesterday? Definitely, calling Israel a sister
democracy invites disgust. I am sure that the fathers of this
great country, America, who built their great democracy on
the basis of American values, rooted in our own values, had
a different definition of what a sister democracy is.

19. Time and again I emphasized the names of some of tl
Israel officials and leaders who participated in the co
ference. I did not claim that Mr, Shalev, who participated
it also, was the author of the Protocols of the Elders (
Zion. He was one of the Zionist leaders, and Israel is tl
political arm of this Zionist movement.

14. I know that those founders of America had different
names for actions similar to the Israel practices. Many
2

20,
Now the question arises, why did the new Israel
representative choose to start in this Council with these
misleading tactics? He is not here to answer the question. I
submit that, in doing so, he was true to Zionist tactics and
cannot be the exception to the rule. The whole history of
Zionist
leadership is a history of falsehood and acts of
forgery
and misrepresentation. I can cite hundreds of such
cases. The members of the Council are all familiar with the
deliberate forgery by the Israel Ministry of Defence in 1954
of documents involving the then Defence Minister of Israel,
Mr. Lavon. The purpose of the forgery in that instance was
to give the impression that Mr. Lavon had himself ordered
certain acts of sabotage by Israel agents who were sent to
Egypt to destroy American installations, with a view to
poisoning Arab-American relations.

Fifteen thousand Israel soldiers, supported by the air force,
artillery and tanks, crossed to the east bank of Jordan over
a 11O-kilometre front, killing civilians, destroying villages
and adding new dark pagesto their already heavy record of
war crimes. One of their main targets was the Arab refugee
camp at Karameh, which has been attacked for the third
time, an attack which was aimed specifically at the young.
It is now established beyond any doubt that, according to
The New York,Times of this morning:

2 1 . If the Ministry of Defence can forge documents in the
name
of its own Minister, one might assume that
Mr. Tekoah would have little hesitation in misrepresenting
what I said, although my statement is here and is still fresh
in. the memory of the Security Council members. Naturally,
the
purpose of this distortion is a deliberate attempt to
divert
the attention of the Security Council from the real
issue before the Council.

26. Thus the Security Council is seized of a new premeditated, wanton attack by Israel pirates to satisfy their
hate and sadism against innocent Arabs. To bring extraneous elements to this specific complaint by Jordan could
have no other aim but to divert attention from this
aggression which constitutes a clear-cut case of genocide
agatist innocent civilians.

“The attack seemed to have been planned at least a
week ago. Israel military and political officials began last
Monday to prepare domestic and world opinion for the
action against”-what they call-“the terrorists .”

27. The new representative of tile Israel invaders of
Palestine, in his maiden speech to the Security Council,
spared no effort yesterday to confuse the issue and obscure
the facts by resorting to diversionary tactics. In the usual
typical manner of Zionist emotionalism of arousing pity
and assuming innocence, he jumped, to suit his purposes,
over a period of time ranging from 2,000 years to twenty
years to a few months to one day, trying mainly to connect
disconnected events, invoking past and dead myths which
by now hardly deceive anyone except those who are ready
to be deceived, indulging in defeat and hypocrisy which not
only bored the audience but which constituted an insult to
human intelligence. The wolf was trying to put on the garb
of a lamb, the tiny so-called law-abiding State of Israel
surrounded by the Arabs and yearning in anguish for
peace-a very poor performance indeed, to say the least.
But his efforts were futile, for no words or cleverness or
conniving can distract our attention from the central issue
of which the Council is seized, namely, the massive attack
by 15,000 Israel soldiers against Jordan and the killing of
innocent Arab civilians, women, and children. Indeed
Mr. Tekoah did speak about it, but to tell us in all
arrogance that Israel had taken the law into its own hands,
which in itself calls for a clear and unequivocal condemnation by this Council.

22.
Many innocent civilians fell victinis of this naked Israel
aggression. Very many of the refugees’ dwellings were
completely
destroyed. Our soldiers resisted the Israel
bornbardment.
They were fighting without air cover; we
have every reason to be proud of the bravery and heroism
of our soldiers and people, and of the refugees who fought
hand to hand, Scores died honourably in defence of their
shelters, their homes and the soil of their country. They
were
resisting the overwhelming force of the Israelis built
and reinforced over the years.
23.
What is before the Security Council is an act of
aggression. Tlze facts are established and the crime is
admitted.
There is no sense trying to inject a substance
foreign to our present complaint into our deliberations.
Politics,
religion,
geography, and the fathers of
Mr. Tekoah-all these are questions injected to confuse the
issue. The Security Council was given advance notice of this
contemplated
attack. If this organ responsible for maintaining peace and checking aggression did not deem it fit to
meet earlier, in order to avert Israel aggression, despite
advance notice, the least it can do now is to condemn the
aggression, censure the aggressor, and invoke Chapter VII of
the Charter. This is more so since the As Samu decision,
adopted by this Council in its resolution 228 (1966) of 25
November
1966, imposes a duty on this body to do so.
Otherwise, Security Coundl resolutions become meaning
less, and this would encourage more Israeli contempt and
defiance, a thing which would threaten the very image of
the great organ called the Security Council.

28. This new criminal aggressinn has twofold characteristics. First, it is an extension and continuation of what the
Israelis have been perpetrating against the Arabs under the
yoke of their occupation or domination, and in violation of
the Geneva Convention which Israel ratified on 12 August
1949. Articles 33 and 53 of this Convention state, inter
alia:

24. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Security Council was convened yesterday at noon in emergency session [1401st
meeting]
upon the urgent request of the representative of
Jordan. In fact, Mr. El-Farra only three days ago warned
the Council of an impending large-scale attack by the Israel
army against his country [5’/8478/.

“Reprisals against protective persons and their property
are prohibited.
“. . .
“Any destruction by the occupying Power of real or
personal property belonging individually or collectively to

25, As the dust of battle has settled, we now have full
knowledge of the dimensions of this latest Israel aggression.
3

private persons, or to the State, or to other public
authorities, or to social or co-operative organizations, is
prohibited, except where such destruction is rendered
absolutely necessaryby military operations”.’
29. The razing to the ground of entire Arab villages on the
west bank of Jordan in the Golan heights, in the Gaza Strip
and in other United Arab Republic-occupied territory and
the destruction of houses in Jerusalem as reprisals against
acts of resistance are violations of these conventions. All of
us remember the cynicism with which the so-called Mayor
of Jerusalem quarrelled with General Dayan because he did
not inform him in advance that he was going to destroy the
Arab homes-not because he destroyed those homes. The
perpetrators of these acts could be prosecuted regardless of
whether they were carrying out orders given to them by
their superiors or whether they were implementing injunctions from their Government to share their crime.

Nine months later the Security Council and the General
Assembly were dealing with the problem Of Israel occupation of an area in the Arab lands three times the size of
Israel.
33. The representative of Jordan mentioned

which was denounced by the Israel authorities two days,
later after they signed it. It is important to,pay attention to
this fact because it shows clearly the deep-rootedness of
Israel expansionism and aggression. We are informed by the
Conciliation Commission for Palestine, in its third progress
report of 21 June 1949, that Israel demanded that the
international frontiers of Mandatory Palestine be considered the frontiers of Israel, and that “it could not accept
a certain proportionate distribution of territory agreed
upon in 1947 as a criterion for a territorial settlement in
present circumstances”.2 The same story is being repeated
now, almost twenty-eight years later, when Israel again is
asking for rectification of the borders.

“It seems urgent for us to remind world opinion that a
powerful current should be started that would gather
enough momentum to put an end to a situation which
ultimately would mean the end of Israel. For the longer
the methods of occupation now practised by the Israelis
last, the more resistance there will be against the
occupying Power and the more the latter will tend to
commit excesseswhich will in turn increase the hatred of
those under occupation.”

34, The most revealing commentaries on the real intentions of Israel come from the Israel leaders themselves,
Abba Eban himself, after the Israel war, stated in the Wad
Street Journal of 10 January 1968 that “Israel would not
‘squander’ the fruits of its military victory . . , the old
Arab-Israel frontiers had been irrevocably erased by the
June war”.

But to the Zionist Israelis these atrocities are part and
parcel of their version of the final liquidation of the Arab
problem.

35. Galili, Minister without Portfolio in the Israel Cabinet,
declared: “We must take steps leading to a long-range
consolidation, lest we be considered a temporary, transient
factor in the occupied areas.”

31. Secondly, it is an implementation of Israel’s continuous, unceasing quest for Lebensraum and a consolidation of its conquests. One has only to turn any page of the
last twenty years of the tragic history of Palestine and the
Arab world to find a variety of adequate illustrations. My
country, Syria, was one of the victims of the Israel
blitzkrieg of 5 June 1967. Early in that year, indeed very
early in that year, on 10 January 1967, I addressed a letter
to the President of the Security Council, the first paragraph
of which reads:
“ . . . I have the honour to draw your urgent attention
to the grave deterioration along the armistice demarcation
lines as a result of the reactivation by Israel authorities of
a dual aim: first, to increase tension in such a way as to
make a subsequent large-scale aggression against Syria
look like a logical outcome of this tension, and second, to
seal the fate of the demilitarized zone, liquidate the Arab
rights in the tiny remaining portions of the zone, thus
expanding further the scope of illegal occupation”.

36. Yigal Allon, the Minister of Labour, said bluntly:
“The natural border of the country is the Jordan River.”
37. Menachem Begin, the hero of Deir Yassin, said: “The
return of even one bit of earth to the Arabs would be a
betrayal of the nation.” And the recently established
Movement for a Greater Israel contends that “it would be
as wrong to give up the occupied areas as it would be to
give up Israel itself.”
38. Upon the visit of Eshkol to the United States, 130
rabbis signed a letter, published at full-page length in rile
NW York Times, asking Israel never to cede the occupied
territories because they had been “liberated’‘-that
was
their term,

[S/ 76 73.1

39. The word “terrorist” occurred more than once in the
debate yesterday, and I feel duty bound, as have my Arab
colleagues who have preceded me to this table, to bring my
own clarification to the issue. If the word is used to
describe the Arab people of Palestine, who have become a
nation in exile, or the Arabs under the yoke of Israel

days later, on 12 January 1967, The Jerusalem
Post reported:
TWO

“Mr. S. Z. Shragai, head of the Jewish Agency
Immigration Department, told the Zionist Leaders yester1 GenevaConvention relative to the protection of civilian persons
in time of war of 12 August 1949. See United Nations, Treaty

2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session,
Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, Vol. II, document A/927,
para. 33.

Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973, pp. 310 and 322.

4
I

yesterday

[1401st meeting] the Lausanne Protocol of 12 May 1949!,

30. The French newspaper Ze IMo&e, commenting on
these acts in an article which appeared on 8 February 1968,
wrote:

32.

day morning that %-tragedy
of our generation and1
of Zionism is that despite the fact that “part” of the land
of Israel has been returned to the Jewish people as aI
sovereign State, we have not yet succeeded in bringing the
people back to the State’.”

occupation, then the description contradicts the references
to the Arab refugees as the term has so far been used by the
highest United Nations officials and in United Nations
resolutions, Thus, the Secretary-General, in the introduction to his annual report submitted to the twenty-second
session of the General Assembly, says: “people everywhere,
and this certainly applies to the Palestinian refugees, have a
natural right to be in their homeland and to have a
future”.3 The recognition is very clear here that we are in
this case dealing with the problem of a people who have a
natural right and who have a right to their homeland.

the Palmach, the Irgun Zvai Leumi, the Lehi. A second
important book is The Revolt; Story of the Irgun, by
Menachem Begin, the hero of Deir Yassin, as I mentioned.
This book was published in I951 and contains a clear-cut
refutation of what the Israeli alleged yesterday when he
said: “The world knows who started the 1948
war . . . against Israel.” /1402nd meeting, para. 175.1 Begin, in his own writing, stated:
“At the end of January, 1948, at a meeting of the
Command of the Irgun in which the Planning Section
participated, we outlined four strategic objectives:
(I) Jerusalem; (2) Jaffa; (3) the Lydda-Ramleh plain; and
(4) the TrIangle.“6

40. United Nations resolutions dealing with the problem
of the Arab refugees from 1948 up to the present time have
dealt with the rights of the Arab refugees and have affirmed
and reaffirmed them in eighteen or nineteen resolutions
that have been flouted and disregarded by the Israel Zionist
authorities.

Further on, the author’s own words describe how he gave
the orders to his storm-troops to invade Jaffa, which was in
the Arab state-to-be:
“Men,of the Irgun! We are going out to conquer Jaffa.
We are going into one of the decisive battles for the
independence of Israel.“’

41, Furthermore, according to the records of the Mandatory Power submitted to the United Nations in 1947, the
Arabs owned, when the United Nations looked into the
Palestine problem, 95.4 per cent of the total area of
Palestine under the Mandate, and the Jews owned 4.6 per
cent. The Arabs are still the legal owners of their lands and
property to which they hold legal title, while the Israelis live
on the stolen property of Arab Palestinians. The rules of
war in international law which deal with occupation by
conquerors do not sanction this state of affairs, and the
Arabs of Palestine for twenty years have never ceded their
inalienable rights or accepted the conquest as a fait
accompli.
And more generally, within the context of the
United Nations, colonialism and conquest have been deFlared as wars against humanity; and the conquest by the
Israelis of Arab territories is such a colonial action,

45. All this was before any Arab army had entered
Palestine to savethe Arab people who were being butchered
and massacred.
46. Such is the situation with which the Arabs have been
faced, a partial manifestation of which was the wanton,
cowardly attack on Jordan of two days ago, the subject of
the complaint into which the Security Council is looking
now.
47. Again we come to the Council to ask for justice in this
house of all nations. Certainly, in this moment of anxiety
and concern for all the Arab States, the Arabs may be
understood if they have pleaded and continued to plead for
their claimed rights. Furthermore, we can expect to make
our plea in an environment of understanding for the great
issues of the world-war and peace, equity, and the world’s
faltering steps towards international law and under such
law. Israel’s massive, premeditated attack on Jordan constitutes a flagrant violation of the law of civilized nations, a
violation which necessitatesnot only condemnation in the
clearest terms but action based on the fact that no other
Member State of the United Nations has been condemned
by the Security Council and the General Assembly as much
as Israel has been, It is high time, therefore, that the
aggressor should be given his real name and condemned,
and that the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter
should be invoked. The world has been shocked by the
attack on Jordan, and the Security Council is called upon
now to face the situation and not to equate the aggressor
with the victim of aggression, as we have seen or heard
some members do. The responsibility of the United Nations
and of the Security Council can hardly be exaggerated, and
the international community is called upon to assume its
full responsibility vis-a-visthis dangerous situation.

42. Nations of the world have been called upon to support
the freedom fighters. Those who are resisting occupation in
their own homelands are doing the right thing, doing what
ought to be done.
43. The Arabs were driven out of Palestine by terror and
massacre. Hence the necessity to inquire about the real
identity of the terrorists in Arab lands and those who
introduce terrorism and underground movements. In doing
so, I refer to the British Command Paper No. 6873 of 24
July 1946, entitled Statement of Information Relating to
Acts of Violence4, meaning Jewish violence in Palestine,
which established the very organic relationship between the
Zionist underground movement and the leaders of the
Jewish Agency, at that time Ben-Gurion, Moshe Sharett and
others of the world Zionist organization-the same Jewish
Agency which last night, in New York, under the protection of United States laws, was collecting millions of dollars
for the criminals of Israel.
44. Furthermore, we have writings by Zionists and leaders
of the underground movement. I refer to a book, unique of
its kind in any literature of the world, entitled Memoirs of
nrzAssassirz;Confessionsof a Stern GangKiller, by Avner.’
He gives us the names of the organizations: the Haganah,

48. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel.
49. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As I listened yesterday and
today to the messengersof hate, murder and terror, I could

3 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement
No. IA, para.49.
4 London, His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1946.
5 New York, T. Yoseloff, 1959.

6 New York, Schuman, 1951, p. 348.
1 Ibid., p. 354.

5

not but recall an ancient Hebrew saying: “On three things
stands the world: truth, justice and peace.” There was
neither truth, nor justice, nor peace in the statements of the
Arab representatives defending continued warfare against
Israel and denying Israel the right to defend itself. As the
tirades of abuse and vilification went on and on, I could not
but ask myself: Who are the representatives that come
before the Security Council to fling around accusations, to
wave articles of the United Nations Charter, to cry out for
censure of defensive action? What are the credentials of
those representatives? Who is it that they represent? What
policies do they personify?
50. First, there was the representative of the United Arab
Republic who appeared before the Council last night as if
he and his country were innocent bystanders in the tragedy
of war imposed by the Arab States on the Middle East since
1948. In fact, Egypt comes before the Security Council
with its hands soaked in blood, the blood of those who died
on the battlefield because Egypt insists on waging war; the
blood of the innocents murdered by terrorist gangs; the
blood of the defenceless Egyptian Jews still lingering in
concentration camps, still subjected to acts of bestiality and
inhuman torture.
5 1. Twenty years ago, Egypt launched war against Israel in
defiance of the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutions adopted by its organs. For twenty years Egypt
has refused to make peace with Israel. It has been the leader
in the sinister coalition of States bent on denying Israel its
right to exist. Last May it was Egypt that mustered its
forces and called on other Arab States to open the final
assault against the Jewish State. No Government is more
responsible for the events of last June than the Government
of the United Arab Republic.

55. Even more amazing is the appearance before this orgar
of the Permanent Representative of Syria-Syria WhiCt
rejected
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, Syria which refused to receive Ambas’
sador Jarring, Syria which imposes suffering and afflictiorl
and sadism on the Jewish communities remaining within it!’
frontiers, Syria which does not SLOW any qualms irl
procl~~llg
that despite the Charter of the United Nations,
&spite its international obligations, it will perSiSt
in Waging1
war against Israel.
56. The Foreign Minister of Syria declared only a feu,
days ago, on 18 March: “The only way is the way of force
and armed struggle,” The Syrian Press and Government
radio are proclaiming incessantly Syria’s support for tep
rorist warfare against Israel. On the 13th of this month,,
Radio Damascus declared: “The fidaveen activities are the
concrete fulfilme,nt of the slogan of popular war.” On 6
March, the Prime Minister of Syria said: “The terror will
continue.”
57. Then there was the Permanent Representative of Iraq
abusing the intelligence of members of the Security Council
by reading to us an Iraqi version of Jewish history as taught
in Baghdad, He carefully avoided, however, any reference
to the history of Iraq’s responsibility for the Middle East
war. He did not tell us how Iraqi forces joined in the war of
aggression in 1948, refused to negotiate an armistice,
continued to wage warfare for two decades, joined in the
June fighting, and then did not accept the cease-fire called
for by the Security Council. Nor did he tell the Security
Council how the Iraqi forces remain till now on Jordanian
territory, actively assisting in the organization, training and
dispatch of marauder units against Israel.
58. It is not by accident that these countries have joined
hands to complain about Israel’s defensive action against
terrorist raids. They are not only partners in the twentyyear war of aggression against Israel: they have ranged
themselves fully behind the campaign of terror and sabotage unleashed against my country and my people.

52. Yesterday, the representative of the United Arab
Republic made it clear again that his Government will not
alter its policies. What the representative of the United
Arab Republic is in fact suggesting to the Security Council
is that it should give sanction to the continued belligerency
pursued by the Arab States, to their disregard of international law, to their defiance of the United Nations
Charter, to warfare by raid, sabotage and murder. In this he
is echoing what is already known from public pronouncements of his Government.

59. It was in Cairo on 20 January 1968 that the terrorist
organizations were united under a central command. It is
from Egypt and Syria that many of the raiders come to join
the training camps on Jordanian territory. The character of
the sabotage forces, their organization, resources, location
and objectives have been known to the Israel defence
authorities. The existence of those bases and their activities
have been common and public knowledge in Jordan.
Members of the terrorist bands have moved freely throughout the country, armed and frequently in uniform, Their
commanders have identified themselves readily and have
given interviews to local and foreign journalists,

53. In an address on 13 March 1968, President Nasser
declared: “We should not rely on a political solution. What
wastaken by force must be returned by force,”
54. On 17 March 1968, the Government radio station,
Voice of the Arabs, broadcast from Cairo:
“The real problem of Palestine is Israel’s existence
there. AS long as there is Zionist existence even in a small
part of the land the occupation continues, The important
thing is to eliminate the Israel occupation, and there is no
difference between territories conquered recently and
those occupied in the past.”

60. The Jordanian authorities knew perfectly well what
was going on. They cannot now shirk responsibility, despite
the efforts made in this Council by the representative of
Jordan. When the Israel units which took part in yesterday’s action crossed the Jordan, they knew precisely where
to find the saboteur bases and who the raiders were. When
they found them, they were faced with men fully armed,
and those were the only ones they engaged, Every effort
wasmade not to harm anyone else.

On 17 March, Radio Cairo reiterated: “There will be no
peace.” And this morning again, the official Egyptian daily
Al Ahrum writes: “ Terrorist raids will increase, Egypt will
determine the time for attack.”
6

not enjoy the support of the local population. They act
contrary to the interests of the local population.

61, The following is a preliminary report of what the
Israel forces found yesterday on the east bank of the
Jordan. It has been proved beyond doubt that Karameh had
ceased to be a civilian settlement and had been transformed
into one huge terrorist base. There are hardly any civilians
in it. The civilian population had evacuated it because the
presence of the saboteurs made normal civilian life impossible. Israel forces found there nine separate centres,
including two headquarters units, a training base, four
subsidiary bases, a supply base and personnel encampments.
Extremely large quantities of arms and ammunition were
found; they numbered several thousand pieces, including
mortars, machine-guns, bazookas, rifles, submachine-guns,
ammunition, tons of explosives and many different kinds of
mines.

71. Indeed, the terrorists’ operations from across the
cease-fire lines were directed to a considerable extent
against Arab inhabitants who had refused to co-operate
with them. In fact, it was the opposition of the local
population to terrorist activities that waslargely responsible
for the establishment of bases and training camps not in
areas under Israel control but in neighbouring countries,
and especially in Jordan,
72. The local population, the local Arab population,
dissociates itself from these intruders and desires only one
thing: to live at peace with its neighbours.
73. The picture which some of the Arab representatives
try to paint here of the situation in the areas under Israel
jurisdiction is completely contrary to the facts. I have
refuted their allegations repeatedly. Allow me to quote
from an article by the Foreign Editor of the Finnrzcial
Times of London, Mr. J. D. E. Jones, which appeared in
that newspaper’sissue of 28 February 1968:

62. It is now established that the chief command of
El-Fatah has been transferred from Syria to Karameh. It has
been established that Yassir Arafat, otherwise known as
Abu Amar, the El-Fatah leader, was present in the
headquarters in Karameh and fled as the battle commenced,
63. A base of the Palestine Liberation Organization was
also found there. It too contained large quantities of arms
and explosives. Underground bunkers organized on a war
footing were found. The whole place was under the
complete control of the terrorists, who also maintained
there a prison into which young men who refused to join
their ranks were thrown.

“ . . . the fact remains that for the first time ever the
Arabs are travelling in large numbers to and fro between
Israel and Arab territory.
“ . * . It is a development arguably more important than
any of the other aspectsof the Middle East situation,

64. The few civilian inhabitants who remained were forced
to pay dues to El-Fatah. Among the documents which were
found were leave passesof Iraqi Regiment No. 421. Among
those who were detained were persons who had been
trained in Egypt.

“Some 30,000 people have already taken advantage bf
this, and presumably they can and do report to the east
bank that they are not being slaughtered by the Israelis,
that the west bank is prospering agriculturally, that the
El-Fatah terrorists are making no serious impact on the
life of the west bank.”

65. It is also known for certain that some of the El-Fatal1
commanders received their military training in Communist
China, among them, William Nasser, who is now under
arrest in Israel for his part in the Abu Gosh murder of a
Druse watchman.

74. The Mayor of Hebron, Sheik Muhammed Ali Jabari,
an appointee of the Jordanian Government;now called by
King Hussein for consultations with him in Amman, stated
at a public gathering of Arab notables from the west bank:

66. It is established that the number of members of the
terrorist organization in the Karameh area was approximately 1,000.

“I swear by Allah that no Israel soldiers harmed any of
our residents. Before the war began, we expected a
mutual slaughter between our people and the Israel
Army. You can imagine how pleasant wasour surprise on
8 June when we discovered that the victorious army was a
well-organized, disciplined body like the armies of the
West. Since that great day our attitude towards Israel has
changed, and we co-operate in an attempt td solve once
and for all the painful and complicated Palestine problem.”

67. Interrogated persons admitted that they had planned
to perpetrate at the end of this month penetrations on a
local scale directed at military and civilian objectives,
including hospitals.
68. The terrorists engaged our forces severely. There was
much sniping and bomb-throwing from the houses, Many of
the Persons we have detained have admitted to active
membership in these terrorist organizations.

7.5. As I have already pointed out, we can understand that
this situation may not be to the liking of some Arab
Governments. After all, for twenty years they have fed the
Arab inhabitants with hate and war propaganda, inciting
them to violence, enmity and destruction. Now, to their
surprise and disappointment, they see that Jew and Arab
can live side by side in peace and work together for the
good and welfare of their peoples and the entire region.

69. In the southern sector the picture was similar, though
on a smaller scale. There too the El-Fatah members put up
a strong resistance. Arms, explosives and documents were
found.
70. These are not local inhabitants of the west bank or the
Gaza area, as some of the Arab representatives here have
tried to suggest. These are trained military marauders sent
in from the outside to kill, to mine and to destroy, They do

76. The Israel-Arab conflict is not a conflict between the
Israel and Arab peoples. It is a conflict between those Arab
7

Governments and those Arab leaders who believe that war
and military adventurism means strength. They delude
themselves. Let them consider the lessons of the last two
decades. Let them ask their peoples, those who demonstrate in Cairo and Halwan, those in the towns and villages
of Jordan’s east bank. Let them ask the people of Hebron
and Jericho and Gaza. Let them ask the soldiers in their
armies. Do they want peace or war? Do they want the
continuation of bloodshed to please irrespbnsible leaders,
or do they pray for the bliss and security of peace.

a third of your membership has no diplomatic relatiollc
with us and identifies itself fully with the Arab position; we
have come to you despite our misgivings and our forebodings in the hope that this time we shall find the Couucil
considerate of our grievances, attentive to the mortal
dangers confronting US. We hope that this time we will not
be turned away from this organ. Much Jewish blood has
been spilled. The people of Israel, and indeed the world, are
still waiting to hear what the Security Council has to say
about it.

77. Yesterday morning, Mr. President, I requested you to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council to seek
relief from the campaign of raids, murder and sabotage
carried out against Israel from Jordanian territory. I also
informed you of the measures Israel wascompelled to take
against the bases and training centres of the raiders. No
distortions, no name-calling, in whatever language, will
change the character of these measures nor the gravity of
the warfare that made them necessary. It is this warfare
that is the central factor in the situation of tension and
danger prevailing in the area. It is this warfare by bomb, by
dynamite, by mine, it is this warfare by stealth and
murderous stratagem that we ask the Security Council to
help terminate.

79. Our complaint brought before you yesterday is simple,
as is our request to the Security Council to act on this
complaint. We urge the Council not to remain silent on the
sanguinary campaign of raids, murder and sabotage to
which my people are being subjected. We ask the Council to
raise its voice to condemn warfare by whatever means, We
come to the Council seeking the Council’s help to put an
end to bloodshed and to move forward to peace and
security, the only salvation for the nations in the Middle
East.
80. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Following
consultations that I have just held, and with the consent of
the Council, I propose to adjourn this meeting now and
reconvene it this afternoon at 4 o’clock.

78. We have come to you despite our experience in this
organ in the past; we have come to you despite the fact that

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

8

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications,may
the world.
Consult
your bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT
Les

SE PROCURER

publications

des

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations

Unies

DES NATIONS

son!

d&positaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventes, New York

KAK
kl~I111llJl

flOJlY’iMTb

MJflAHMfi

OpnIlll;laI[IIII

en

vente

dons

les

aupr&s
de votre
ov Gen(tve.

OPrAHil3AlJMM

O~ZC~IIIIC~IIII,IS

UNIES
librairies

libroirie

06bEAMHEHHblX

IIa1(11ii

~lOiIiII0

IiylIlITb

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todos
portes
Ventas,

Litho in U.N.

Nueva

del

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

de Ias Naciones
Unidas
estbn
mundo.
Consulte
a IV librero

en venta
o diri/ase

les

agences
6:

HAlJMfi

n IiIlII;tilIl~lY

RWIITI'TIIBS
110 Dc'CL p"l0lliU
Mpl.
IIanO~IlTC
Cllpanlill
06 Il3~allllJlS
Mal'%lIlllC
11311 IIlIIlIIlTC
II0 a~l,CCJ':
O~lRUIIl3IlI[IlJI
O6ZC~IllICIllII>IX
IIpo~aiIiO
na~amir, HIdO-TlOpIi
mli >KOllena.
COMO

et

ou adressez-vous

~Ia~a3lIllaX

II

II IlalllCM
I~llllilillOY
IIal\llii,
CCBI~IIJl
110

UNIDAS
en librerfas
y cosos distribuidoras
o: Naciones
Unidos,
Secci6n

de

York o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

12S48-March

1970-21100

1
t
