S/PV.8721

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8721st meeting

Wednesday, 12 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Goffin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Volmer
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Siregar
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Integrating child protection into peace processes
Letter dated 5 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/97)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03616 (E)
*2003616*

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2020/3.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.

Children and armed conflict
Integrating child protection into peace
processes
Letter dated 5 February 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/97)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
welcome the presence of Their Majesties the King and
Queen of the Belgians.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and Ms. Jo Becker, Chair of the Advisory
Board of Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict.
Mr. Chergui is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2020/97, which contains the text
of a letter dated 5 February 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I will refrain from reading out the text
aloud, but would note that in this statement the Security
Council, among other things, welcomes the development
of the United Nations guidance on child protection in
peace processes, encourages the Secretary-General to
disseminate the guidance and promote its use in United
Nations peace and mediation processes, and encourages
all the relevant actors involved in peace and mediation
processes to use the practical guidance as a tool. I thank
the Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement.
2/19

12/02/2020

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): On this
International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers,
I am pleased to join the members of the Security
Council to present the United Nations guidance for
mediators, aimed at better protecting children in armed
conflict. Simply put, children should never be involved
in conflict. And yet, as Graça Machel stated in her
landmark 1996 report,
[m]illions of children are caught up in conflicts
in which they are not merely bystanders, but targets.
(A/51/306, para. 1)
Children under the age of 18 make up more than half
of the population in countries affected by war. Unable
to protect themselves against its impact, those children
are among the most vulnerable people. Approximately
250 million children live in countries impacted by
a conflict. In 2018, more than 12,000 children were
killed or maimed in conflict, the highest number since
1996, when the General Assembly created the post
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. More than 24,000
cases of violence have been documented and verified,
compared to 21,000 in 2017. Attacks on hospitals and
schools deprive children of vital education, treatment
and emergency care and force families to leave their
homes. In war zones, children are often subjected to
atrocities, including sexual violence and abduction.
Some are trained to handle deadly weapons or are used
as cooks or messengers. Such violence has long-lasting
traumatic effects on children and the communities and
societies of which they are a part. It fuels the resentment
and frustrations that lead to extremism, creating a
vicious cycle of tension and violence.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Council for its systematic engagement
on this issue in several resolutions over the past 21 years.
We have made some progress in raising awareness of
violations, partly due to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established by the Council in 2005. The
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

statistics that the mechanism has yielded are incomplete,
but they paint a damning picture and raise questions of
responsibility and compliance. Over time, they have the
power to change behaviours, prevent grave violations
and protect children. My Special Representative is
working to improve the protection of children, from
the Central African Republic to Myanmar and Yemen
and everywhere else in the world. South Sudan is an
example of how the protection of children can bring
parties to conflict together and build confidence
and peace. Parties to the peace agreement signed the
Comprehensive Action Plan to End and Prevent All
Grave Violations Against Children with the United
Nations, in the presence of my Special Representative
in Juba last week. It comes at a crucial moment for
South Sudan and has the potential to build confidence
between the parties in the context of a peace process
that, as members know, is facing many obstacles.
Elsewhere, 12 parties to conflict have been removed
from the list of those responsible for violations after
complying with their commitments under an action
plan. Sustained advocacy has led to changes in the law
and better cooperation with Government departments
and the military. In Afghanistan, for example, child
protection units have been established in every province
and the recruitment and use of children has been made
a criminal offence. Campaigns, including Children,
Not Soldiers and the new ACT to Protect Children
Affected by Conflict, have helped to bring about a
global consensus that children should never be used in
conflict. However, despite those efforts, the figures on
grave violations against children in conflict continue
to rise. Greater awareness and better monitoring do not
account for that increase. It is the result of ongoing and
worsening hostilities and the shameful disregard for
civilian lives. We must all do more.
The practical guidance for mediators that we are
launching today is the next step in our strategy to put
children at the heart of protection, peacebuilding and
prevention efforts. It recognizes that the children’s
needs and rights must be considered in all phases of
conflict, from prevention efforts to mediation and
recovery, through sustainable inclusive development.
The guidance is based on principles that outlaw
discrimination and put children’s interests first. It
provides the means for mediators and negotiators to
conduct a children’s rights-based analysis of conflict
and welcomes the involvement and participation of
children with the appropriate support. By integrating

S/PV. 8721

specific measures to protect children in peace processes,
we can achieve concrete results for children and for
peace. When the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo ended the recruitment
and use of children, it helped to build confidence and
create momentum to move the peace process forward.
I thank all those who were involved in developing
the guidance, especially my Special Representative,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace
Operations, UNICEF and other stakeholders that have
direct experience in the fields of mediation and child
protection in civil society. I strongly encourage all
Member States, regional and subregional organizations,
mediators and other actors involved in peace processes
to make full use of the guidance and to circulate it widely
to achieve the greatest possible impacts. However, as
important as this guidance is, it is not enough. I urge
all Member States to take concrete actions to prioritize
the protection of children affected by conflict at the
national, regional and global levels, and my Special
Representative stands ready to support all Member
States in those efforts and, in particular, is doing so at
the present moment in Mali, Syria and Yemen.
Last September, I stood on the north lawn of
the United Nations complex and looked around at
3,758 backpacks that had been laid out by UNICEF
colleagues to resemble a graveyard. Each backpack
represented a child killed in conflict in 2018. Standing
in the cemetery of dreams was devastating, and I am
sure that many here experienced it for themselves. It
is our fundamental duty as leaders to do everything in
our power to protect children — our future — from the
chaos and madness of wars that have nothing to do with
them. Together we are beginning to make progress, but
we need to continue on that path, and I urge members
to make it a priority for the Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Sir, and the Belgian presidency for including
this important issue in our discussions. I would like
to underline the exceptional nature of the address
by His Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians,
to the Security Council today. I know how great his
commitment is to young people in general and to young
people in fragile situations in particular. Reconciliation

20-036163/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

processes in conflict-affected societies are of particular
interest to him, and we agree. His statement in this
Chamber will raise the profile of the noble cause of the
protection of children in armed conflict, a topic that
Belgium, like the African Union, has long been put
on the international agenda at the United Nations but,
above all, through His Majesty the King’s support for
UNICEF and development cooperation.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the
commitment shown by Her Majesty Queen Mathilde.
As Honorary President of UNICEF-Belgium and a
Sustainable Development Goals Advocate, she has
participated in numerous humanitarian missions,
particularly on the African continent. Her Majesty
has systematically emphasized the rights of children.
I know how much the issue, particularly the question
of physical and psychosocial rehabilitation for child
victims of armed conflict, is close to her heart and I
thank her for it.
(spoke in English)
I thank the presidency for the invitation to
participate in this high-level debate on integrating child
protection provisions in peace negotiations and peace
and ceasefire agreements. Indeed, children must be at
the heart of all our efforts to prevent and resolve violent
conflict, including concrete measures to avert and
respond to all forms of abuse, neglect and exploitation.
During peace negotiations, the best interests of children
must be the first priority and no related decision should
entail any further violence for them.
Conflict disproportionately affects children,
who may become victims of forced participation in
conflict or be killed, maimed, recruited, used, sexually
exploited, trafficked or denied access to humanitarian
assistance. Schools and hospitals are attacked,
preventing children from accessing basic services,
such as education and health care, in contravention of
international law. It is imperative — in fact, integral to
sustainable peace — that violations of children’s rights
be not only prevented but addressed before, during and
after conflicts. Unaddressed violations of children’s
rights perpetuate a culture of impunity, injustice and
lawlessness that may have given rise to the conflict in
the first place and provide fertile ground for a relapse
into violent conflict.
If guns are to be sustainably silenced in Africa,
fundamental rights and liberties, including the rights
and welfare of children, must be protected through the
4/19

12/02/2020

rule of law. That is one of the principles that underpins
the African Peace and Security Architecture and the
African Union’s efforts in preventing, managing and
resolving conflicts in Africa.
Given the devastating impact of violent conflict
on children and particularly on the erosion of their
basic human rights and freedoms, it is critical that
all actors engaged in mediation and peace processes
incorporate child-protection language and provisions
in peace agreements.
It is important to highlight that our Peace and
Security Council, at its 491st meeting, held on 9 March
2015 in Addis Ababa, reiterated that the African Union
should include children’s interests in peace agreements,
in the post-violence arrangements for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and truth and
reconciliation commissions.
Over the years, the African Union and the regional
economic communities and mechanisms have invested
time and resources in ensuring that peace processes and
peace agreements systematically address and prevent
violations of children’s rights, as well as provide for the
meaningful participation of children in peacemaking
and peacebuilding efforts on the continent. There are
several concrete examples of the efforts of the African
Union and other partners in this regard, including the
2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement
for Burundi; the Sudan’s 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement; the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan; and last
year’s Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic.
In Burundi, in addition to a declaration that was
agreed in December 2008, which mandated the parties
to immediately and unconditionally release children
recruited or used, the Arusha Agreement provided
that no child shall be used directly in armed conflict
and that children shall be protected in times of armed
conflict. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement, on its
part, obliged its signatories to demobilize all children
in their ranks, and a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration commission was established to oversee
this. A provision in the 2015 South Sudan Agreement
states that the parties shall offer special consideration
to conflict-affected children and provides for a childfriendly transitional justice system. In the Central
African Republic, where I had the honour to mediate the
peace agreement, we addressed all violations against
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

children and provided a full-fledged monitoring and
verification system headed by the African Union.
While our continental organization, the African
Union, has this rich experience integrating child rights,
protection and welfare into peace processes, we are
yet to establish a standard framework or guidelines
for doing so. That is why the African Union welcomed
and participated in the high-level dialogue organized
last year by the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, in partnership with the Government of
Belgium, in Brussels, to deliberate on a draft practical
guidance on the integration of child-protection issues
in peace processes.
In this regard, in addition to our zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse in peace-support
operations, I welcome and am proud of the African
Union’s contribution to the Secretary-General’s
practical guidance for mediators to protect children in
situations of armed conflict. This will be an invaluable
tool not only for African Union mediators and special
envoys but also for African Union member States
engaged in peace processes.
Let me reiterate once again my appreciation to
Belgium and its King Philippe and Queen Mathilde for
having created this timely opportunity for all of us to
contribute to restoring precious smiles to our children’s
faces and to giving them hope for the future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Becker.
Ms. Becker: I am honoured to address the Council
today on behalf of the Watchlist of Children and
Armed Conflict, a global network of human rights and
humanitarian organizations devoted to protecting and
promoting the rights of children in armed conflict.
In 1996, when Graça Machel delivered her seminal
study on the impact of armed conflict on children (see
A/51/306), she deplored the fact that up until then, no
peace treaty had ever acknowledged the existence of
child soldiers. Without such recognition, she said, there
could be no effective planning for peace. Since then, the
Security Council has repeatedly called for the inclusion
of child protection in peace processes. But in reality,
peace agreements that address child protection are still
rare. They are the exception, not the norm.

S/PV. 8721

The Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict
conducted an analysis of ceasefire and peace agreements
to assess how well they addressed child protection. We
were pretty discouraged by the results. We looked at all
the documents in the Department of Political Affairs
peace agreements database, going back to 1999, the
year when the Security Council first took up the issue
of children and armed conflict. The documents included
peace and ceasefire agreements as well as declarations
and other communiqués.
We found that of 444 documents, fewer than 18 per
cent included child-protection provisions, and many of
those did so only in the most general way — for example,
by calling for the protection of women, children and
other vulnerable groups. This simply is not good enough.
We know that children suffer disproportionately in war;
they also benefit less in peace.
Peace processes and agreements do more than end
war. They establish a framework for transition and the
political, social and economic agenda for peace. They
establish priorities for post-conflict investment and
resource allocation. When children are excluded, their
needs and their rights become invisible. The result is
underinvestment and a lack of critical programming.
In such circumstances, we cannot be surprised if new
grievances emerge and former child soldiers take up
arms again.
Addressing the needs of conflict-affected children
in peace processes is not just a moral or a legal
imperative — it is crucial to a durable peace.
Our experiences with peace processes to date
highlight some critical gaps. Peace agreements are most
likely to address the issue of child soldiers, but they
often fail to address justice for child soldiers as victims
or accountability for the leaders who recruit them. This
failure contributes to impunity and continued cycles of
recruitment and re-recruitment.
Provisions on children associated with armed
forces or groups are sometimes too narrow, focusing
only on child combatants and failing to include
girls or those who did not bear arms. In Liberia, for
example, community groups needed to advocate after
the signing of the 2003 peace agreement to ensure that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
efforts included all affected children.
Despite the years of attention to the issue of
child soldiers, some peace agreements still fail to

20-036165/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

12/02/2020

address them at all. The 2015 Bamako Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, for example, does
not mention the issue or include children in its DDR
provisions, despite high-level advocacy by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict.

Stable and Lasting Peace. The peace agreement itself
references children dozens of times, with detailed
provisions regarding health, early-childhood education,
food security, including school feeding programmes,
and a truth, justice and reparations system mandated to
pay special attention to crimes against children.

Peace processes also fail to include channels for
child participation. In South Africa, for example, the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission found that few
children approached it to tell their stories until they
convened special hearings for children and youth. Once
organized, those hearings drew enormous input. Libya
is another missed opportunity. In 2018, more than 75
public consultations for peace were held across the
country, involving more than 7,000 Libyans. Special
consultations were held for women, for university
students and for the displaced, but none were specifically
designed to include children.

Some peace agreements have included specific
protections for schools, which are often targeted
during armed conflict or used for military purposes.
For example, the 2002 ceasefire agreement between
Sri Lanka and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
stipulated that, within 160 days, school buildings
occupied by either party would be vacated and returned
to their intended use.

Institution-building often ignores children.
Guatemala’s peace agreement, for example, included
provisions to strengthen the justice system for adults,
resulting in funding, training and monitoring. But
justice systems for children were never even considered
at the negotiating table and received no resources.
Some take the view that general provisions to benefit
the population at large will automatically trickle down
and benefit children, but our experience is that that is not
the case. We have learned that specificity is essential.
In that regard, we also have some good examples to
learn from. One of the first peace agreements to address
children was the 1999 Peace Agreement between the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front of Sierra Leone. It called for particular
attention to child soldiers, including the mobilization
of resources and their inclusion in DDR efforts. That
paved the way for the formal demobilization of nearly
7,000 children. Later studies found that the response
in Sierra Leone was far more effective and integrated
than in many other conflicts and that children who
were demobilized appeared to be doing as well as other
children in their communities.
As the Secretary-General mentioned earlier,
Colombia is a particularly good model where an
explicit agreement on the release of children under
the age of 15 by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo helped build trust
between the parties ahead of the Final Agreement for
the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a
6/19

In 2016, based on broad consultations and analysis,
Watchlist prepared a checklist for provisions related
to children and armed conflict in ceasefire and peace
agreements. The checklist inspired the United Nations
and Member States to develop the guidance that is
being launched today. Some of the key components that
we identified include the following: prioritizing child
protection in the agendas of peace talks from the very
beginning; ensuring that all parties explicitly agree to
end the six grave violations against children, including
by naming them as violations of ceasefire agreements;
including specific provisions for children associated
with armed forces or groups, including adequate
resource mobilization and inclusion in DDR processes;
including protections for education, including
agreements by parties to vacate and rehabilitate schools
that have been used for military purposes; ensuring that
children’s needs and rights are adequately addressed
and resourced in post-conflict programming, including
their physical and mental health needs, education and
vocational and economic opportunities; ensuring that
transitional justice, accountability and reparations
mechanisms specifically address violations against
children and solicit children’s views; and ensuring that
monitoring and implementation mechanisms for peace
agreements address all child protection provisions
and provide for civil society participation to promote
transparency and accountability.
We welcome the new guidance for mediators to
protect children in situations of armed conflict and
encourage the Secretary-General to ensure its broad
dissemination within the United Nations system.
Finally, the Security Council can also help ensure
child protection in peace processes. We urge the Security
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

Council to take the following steps: first, request that all
conflict analyses include an assessment of the impact
of armed conflict on children to ensure that such issues
are dealt with at the beginning of any peace effort;
secondly, ensure that country-specific resolutions on
peace processes emphasize the need for explicit and
comprehensive provisions for child protection; thirdly,
urge mediators, the United Nations, parties to conflict
and other stakeholders to ensure the meaningful
participation of affected children and that their views
are taken into account; fourthly, ensure dedicated
and adequately resourced child protection capacity in
United Nations peace operations and political missions;
fifthly, request the Secretary-General and United
Nations Special Envoys to ensure that child protection
is addressed in all reports on peace processes and the
monitoring and implementation of peace agreements;
and, lastly, as a foundation for accountability, insist
that the Secretary-General’s annual list of perpetrators
of violations against children be accurate and evidence
based, utilizing the data collected by the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict
established through resolution 1612 (2005).
We appreciate the Security Council’s attention to
this important issue.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Becker for her briefing.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Majesty
King Philippe, King of the Belgians, who will make
a statement on behalf of the Kingdom of Belgium. I
request the Protocol Officer to escort His Majesty to a
seat at the Council table.
His Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians,
was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
King Philippe (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Chergui and Ms. Becker for
their enlightening briefings and calls to action.
Thirty years ago here in New York, King Baudouin
addressed the Heads of State and Government gathered
at the World Summit for Children on the occasion of
the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. He recalled the importance of making
Governments and the public aware of the fragility and
vulnerability of children and the importance of their
family environment. Since then, the United Nations has
done impressive work to defend the cause of children
affected by armed conflict. Belgium has made that

S/PV. 8721

issue a constant priority of its foreign policy. Queen
Mathilde has been dedicated to it for many years.
The subject remains a burning issue as geopolitical
tensions have reached their boiling point since the
beginning of the century. Today, one child in five suffers
the negative impact of armed conflict throughout the
world. That statistic cannot leave us indifferent. It
represents real instances of girls and boys who are
fleeing clashes, maimed, exploited, killed, sexually
abused and recruited by armed groups — millions of
young lives injured in both body and spirt.
Saving those children requires an ongoing policy,
joint prevention and remediation efforts and the tireless
marshalling of financial and human resources. We
must help these children to recover and thrive. We must
revive their hope and help them regain their lives. By
listening to them, acknowledging their suffering and
reintegrating them into society through unrelenting
support, we will break the cycle of violence and make
lasting peace possible.
In 1999, the Security Council adopted resolution
1261 (1999), the first of its kind on the situation of
children in conflict. Since then, the Council has
continuously called for peace processes to incorporate,
from the outset, essential elements for the protection
of children’s rights. In several peace negotiations,
the protection of children has received meaningful
attention, which is to be welcomed, but inclusive
processes remain the exception. Too often, the plight
of children remains neglected. Their voices, rights
and needs are hardly taken into account. We need to
do much better. The future of societies affected by
hostilities is at stake. Experience shows that, at times,
parties to conflict can agree more easily on measures
to assist children than on other issues. That focus on
children can build trust. A child protection agreement
can serve as a springboard and catalyst for broader
agreements. It is with that in mind that the guidelines
on the protection of children in negotiations and peace
processes have been developed. Their integration into
peace negotiations will lead to concrete improvements
in the lives of children affected by conflict.
Belgium is deeply committed to multilateralism
and the United Nations. My country is committed to
defending, not its own interests, but the fundamental
values that inspire the Charter of the United Nations
and form the basis of decent societies. That sincere
conviction is reflected in our contribution to the

20-036167/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

work of the United Nations — in the participation of
Belgian soldiers in peacekeeping operations and in
our investment in all organs of the United Nations,
including the Security Council. It is also reflected in
the concern that brings us together today.
Every child has the right to grow up in a home
and in a safe environment and to receive quality
education. Every time we save a child from war, help
her rebuild or return her to school, those dreams
are again made possible. It is a lifelong victory. We
facilitate reconciliation and, perhaps, even prevent the
emergence of another conflict. That is the responsibility
we all shoulder. The year 2019 marked the end of a
very challenging decade for children in conflict zones.
It is up to us all to ensure — with just and concrete
measures — that 2020 marks the start of a decade of
hope for all children.
The President (spoke in French): I thank His
Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians, for
his statement.
His Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians,
was escorted from the Security Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to those other members of the Security Council
who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Siregar (Indonesia): At the outset, I am
honoured to warmly welcome Their Majesties the King
and Queen of the Belgians, together with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, on the occasion of their
official visit to the United Nations.
I am equally honoured to welcome the Deputy
Foreign Minister of Estonia.
I would like to extend my appreciation to Belgium
for organizing today’s briefing. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
We welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2020/3, initiated by Belgium earlier today.
Today’s briefing is timely. We witness children
still bearing the brunt of protracted conflicts all over
the world. There are more than 24,000 grave violations
against children in 20 country situations. Those
numbers are testament that today’s agenda item remains
a concern for all of us here.
8/19

12/02/2020

My country has not turned and will not turn a
blind eye to the needs of protecting children in armed
conflict situations. Much has been done, but there
are challenges ahead in ensuring child-rights-based
protection in armed conflicts. In that context, let me
underline three points for us in building pathways for
child protection measures.
First, we must materialize our normative
commitments into actions. We do not start from
zero. Most of us here in the Council are parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. They laid normative foundations for our actions
in child protection. The Council adopted resolution
2427 (2018), recognizing that child protection has to be
specifically integrated into all peace processes, with
strong emphasis on the best interests of children.
In that spirit, Indonesia has always been committed
to implementing those normative foundations on the
ground. Our peacekeepers, for example, consistently
conduct child protection mandates within civil-military
coordination activities by providing health care for
children and their mothers and engaging children
through sports, education and other social activities.
True action speaks louder than words.
Secondly, child protection has to be addressed
comprehensively. Child protection in armed conflicts
should encompass all phases of conflicts, from
preventing the six grave violations against children
in armed conflict and breaking the cycle of child
soldiers to advancing family- and community-based
reintegration. That full cycle of comprehensive child
protection measures has been integrated into United
Nations peacekeeping mandates on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Having the largest child-protection section in any
United Nations peacekeeping mission, Indonesian
peacekeepers in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) have been actively engaged
in conducting interventions to separate children
from armed groups, including their repatriation, and
preventing violations and abuses against children.
Lessons from MONUSCO should also be replicated in
all peacekeeping missions.
Thirdly, enhancing support on child protection
measures is vital. Countries are not all on the same page
in providing protection measures for children in armed
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

conflicts. International cooperation and the sharing of
best practices in that area are necessary. All parties
involved in a peace process should develop capacity,
sensitivity and awareness to the needs of children. That
includes parties to conflicts, mediators, negotiators,
child advisers and humanitarian actors. On that note,
we welcome the launching of practical guidance for
mediators to protect children in situations of armed
conflict. The guidance would serve as an excellent
tool to ensure child protection in peace processes.
Indonesia looks forward to cooperating with other
Member States to ensure better protection for children
in armed conflicts.
Children are not soldiers. Children are our future.
By ensuring children of their rights, we have invested in
creating future peacebuilders and development drivers.
By doing so, we invest in long and durable peace.
Mr. Volmer (Estonia): We thank Belgium for
organizing today’s meeting and all briefers for
their excellent presentations. We also express our
appreciation for the role Belgium plays in strengthening
the protection of children in armed conflict, including
through its leadership of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
The Security Council has repeatedly condemned
the widespread violations and abuses committed
against children in armed conflict. Over the past two
decades, that has been accompanied by the Council’s
increasing and systematic engagement on the issue of
the protection of children in armed conflict, including
a clear recognition that child protection needs to be
integrated into all peace processes. We are very grateful
to Ms. Becker for the overview of the situation.
We strongly support this objective, but we have to
agree that gaps remain in its translation into action. In
peace processes child protection issues continue to be
addressed on an ad hoc basis, with children’s rights,
specific needs and concerns insufficiently addressed.
We therefore thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and all other contributors for the preparation of the
practical guidance to protect children in situations
of armed conflict. We see the guidance as a valuable
addition to the instruments at our disposal, providing
a systematized compilation of practical and concrete
guidelines, including examples of best practices. We
welcome the fact that the guidance is firmly based on
international humanitarian and human rights law. We

S/PV. 8721

also emphasize that the integration of child protection
into peace processes needs to be gender-sensitive and
take into account the needs of girls and boys.
Given the wide array of parties involved in peace
processes, we appreciate that the guidance can be
adjusted and drawn upon by various actors, including the
United Nations system, regional and local organizations,
and civil society. It is now equally important to ensure
that the guidance is widely disseminated and integrated
into ongoing and future peace processes. Estonia will
contribute to that effort.
As noted in the guidance, we need to ensure
accountability for all violations and abuses against
children in armed conflict. We call on all States
to exercise their criminal jurisdiction over the
perpetrators of these crimes and to make further efforts
to strengthen national and international accountability
mechanisms. We recall that, under the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, the conscripting
or enlisting of children into armed forces and sexual
violence constitute war crimes.
We affirm our continued support for the work of
the Special Representative and her Office, including
the close cooperation between her Office and UNICEF.
We also reiterate the need for the allocation of sufficient
resources for United Nations child protection activities
and the importance of child protection advisers in
political and peacekeeping missions.
If left unaddressed, the violations and abuses
committed against children in conflict have lasting
negative consequences for children, their families and
entire communities, leading to a continued cycle of
violence and injustice. We see the guidance as one of
the tools to help break this cycle.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank
Their Majesties for graciously being with the Security
Council today. It enhances the reputation of the Council
to have them here. I also want to thank them for the
amazing efforts that Belgium has long made on the
issue of children in armed conflict. I am very pleased to
be able to salute those efforts and the progress that this
important dossier has made under Belgian leadership.
I also wish to welcome the ministers here today and
thank them for being with us. Finally, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General, Commissioner Chergui
and Ms. Becker for their important briefings.

20-036169/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

We have all seen and heard of the dreadful and
lasting effects that global conflicts have on children,
their communities and their future, so I will not repeat
them. Instead, I would like to highlight a couple of case
studies that really illuminate how this impact devastates
children’s lives.
In Syria, as stated in the recent report on children’s
rights by the United Nations Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
children continue to be “[r]obbed of their childhood
and forced to participate in a brutal war” (A/HRC/43/
CRP.6, p.1). They have been killed, maimed, raped,
abducted and detained. They have been forced to act as
combatants and, in the case of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), as executioners. Places where
they are meant to be safe and nurtured, such as schools
and hospitals, have been targeted.
Over 2.5 million children have been displaced in
Syria, leaving many at the mercy of the elements and
without adequate sustenance or services. And that
trend is far from over. As Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock told the Council last week (see S/PV.8715),
the bombardment of Idlib has seen the continued
killing of civilians and attacks on civilian objects, and
the displacement of more than 300,000 children in
north-eastern Syria since early December alone. And,
as the Commission of Inquiry report finds, the mental
health of children is and will continue to be deeply
affected for years to come. Children and young people
have sustained crucial damage to their long-term
prospects and a huge number have missed out on years
of education.
Turning to Mali, children continue to suffer the
effects of the ongoing conflict, particularly in central
Mali, where they are killed and maimed as direct targets
of attacks in the course of intercommunal violence.
Insecurity, attacks and threats on schools and teachers,
the absence of State authorities and a lack of equipment
have led to the closure of more than 900 schools, at the
last count. As with Syria, children are suffering both
the immediate effects of conflict and long-term effects
on their mental well-being, as well as a lack of access to
services such as medical care and attention.
In Cameroon, the impact of conflict on children
in the Anglophone region is significant. Children’s
education is used as a political bargaining chip by the
separatists, who have closed down schools and taken
children hostage. UNICEF estimates that 80 per cent of
10/19

12/02/2020

schools have remained closed since 2016, and the ban
on education has affected more than 600,000 children.
The scale of the impact of conflict on children is
clear, but when it comes to peace and efforts for peace,
their needs and their views are often neglected. That is
why we welcome the launch today of the United Nations
practical guidance for mediators to protect children in
situations of armed conflict. As the guidance points
out, the Security Council has highlighted on numerous
occasions the importance of integrating child protection
issues into mediation and peace processes. Doing so
is essential in order to ensure that negotiating parties
commit to upholding their international, regional and
national child-protection obligations; to guarantee that
the special needs of children and young people are taken
into consideration and embedded in efforts to build
and sustain peace; and to improve the sustainability
and success of peace efforts, given the central role of
children’s issues in reconciliation and development in
post-conflict situations.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s personal
investment in the guidance and we look forward to its
broad dissemination. I also take this opportunity to
urge all mediators, facilitators and negotiators involved
in peace and mediation processes to use it as a tool in
their work, noting that engaging on issues of children
and armed conflict may open doors to discussion of
other priorities.
In the Arria Formula meeting that we hosted
alongside Belgium and Poland in November, the
United Kingdom called for the United Nations system
to take a more holistic and coherent approach across
its departments and agencies to ensure that child
protection and development was integrated across the
conflict cycle. This guidance is a very good example
of that, and we hope there will be further efforts to
integrate approaches across the United Nations system.
We would like to renew our calls for children’s
views to be taken into account on issues that affect them,
in accordance with best practice, and for the Security
Council to do more to implement resolution 2282
(2016), which recognizes that security, development
and human rights are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for presenting the practical
guidance for mediators to protect children in situations
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

of armed conflict, as well as the other speakers for their
observations. I also welcome Their Majesties the King
and Queen of the Belgians. Their presence confirms
Belgium’s commitment to this issue, which has also
been demonstrated through Belgium’s extraordinary
work as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict.
We welcome the practical guidance, and commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and her team, as
well as the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and UNICEF, for preparing that document. The
provisions on the protection of children should be a
high priority in mediation processes. We are confident
that this guidance will assist us in placing children at
the heart of mediation efforts, thereby improving the
chances for sustainable peace. We therefore encourage
the Secretary-General to disseminate this guidance
with a view to promoting its use in peace and mediation
processes, and we encourage all actors involved in
those processes, including civil society, to use it as an
effective tool to channel the protection and rights of
children into peace negotiations.
The growing number of children in armed conflict
and the disproportionate way in which they are affected
is terrifying. The severity and extent of the short- and
long-term repercussions of armed conflict on children
are a source of deep concern. Nevertheless, as we
commemorate the International Day against the Use of
Child Soldiers, that tool is inspiring and encouraging.
We are aware that addressing grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict is
a sensitive issue that requires the skills necessary
to address it. That is why, although we consider the
guidance to be user-friendly and flexible, designed
with confidence-building in mind and taking into
account the context of the situation, it is also paramount
for mediators to have an expert on the issue, or a staff
member from UNICEF, the Office of the Special
Representative or a child protection adviser, on
their team.
It is essential to take into account the point of
view of children, as well as to include provisions on
their protection at an early stage in peace processes,
thereby increasing the possibility of preventing future
violations and ensuring their protection. One example
of that is the peace process in Colombia, in which the

S/PV. 8721

protection of children served as the starting point for
dialogue with the armed groups.
Peace agreements should be not only reactive
but also preventive. The protection of children must
be included as a priority in the implementation of
agreements. The sustainability and viability of peace
agreements will depend largely on that. The number of
peace agreements that make specific reference to child
protection is very low. We hope that more peace and
ceasefire agreements will include provisions pertaining
to child protection. It is a matter of making it a regular
feature of peace negotiations and agreements, as the
Security Council has explicitly requested in resolutions
on the subject.
The Dominican Republic has endorsed the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris
Commitments, and has also joined the ACT to Protect
Children Affected by Conflict campaign. The future
of children affected by the conflict is threatened when
warring parties continue to commit violations against
them and impunity remains the norm. As former
Executive Director of the Watchlist on Children and
Armed Conflict, Eva Smets, has emphasized, children
are our reason to fight for the elimination of the worst
aspects of war, but they are also our hope for success.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council: the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia.
We would like to extend a special and warm
welcome to His Majesty King Philippe, King of the
Belgians, and Queen Mathilde, who have graced us
with their presence today. We would like to pay tribute
to the sterling work that they have done in the area of
children and armed conflict.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
and thank Secretary-General António Guterres; the
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Ambassador Smaïl Chergui; and Ms. Becker,
Chair of the Advisory Board of the non-governmental
network Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, for
their insightful briefings this morning. We would also
like to welcome the presence of the Deputy Ministers
in the Chamber.
We welcome the development of the practical
guidance for mediators to better protect children
in situations of armed conflict, and commend the

20-0361611/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

Kingdom of Belgium for convening this meeting and
for the important work it is doing in its chairmanship of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We believe that the protection of children should
be addressed at all levels, including in preventive
diplomacy, the mediation of peace processes and with
regard to peacekeeping as an important part of the
mandate of the protection of civilians. It is imperative
that all concerned parties ensure that the protection,
rights and well-being of children are integrated into
peace processes, peace agreements and post conflictrecovery and reconstruction phases. That realization
on the part of warring parties and mediators can be
instrumental in fostering dialogue, building confidence
among parties and assisting in bringing immediate
and long-term benefits to children. We believe that
ending and preventing conflict-related violations
against children in armed conflict is not only a moral
imperative, but that it also contributes to building
sustainable peace.
We would like to underscore the important role
played by local communities in the integration of
children who have been affected one way or another by
armed conflict. Communities remain the first point of
contact for those children and therefore play a critical
role in contributing to and paving the way for a better
future for them. In that regard, it is imperative for
such communities to be equipped with the requisite
resources to ensure that all aspects, including child
protection, counselling and skills to handle such cases,
are made possible.
We have observed that not all resolutions regarding
the issue include the perspectives of parents and their
role as primary caregivers. In that regard, we, as the
Security Council, should consider including the concept
of the role of parents in the outcomes of the Council in
the future.
We believe that the development of integration
programmes for children who are affected by armed
conflict should take into account the perspectives of
the children themselves. It is within that context that
national and local programmes should not disregard the
experiences and voices of children; instead, those should
be used to design and develop suitable programmes for
affected children.
We recognize that in addressing grave violations
against children in armed conflict, general approaches
are often applied. It is imperative that Member States
12/19

12/02/2020

also take into account country-specific situations, which
may require tailored measures to address the issues.
The three African members of the Council are
pleased with the efforts of the AU and subregional
groups in advocating for increased focus on issues
related to children and armed conflict and prioritizing
the implementation of relevant continental protocols
and charters. The inclusion of the protection of
children against grave violations in political and
peace agreements, such as in the case of the Central
African Republic, is a significant development. Its
implementation should demonstrate the benefits of
such initiatives and will also serve as a model to be
replicated in other conflict situations. As we continue
to strengthen our efforts to silence the guns in Africa,
we acknowledge that achieving Agenda 2063: The
Africa We Want, a prosperous Africa and a better life
for African children will not be possible if wars and
conflicts are not brought to an end and if the rights of
the child are not protected.
We welcome the call for regional organizations
to increase their capacity to address the multiple
challenges brought about by the issues of children
and armed conflict. We will continue to support all
efforts throughout the conflict spectrum to address
the plight of children, who are the most vulnerable in
such situations.
The three African members of the Council would
like to conclude with a quotation by former President
Nelson Mandela, who said:
“Our children are our greatest treasure. They are
our future. Those who abuse them tear at the fabric
of our society and weaken our nation.”
That is true for all nations, because protecting the
rights of children secures a better future for them.
Every effort should be made at the national, regional
and international levels to prevent and resolve conflicts
through peaceful negotiations and mediation in order to
secure our children’s future.
The three African members of the Council welcome
and support the presidential statement presented by
Belgium (S/PRST/2020/3).
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I thank the King of the Belgians for his
participation in the Security Council today, as well
as the Belgian presidency for taking the initiative to
convene this meeting, which further demonstrates its
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

commitment to the protection of children in armed
conflict. I commend in particular Belgium’s work
as Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, as we commemorate
the fifteenth anniversary of its founding resolution
(resolution 1612 (2005)).
Since 1999, the Security Council has called on
all parties to conflicts to include the issue of child
protection in their peace negotiations. In 2007, the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles called for
the inclusion of child-specific provisions in peace and
ceasefire agreements. Despite the significant progress
that has been made in that area, the current situations
in Syria, Yemen, Myanmar, the Sahel, Afghanistan and
elsewhere are a daily reminder that much remains to
be done.
Today we welcome the official launch of the
practical guidance for mediators to protect children
in situations of armed conflict, which we have just
endorsed. We thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
all those who contributed to the development of the
practical guidance. It serves as a genuine toolbox that is
flexible and adaptable. Negotiators and mediators will
now have a compass to guide them in integrating child
protection into their work.
The guidance also illustrates what France
believes successful mediation should look like,
namely, combining short-term diplomacy to pacify
tense situations with long-term stabilization, which is
essential for sustainable peace. Child protection makes
it possible to provide for a long-term approach. We must
take care to ensure that the guidance does not become
a dead letter. All actors must take ownership of and
unequivocally support its content — it is not just child
protection specialists that are concerned here. This is a
major challenge the guidance must tackle: its principles
are well known, but not yet sufficiently disseminated
or systematized. The issue of children in conflict
needs to be mainstreamed, as we say in good French.
In that connection, I would like to make the following
three proposals.
First, Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral should be systematically made aware of the
principles of the guidance before taking office.
Secondly, they could present their actions and
priorities in this area to the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict in order to ensure that

S/PV. 8721

child protection is taken into account throughout
their mandates.
Thirdly, and finally, the issue of children in armed
conflict could be a fully-fledged axis of cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union in
the coming years.
In that regard, we cannot allow the measures put in
place by the Security Council to be paralysed in any way.
The Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism on grave
violations against children in armed conflict is more
crucial than ever, and I call upon all those concerned
to give it full effect. The Working Group in particular
should be able to adopt its conclusions on Yemen, the
Central African Republic and Afghanistan, which
were negotiated several months ago. We also renew
our call for the universal ratification of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as
well as the endorsement of the Paris Principles and
Paris Commitments.
France’s commitment to protecting children in
armed conflict situations is well known. It is a priority
that we defend at the United Nations but also on the
ground, together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF and a highly committed
civil society, represented by Ms. Becker. I commend
their indispensable work and wish to assure them of our
continued support and efforts in this area.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam would like to thank
the Belgian presidency for convening this briefing. In
particular, we express our gratitude to His Majesty
King Phillipe and Her Majesty Queen Mathilde of the
Belgians for their presence here today. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Children’s issues are always close to our heart.
Viet Nam underwent decades-long wars. Our millions
of then-children grew up in times of war and suffered
its consequences, with many losing their lives. We
left wartime behind half a century ago, but the pain of
war is still strongly felt in many parts of our country.
Paradoxically, hundreds of thousands of our children
born many years after the end of those wars are the
ones who continue to endure that pain, without even
knowing what caused it. Such situations and far more
heartbreaking ones are prevalent nowadays in many
conflict-affected areas. The tragic situation of those
millions of children is a poignant reminder of our

20-0361613/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

12/02/2020

unfulfilled promise to protect our children and build a
peaceful world for them.

bridge builders to connect national, regional and global
efforts in a coordinated manner.

The protection of children in armed conflict is
therefore the crucial work of the Security Council,
in line with its primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. It is also the obligation
of each and every of us here as a member of the
international community. It is our moral imperative to
defend our defenceless children.

Thirdly, education is the cornerstone of reintegration
programmes. With priority given to education, Viet
Nam spares no effort to ensure children’s access to
education under any circumstances. During wartime,
classes were held in any available place, be it in orchards,
communal houses or even underground shelters. Those
classrooms, though poorly made, not only helped
our children overcome harsh war conditions but also
nurtured in their hearts and minds a pure love for peace
and a fervent hope for a better future. When it comes
to reintegration programmes for children formerly
associated with armed groups, education is also the
best way for them to break obsessions of the past and
regain the childhood and future they deserve.

Commitments have been made. Our primary
focus now is to translate them into reality by taking
concrete actions. We welcome the practical guidance
for mediators to protect children in situations of armed
conflict as an outstanding example in that regard.
We commend the tremendous efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, her team and
others for their meaningful work and believe that the
practical guidance will contribute to better protection
for our children. In that connection, let me share our
observations on some of critical issues that the practical
guidance touches upon.
First, the practical guidance should be a living
document. The success stories of many countries
shared in the guidance will surely inspire many more
to come. Those moving testimonies show that, with
genuine efforts, we can make a difference to the lives
of millions of our children. In that regard, we welcome
the recent signing of the comprehensive action plan to
end and prevent all grave violations against children in
South Sudan. We encourage the continued compilation
of experiences and lessons learned to further improve
the guidance so as to make it more responsive to
rapidly changing situations. We also hope that the
guidance can be brought into full play at the national
level with customized application in order to adapt
it to the national context, while being mindful of the
specificities of each situation.
Secondly, with regard to cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it is obvious
that the latter are reliable partners of the former in the
maintenance of international peace and security in
general and the protection of children in particular.
As shown in the guidance, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development made great contributions
to facilitating the implementation of action plans to
end and prevent violations against children. Regional
organizations, through engagement with the United
Nations and their member countries, could serve as
14/19

More than 20 years has passed since our first
debate on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.3897).
Much has been achieved during those two decades,
but much more needs to be done to save millions of
children. The Security Council needs to demonstrate
its responsibility, both through words and actions.
We express our strong support for the presidential
statement that was just adopted (S/PRST/2020/3). We
look forward to its effective implementation.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We join other members in thanking the King and Queen
of the Belgians for participating in this meeting. We
welcome the Foreign Ministers of Belgium and Indonesia
and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia. We also
thank Secretary-General Guterres, Commissioner
Chergui and Ms. Becker for their briefings.
With children constituting approximately half of
the population of countries ravished by war and conflict
and an estimated half of the world’s refugee population,
remediating the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on children remains critical to the work of the
Security Council. As signatories to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with
Security Council members in endorsing the use of
child-centred, gender-aware and gender-responsive
comprehensive strategies in peace processes and postconflict settings. We welcome the production of the
adaptable practical guidance for mediators as part of
the Council’s essential child protection- and child
empowerment-related peace and development work.
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

We are well aware of the atrocities committed
against children, as chronicled in various SecretaryGeneral reports, since the emergence of the children
and armed conflict mandate, in 1996, and the Council’s
subsequent adoption of 12 resolutions, between 1999
and 2018, on all six of the grave violations against
children. However, it is worth reminding members that
in 2019, in spite of our work and that of Governments,
civil society, communities and families, the killing and
maiming of children reached a global record since the
monitoring system’s creation, in 2005. As we heard
earlier from Ms. Becker, children also suffer the worst
effects when schools and hospitals are attacked and
when humanitarian access is denied.
The rate at which children continue to be abducted,
recruited and used in active hostilities, including as
suicide bombers, has continued unabated in several
conflict-ridden regions. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines remains particularly concerned about the
recruitment and use of children. We are also deeply
troubled by the high levels of reported cases of sexual
violence against children, in particular girls, even while
sexual violence in conflict remains underreported
owing to stigma, lack of services and concerns over
the protection of victims and survivors. That problem
is exacerbated by endemic impunity and a lack of
accountability for perpetrators at the individual,
community and State levels.

S/PV. 8721

processes. We agree with the representative of Viet
Nam that it should be a living document, constantly
updated with examples of good practice.
Children represent more than 20 per cent of our
world population, but 100 per cent of our future. We
cannot sit idly by while future generations face such
uncertain prospects for life and livelihood. There can
be no greater purpose to which we commit ourselves.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Belgium for its initiative to convene
today’s meeting. We also thank His Majesty King
Philippe for his encouraging and powerful statement,
and Their Majesties for their efforts in the area of child
protection. We further thank the Secretary-General and
the briefers for their contributions to today’s discussion.
The topic of child protection is of paramount
importance to the Russian Federation. We attach great
importance to the activities of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. It
is a unique mechanism, currently headed by Belgium,
which, for 15 years now, has facilitated more effective
protection of children in conflict and has helped
ensure accountability for violations and prevent
future violence.

The Security Council has articulated frameworks
across its various mandates to address accountability
and reparation. We regard mediation as a key
mechanism in securing remediation and reparation
for survivors, as a strategy for sustainable healing
and as a means through which to ensure violations
against children are prevented from occurring in the
first place. Mediation provides a space where parties
to a conflict assume ownership and responsibility for
the final resolution, thereby increasing the likelihood
of a lasting peace. However, as noted in the guidance
document presented today, that can be compromised in
the absence of child protection-focused analyses, the
requisite resource persons with child-centred expertise,
tailored psychosocial and reintegration strategies for
children and respect for the right of children to be heard.

In various countries around the world engulfed
in hostilities, children continue to endure brutal
violence. Terrorists do not shy away from using even
small children and bringing them into their ranks.
Systematic recruitment of minors, denial of access to
education and violence against children have become
commonplace. The international community must
not tolerate this situation. The hostages of terrorists’
criminal activities also include their own families,
their wives and children, who are stigmatized and
discriminated against by society. No children caught
in that devastating maelstrom should be marginalized
by society. They have the right and should become full
members of society once again. Their rehabilitation
and reintegration is a crucial aspect of the children and
armed conflict agenda today. This is an area where
different state actors, civil society and international
organizations can cooperate successfully and
effectively, while complementing each other’s efforts.

The practical guidance for mediators is an
important document that can assist with mainstreaming
child protection-focused action in confidence-building
measures, security arrangements, governance and
transitional justice systems and peacebuilding

The Russian Federation fully understands
the importance of reintegrating children affected
by conflict. Of course, the priority here is our citizens,
who, by a twist of fate, have found themselves in an
exceedingly difficult situation. Since 2018, the Russian

20-0361615/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

Federation has spared no effort to ensure the return
of Russian children from battlegrounds in Iraq and
Syria and to ensure their ongoing rehabilitation. Many
of those minors are trapped in prisons alongside their
mothers, under investigation or having had prison
terms of varying lengths handed down for participation
in terrorist activities the ranks of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.
More than 150 Russian children have already
successfully been evacuated from Iraq and Syria. Just
a few days ago, the Russian ombudsman on children
brought 26 children out of Al-Hol refugee camp. Another
nine children will be brought back to the motherland in
the very near future. These efforts are ongoing.
Today a number of States are beset by armed conflict
and are making meaningful efforts in this regard.
Their positive example should serve as inspiration for
others, yet they need support from the international
community in the form of respectful, constructive
dialogue in a manner that fully upholds the principles
of State sovereignty.
The Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, at the
request of the Security Council, has crafted voluntary
guidance, which should undergird the efforts of the
United Nations and its Member States both in addressing
reintegration issues and, on the whole, incorporating
child-protection issues in conflict resolution and postconflict recovery.
Our hope is that, with this new mechanism, there
will be more examples of the successful reintegration
of child combatants, addressing the plight of children
in conflict and improving the protection of children.
Our overall efforts in the Security Council should
foster progress to that end, for the benefit of children
and our future.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Once
again China would like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium, Mr. Philippe
Goffin, and is pleased to see you presiding over this
meeting. I also thank His Majesty King Philippe
of Belgium for his statement. I wish also to thank
Secretary-General Guterres, Commissioner Chergui
and Ms. Becker for their respective briefings.
China welcomes the presidential statement just
adopted by the Security Council (S/PRST/2020/3)
and appreciates the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
16/19

12/02/2020

and Armed Conflict to promote the development of the
practical guidance for mediators to protect children in
situations of armed conflict.
Children represent the future and the hope of our
world. They deserve the maximum protection and
also happen to be the most vulnerable group. In 1999,
the Security Council adopted its first resolution on
children and armed conflict (resolution 1261 (1999),
which strongly condemned the targeting of children in
armed conflict and called on all parties concerned to
put an end to such practices.
For more than 20 years, the United Nations and
the international community have made unremitting
efforts to protect children in armed conflict, and this
issue has received increasing attention. However,
reality indicates that what we have done is still far
from enough. Armed conflicts and terrorist activities
continue to spread and, as a result, many children
have been denied carefree childhoods, and others are
struggling in difficult situations of violence, fear,
hunger, disease and displacement.
The fundamental approach to protecting children
from the harm of armed conflict is to stop and resolve
armed conflicts. Disputes should be resolved through
dialogue and negotiation on an equal footing, and the
use or threat of force must be avoided. Greater attention
should be paid to conflict prevention and the promotion
of peace processes. In this regard, the special needs
of children should be fully taken into account so as to
ensure that children are free from the harm of conflicts
and that their rights, including the right to education,
are safeguarded.
The Security Council should in full earnest
discharge its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and remain
committed to facilitating the political settlement of
conflicts through mediation. China firmly supports the
Security Council in the fulfilment of its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations and continues to play
an active role in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, so as to allow children around the world
to grow up in a peaceful, secure and stable environment.
The priority now is that countries in conflict should
assume primary responsibility for protecting children
in armed conflict. All parties to a conflict should
prohibit the recruitment and use of child soldiers. The
United Nations and the international community should
fully respect the leadership of the countries concerned,
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

maintain close communication and coordination
with them, support their capacity-building, mobilize
international resources to address their practical
difficulties, such as funding and technology, and
promote their effective implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Since 2018, within the Framework of the SouthSouth Cooperation Assistance Fund, the Chinese
Government has provided financial and technical
assistance to countries including Somalia, South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
train officials and improve capacity-building in the
area of child protection. Those efforts have produced
positive results.
Going forward, a comprehensive strategy is needed
to make the return of children to their families, schools
and society a priority in post-conflict reconstruction.
Even if children survive conflict, many of them may
relapse into tragic situations owing to physical or
mental-health issues and lack of education. China calls
on the international community and the relevant United
Nations agencies to work closely to support postconflict countries in peaceful reconstruction, economic
and social development, as well as the resettlement,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration of
former child soldiers, in order to ensure that children
have access to basic social services and can enjoy their
rights to health and education.
Since 2000 China has helped Africa build more than
200 schools. Chinese medical teams have been saving
lives and treating children in many parts of Africa, and
many touching stories have been told of their devotion.
It is worth mentioning in particular that the Chinese
peacekeeping contingent deployed to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been participating in the
construction of the SOS Children’s Village in the
city of Bukavu since 2005. Despite the contingent’s
rotations over the years, its assistance to local children
in the form of providing supplies and medical service
has continued uninterrupted.
We hope that all countries will provide concrete
support and continue to work to help the children of
the affected communities and address the practical
difficulties that they are facing in their daily lives. China
stands ready to work with the international community
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
improve the situation of children in armed conflict and

S/PV. 8721

provide all children worldwide with a shared future of
peace, stability and happiness.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I thank Their Majesties
for the honour of their presence at today’s Council
meeting, and I thank Belgium for having arranged
this briefing on a very important topic. Minimizing
the impact of armed conflict on the lives of children
requires our undivided attention. Therefore, let me
express our heartfelt gratitude to Belgium for its tireless
efforts to keep the rights of children at the top of the
Council’s agenda.
I wish also to extend a special welcome to the
Ministers attending this morning’s meeting, and
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for having
shared their valuable insights. Their accounts have
once again reminded us of the fact that the issue of
children and armed conflict is more pressing than ever.
More than 420 million children worldwide are affected
by conflict.
Germany therefore very much welcomes the launch
of the practical guidance for mediators to protect
children in situations of armed conflict. The guidance
for practitioners is needed to support those working in
the field dedicated to ensuring that the protection and
welfare of children are taken into account in all aspects
of peace negotiations and agreements. Our commitment
to children’s rights remains firm, and we see our
engagement in the Security Council’s Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict as an important part of
that. Germany is also proud to support UNICEF as one
of the largest donors with its contributions especially
dedicated to programmes in countries dealing with
conflicts and crises in order to support the resilience
and perspectives of children.
Many previous speakers have reminded us of the
impressive achievements that have been realized in
the past years. At the same time, we are all aware of
the immense challenges that we continue to face in
this context. I would like to refer to a few of the most
pressing challenges.
First, too many children are in need of immense
resilience in too many places on the Security Council’s
agenda. We are deeply concerned about the many cases
of sexual- and gender-based violence. Our humanity
is measured by how we protect the weakest, and it is
obvious that we still have a long way to go. Although
there is constant underreporting, owing to difficult

20-0361617/19

S/PV.8721

Children and armed conflict

verification, the official statistics remain appallingly
high. Those crimes require an adequate and resolute
response. In line with resolution 2467 (2019), we need to
ensure non-discriminatory and multisectoral assistance
to all child survivors of sexual violence, as well as to
children born of rape. That must also include access to
sexual and reproductive health services.
Secondly, it is shocking to see that, more than
10 years after the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009),
there still seems to be no end in sight for the killing
and maiming of children. The Secretary-General has
identified Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen as cases of
particular concern. We continue to call for abolishing
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Yet
in Syria alone air strikes, barrel bombs and cluster
munitions have killed and maimed thousands of
children, as just confirmed in the recent disturbing
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/43/
CRP.6). The Commission’s report on Syria documented
the large-scale increase of aerial operations and ground
offensive causing damage to key civilian infrastructure.
As initiators of resolution 1998 (2011), on attacks on
schools and hospitals, we condemn all such attacks on
civilian objects in breach of international humanitarian
law. We urge all States to sign on to the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Together with its international partners, Germany
continues to work hard to ensure that international
humanitarian law is applied so as to prevent all grave
violations. In that regard, we recall resolution 2427
(2018), which reminds all parties to armed conflict to
comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them
under international law for the protection of children in
armed conflict. In echoing resolution 2427 (2018), let me
also stress the need for accountability for all violations
and abuses against children in armed conflict. All States
need to continue to address impunity by strengthening
national and international accountability mechanisms.
Germany reiterates its fullest confidence in the
work of the International Criminal Court in ensuring
accountability, as well as its support for international
investigative mechanisms, such as those set up by the
Human Rights Council. The well-being of children
should be at the centre of all our actions. We need to
ensure that children affected by armed conflict are
able to participate in community-based programmes
anchored in the child’s rights approach that complements
accountability mechanisms.
18/19

12/02/2020

In view of the broad range of challenges, of which
I just mentioned a few, we need to use all means, tools
and instruments at our disposal, particularly in the
field. Much of the concrete field-level work on the issue
of children and conflict is entrusted to child protection
advisers in United Nations peace operations. With
the continued consolidation of protection functions in
field missions, Germany renews its call to preserve
that important function as a distinct role and for
United Nations missions to be adequately resourced in
that regard.
As was said earlier, we commend the work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba and her leadership role in the development
of the practical guide for mediators to better protect
children in armed conflict. The simple truth is that child
protection requires the efforts of the entire international
community. We therefore also welcome the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
cooperate with the European Union, as well as NATO,
where we have established the position of Senior Child
Protection Adviser.
In conclusion, it is important that we today renew
our commitment to delivering peace and access to basic
services and education to a whole generation of children
suffering in conflict situations around the world.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
On behalf of the United States, as the host nation of
the United Nations, we warmly welcome His Majesty
the King and Her Majesty the Queen of the Belgians
to the United Nations and New York. We also warmly
welcome you, Mr. Minister, and thank you for presiding
over the Security Council today. We thank the Vice
Foreign Minister of Indonesia and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Estonia for being here with us today as well.
There is perhaps no group of people harmed more
by the absence of peace and security than children. In
most cases, they are the most vulnerable among us. We
therefore deeply appreciate the efforts of Belgium to
highlight global child protection, including through
leading consensus on conclusions on Syria, Burma
and the Sudan and by chairing the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict since
last year.
We also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for
their briefings today. Yesterday Ambassador Craft (see
S/PV.8717) noted that how we allocate our time defines
20-03616

12/02/2020

Children and armed conflict

what we believe is important, and their presence here
today affirms the importance of integrating the children
and armed conflict agenda into our discussion on peace
processes and conflict prevention. We thank them.
The importance of doing so was also reaffirmed
by the Council in August 2019 (see S/PV.8591), as
it has been by members, numerous resolutions and
presidential statements since 1999. In August, we
reiterated that those who suffer the most in war are
often children and that our discussions about armed
conflict cannot ignore the devastating impact that it
has on them. We are hopeful that both the frequency
of the Council’s Working Group meetings and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba’s
engagement and advocacy involving parties to armed
conflict will increase.
Continued meetings, signed action plans and
briefings like today’s will all help generate needed
progress. We should see the Council’s unity on this
issue as an opportunity to better protect children from
armed conflict. And, by engaging with armed groups,
building trust and offering alternatives to violence, as
allowed by our mandate, the United Nations and other
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the European Union, can create new possibilities
for sustainable peace. Today’s adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/3 recognizes just that.
As we see in countries around the world, conflict
prevents children from achieving their potential and
saddles them with burdens that no young person should
have to carry. For example, in South Sudan most
children have never known peace, but only the threat
of violence, abduction and abuse. A pause in political
violence has created space for advocacy, including the
action plan signed last week. But the best protection
for children in South Sudan will not come from an
action plan; it will come from President Kiir Mayardit
and Mr. Machar sitting down and negotiating a lasting
peace. Today we call on South Sudan’s leaders to finally

S/PV. 8721

put aside their differences and prioritize the hopes of
their nation’s children.
In Colombia, the United States is dismayed by
continuing violations and abuses against children. Yet
recent trends give reason for optimism, as the Final
Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the
Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace and the
demobilization of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia are clearly improving circumstances for
the nation’s young people. Amid the regional fallout
of the crisis in Venezuela, we also applaud President
Duque Márquez’s efforts to protect the children and
Venezuelan refugees, including by granting citizenship
to those born in Colombia.
In addition, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, United Nations efforts to extricate child
combatants from armed groups have led to the signing
of agreements to disarm and demobilize. In the Central
African Republic, the engagement of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
with armed groups appears to offer the same inroads
for education and change.
But beyond country situations on the children and
armed conflict agenda, we are deeply concerned about
the fact that at least 600,000 children in Cameroon have
not been able to safely attend schools in the country’s
English-speaking regions for more than three years.
That is a stark reminder that mediation requires followthrough to prevent children from once again falling
prey to the deadly cycles of violence.
The Council has a duty to speak out on behalf of
children, for they are our future and our hope. But to
realize a future of greater safety and prosperity for
all children, there must be meaningful action. That is
what makes the children and armed conflict agenda
so critical, and we are grateful for the opportunity to
discuss its implementation today.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

20-0361619/19
