United Nations

S/PV.6037

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6037th meeting
Thursday, 11 December 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jurica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Croatia)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office
in Burundi (S/2008/745)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-64243 (E)

*0864243*

S/PV.6037

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(S/2008/745)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Burundi, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Charles Nqakula, Facilitator of the Burundi Peace
Process and Minister of Defence of South Africa.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Charles Nqakula, Facilitator of the
Burundi Peace Process and Minister of Defence of
South Africa.
I invite Mr. Nqakula to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Anders Lidén, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United
Nations.
It is so decided.

2

I invite Mr. Lidén to take a seat at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/745, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process and Minister
of Defence of South Africa, and by His Excellency
Mr. Anders Lidén, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United
Nations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the Burundi Peace Process and Minister
of Defence of South Africa.
Mr. Nqakula: Allow me at the outset to express
my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
invited me to the Security Council in order to interact
with the members here. I bid a good afternoon to all
the members of the Security Council and the executive
representative of the Secretary-General. Today is the
second time that I have had the singular honour to brief
the Security Council on the work we are doing in
Burundi with respect to the search for durable peace in
that country.
When I briefed the Council last year, our report
was an expression of hope that we were on the verge of
completing the various steps of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement between the Government of
Burundi and the Parti pour la Libération du Peuple
Hutu-Forces Nationales de Liberation (PalipehutuFNL), but the Burundi peace process, from the Arusha
negotiations to the Dar-es-Salaam peace process, has
always had its ups and downs. It is, of course, in the
nature of negotiations that many hiccups and bumps
are experienced as such processes unfold.
The Burundi negotiations were particularly
difficult given the deep distrust between the
negotiating parties. We believe this time around that a
significant step forward has been taken to resolve the
matter of the Palipehutu-FNL — the only group in
Burundi that has stayed out of the democratization

08-64243

S/PV.6037

process in that country. The Facilitator of the Burundi
peace process submitted a report in October to the
leaders of the regional initiative of the Process, chaired
by Uganda.
That report formed the basis of the discussions of
the summit of the heads of State and Government of
the Great Lakes region, held in Bujumbura, Burundi,
on 4 December. The Government of Burundi and the
Palipehutu-FNL, as has been the practice right through
the process, were represented at the summit, as were
the African Union and the Secretary-General, through
his Executive Representative. The summit finalized the
four outstanding matters with respect to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. Those questions were always threatening
to scuttle the peace process and, on a number of
occasions, led to a stalemate.
The Palipehutu-FNL had been demanding certain
concessions from the Government regarding the
integration of their combatants into the armed forces of
Burundi. In the beginning, the Palipehutu-FNL agitated
for the disbanding of the Burundi army, whereupon a
new defence force would be created for the country
through the amalgamation of chosen troops from the
current army and combatants of the Palipehutu-FNL.
That demand was shot down by the leadership of
the Regional Peace Initiative when it was first raised,
before the signing of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement on 7 September 2006. The summit of the
heads of State and Government of the Great Lakes
region, sitting on the same day, also rejected the
Palipehutu-FNL demand on the basis that the Burundi
army was an institution that had been established in
keeping with the law of the country, based on the
Arusha negotiations.
The Palipehutu-FNL nonetheless continued to
argue for an arrangement that would be defined by
what they called a forces technical agreement. The
arrangement was designed to produce a new army.
Although an effort was made in the beginning to create
a system to find common ground, the work ground to a
halt. Two matters the Palipehutu-FNL had raised that
the parties at the summit agreed to were the release of
political and war prisoners by the Burundi Government
and the appointment to the organs of the State of the
leaders of the Palipehutu-FNL. President Pierre
Nkurunziza, the Head of State of Burundi, had already
committed himself in the past to implementing both of

08-64243

those demands. He said, though, that he wanted to
release detainees into the assembly areas when those
areas were up and running. He has offered the
Palipehutu-FNL 33 positions for their senior members
in the State institutions.
The Palipehutu-FNL was told by the parties at the
Summit that it needed to apply to register as a political
party in Burundi in order to participate in the social,
economic and political life of the country, but that it
could not do so under its current name. The name
Palipehutu means the Party for the Liberation of the
Hutu People.
The summit agreed that the name Palipehutu
militates against the letter and spirit of the Burundi
Constitution which stipulates that political parties in
Burundi must be open to all Burundians and have to
reflect a national image and in no way shall advocate
violence, exclusion or any kind of hatred, especially
regarding ethnic, regional, religious or gender
belonging. Palipehutu-FNL was instructed, therefore,
to change its name. It is currently informing its
members about that decision.
The first group of Palipehutu-FNL combatants
will report to the assembly areas on Friday, 12 December,
for the start of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. That exercise will have to be
completed by 31 December, in keeping with the
decision of the summit.
The completion of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement has taken a long
time, given that the Agreement was signed in
September 2006. Various attempts have been made to
resolve whatever problems have arisen in the course of
the process. A number of meetings have been held to
resolve the problems and, on a number of occasions,
binding documents have been signed to consolidate
those agreements. But every step forward has been
accompanied by new demands and retrogression.
One of the major breakthroughs was recorded
when the leadership of the Palipehutu-FNL went back
to Burundi to help implement the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement and push forward the peace
process. The breakthrough did not open all the doors
that we thought it would. The period following the
return to Burundi of the leadership of the PalipehutuFNL did not resolve all the problems revolving around
the implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement. The Facilitation’s Political Directorate had

3

S/PV.6037

to intervene just before the arrival in Burundi of
Mr. Agathon Rwasa, the Palipehutu-FNL’s leader, when
war broke out again between the Government forces
and the Palipehutu-FNL. The intervention was in the
form of a joint declaration between the two parties,
foreswearing violence. No major attacks have
happened since then. The situation continues to be
calm in that country.
In the face of more dilly-dallying, the Facilitation
took the two parties to South Africa for confidencebuilding. The exercise culminated in the signing of the
Magaliesberg Communiqué, which underscored that
the successful and earliest conclusion of the peace
process in Burundi was primarily the responsibility of
the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-FNL.
The Communiqué was signed on 10 June this year. In
the face of more difficulties after the Magaliesberg
meeting, the Facilitation arranged a meeting in Ngozi,
Burundi, where the two parties once more made
commitments.
The Facilitator of the Burundi peace process has
been instructed by the Regional Peace Initiative fully
to implement the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement
by 31 December. The period from January 2009 will be
used as a mop-up phase. The Facilitation team will
then scale down its operations and the African Union
Special Task Force will begin its withdrawal, to be
completed by the end of March 2009. The Facilitation
will then close its operations at the end of March. The
Facilitator will report to the Regional Peace Initiative
as soon as all of the elements of the mandate have been
finalized in the New Year.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Anders
Lidén, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Permanent
Representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to participate in today’s meeting on Burundi in my
capacity as the Chair of the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
close collaboration between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is essential. Not least is
that so in the case of Burundi, a country that now
seems to be on the right track towards the
consolidation of peace, but that is situated in a very
volatile region and needs the sustained support of the
international community to prevent it from relapsing
into armed conflict.

4

The conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo — massacres and ethnic tension — can
easily spill over into neighbouring countries with
similar experiences of the past. At the same time, peace
and stability in Burundi are the key building block for
peace and stability in the region as a whole.
The implementation of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement is a first crucial step in order for
effective peacebuilding to take place in Burundi. In late
October, I had the opportunity to visit Burundi to
discuss with Burundians their priorities among the many
priorities for peacebuilding. There was no doubt —
peace and security were referred to as the number one
priority. For example, I met with women’s groups on
the outskirts of Bujumbura who had suffered badly
from war and lack of security, and now struggled to
make a decent living for themselves and their children.
Their first wish was for the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement between the Government of Burundi and
the Parti pour la Libération du Peuple Hutu-Forces
Nationales de Libération (Palipehutu-FNL) to be fully
implemented. They needed security to move on with
their lives and to believe in the future, so to hear about
the breakthrough last week in the talks between the
Government and the Palipehutu-FNL was indeed very
good news.
We commend the leaders of the Regional Peace
Initiative and the South African Facilitator for having
brought about that breakthrough. We also congratulate
the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-FNL on
having shown the necessary flexibility. The declaration
signed last week should bring an end to the conflict,
giving the Palipehutu-FNL the opportunity to enter
political life in Burundi as a political party under a new
name and to be integrated into State institutions.
The agreement is a window of opportunity for
Burundi and for the region. We now need to support
the Burundians to ensure that this time around the
agreement can be fully implemented. If we fail to do so
and allow things to fall apart, the consequences for
Burundi and the region could be devastating. With that
in mind, the African Union and the Regional Initiative
should be encouraged to remain fully engaged and to
continue to play their important role as guarantors of
the peace process for as long as necessary.
The Peacebuilding Commission’s Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi and the
conclusions of the biannual review of June this year

08-64243

S/PV.6037

provide a strong call for the Commission’s support for the
peace process and the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement. The Commission will hold a country-specific
meeting on Burundi tomorrow. The purpose is to hear
from regional actors, the Burundian Government, the
United Nations and other interested parties about their
most urgent needs with regard to the implementation of
the ceasefire, as well as to call for international
political and financial support to address those needs.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process urgently has to move on, and with speed.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been supportive in
ensuring that there is an immediate World Bank
programme in place and ready to deliver. Further
support needs to be mobilized for other priorities,
including for the process to transform the PalipehutuFNL into a political party ready to participate in the
elections of 2010, and for the regional engagement to
remain on the ground.
International involvement, in particular through
the African Union and the Regional Initiative, will
continue to be crucial to ensure that the right
conditions for the implementation of the DDR process
and other aspects of the Ceasefire Agreement are in
place. A sense of security and trust between the parties
will be needed for a successful conclusion of the DDR
process. Mutual trust and confidence in the institutions
of the State will also be necessary to prepare for the
electoral process. It is of utmost importance that the
process that is to culminate in the elections in 2010 be
considered to be free and fair. That will be an
important test for peacebuilding in Burundi. The
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations and the
international community must stand ready to support
Burundi in that process.
Peacebuilding in Burundi is a long-term partnership
for peace and development. It requires sustained
resources and capacity, as well as coordination. The
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement will
provide the conditions needed to move ahead with the
priorities of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Strategic
Framework, which include security, justice and the rule
of law, land reform, socio-economic recovery and
gender issues.
The Commission’s biannual review in January
2009 will provide an opportunity to review progress in
those areas and to call for further international support
and attention where needed. Our joint efforts to

08-64243

consolidate peace in Burundi will lay the foundation
for full-scale implementation of the Government’s
poverty reduction strategy for long-term development,
to the benefit of all Burundians.
In conclusion, allow me to commend the
Government of Burundi and all actors involved for
their constructive engagement and their commitment to
peace in Burundi. Let me use this occasion to thank the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
for cooperating with the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Government so ably in that regard. BINUB is
very important for the Commission and for broader
peacebuilding efforts. Further enhancing the integrated
structure of BINUB and the United Nations country
team, under the continued strategic leadership of the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
will be necessary for effective United Nations support
for peacebuilding in Burundi. The Peacebuilding
Commission in New York will not be able to prove its
relevance without the effective coordination and
involvement of all stakeholders on the ground in
Bujumbura.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Anders
Lidén for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Burundi.
Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): The
Government of Burundi thanks the Secretary-General
for his fourth report (S/2008/745) on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB), which
is a succinct, comprehensive and very detailed document.
The absence in the report of up-to-date information would
have detracted from its quality had the 4 December
summit at Bujumbura of heads of State of the Regional
Peace Initiative for Burundi not been a success.
Beyond expressing my gratitude for the report, I
would like to express the gratitude of the Government
of Burundi to the Secretary-General and his Executive
Representative for their commitment to ensuring the
success of the peace process in my country. The
Government of Burundi particularly thanks the
Secretary-General for his statement to the summit of
the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi. His
contribution no doubt played a role in convincing the
Government and the Parti pour la Libération du Peuple
Hutu-Forces Nationales de Libération that concluding
the peace process was no longer subject to negotiation.

5

S/PV.6037

I would also like to take this opportunity once
again to warmly thank Minister Charles Nqakula,
Facilitator of the peace process, and the heads of State
of the countries of the Regional Initiative, who once
again responded promptly to the international
community’s appeals to resolve a situation that had
become explosive. I should also like to thank the
President of the Commission of the African Union,
who travelled to Bujumbura to lend his presence to the
summit.
In commenting on the report of the SecretaryGeneral, allow me to begin by referring to the final
paragraphs of that document. In his observations, the
Secretary-General, confident that the peace process in
Burundi would be concluded in the near future,
recommends in paragraphs 90 to 93 that the Security
Council extend the mandate of BINUB for 12 months.
We fully support that wise and very sensible proposal.
We also support carrying out a technical assessment of
pending problems and the progress made in June 2009
so as to prepare for the transfer of BINUB from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to the
Department of Political Affairs. The Government of
Burundi hopes to be involved in the assessment work
to be carried out in the field.
To return to the beginning of the report, I note
that the second part focuses on the main events that
took place between 15 May and 10 November 2008. I
shall not dwell on them; as I said earlier, the summit of
the Regional Peace Initiative for Burundi that took
place on 4 December 2008 in Bujumbura produced
positive results that restored hope for everyone. This
represents a decisive step, and the Government would
now like to move on to the next stage.
Moreover, we inform the Council that Mr. Agathon
Rwasa met yesterday with His Excellency President
Pierre Nkurunziza in order to decide together the first
steps to be taken in this regard. We hope that the other
partners in the process will rapidly implement their
commitments in order to allow the two stakeholders to
advance.
Allow me to comment, however, on paragraph 14,
which refers to incidents in which BINUB vehicles
carrying personnel on board were attacked. We would
like to inform the Council that the legal dispute
between the former employees of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi and of BINUB is currently being
studied by the national bodies responsible for labour

6

regulations in terms of international labour law. Their
conclusions should settle this issue once and for all.
The third part of the report concerns peacebuilding
and the integration of United Nations system activities.
Burundi welcomes all efforts deployed by the United
Nations system for the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Support Strategy
over the past two years. We hope that its extension
through 2009 will provide an opportunity to enhance
the implementation process, in particular through a
better alignment of all activities of United Nations
agencies with the priorities of the Strategy.
In the future, we will once again take up the United
Nations strategic priorities for the period from 2010 to
2014, which were discussed with the Government and
have recently been adopted. However, the issue of
democratic governance, which constitutes the fourth
priority, not the second, should be revisited, particularly
with regard to the organization of the 2010 elections, in
order to clear up any misunderstandings with regard to
the upcoming electoral process. The Government is
currently establishing an independent national electoral
commission. The names of the members of the
commission will be announced in the coming days. The
competencies of the commission will not overlap with
the initiatives of the United Nations system.
We were also struck by paragraphs 32 and 47 in
the report, which deal with freedom of opinion and
expression and by all paragraphs addressing human
rights in general, namely paragraphs 44 through 53.
The Government is currently setting up an independent
national human rights commission. Moreover, draft
laws, including a new penal code, and specific measures
are being developed in order to guarantee peace for all
citizens. Just recently, a high-level delegation travelled
to Geneva in order to explain all these human rights
issues in Burundi. A report was drawn up and discussed
and recommendations were issued.
We will not dwell on that debate, but we would
like to state that, while a number of cases of arrests and
imprisonment were reported, that should not overshadow
all the efforts of the Government to restore order in a
country that is emerging from 40-odd years of military
dictatorship with ethnic and regional dimensions and a
dozen years of inter-ethnic civil war. It is important to
reassert the value of the principle that no one is above
the law, including journalists who might be tempted to

08-64243

S/PV.6037

express themselves without regard to the ethical code
that governs their profession.
With regard to the economic situation, we
welcome the fact that our country has attained an
economic growth rate of 4.5 per cent. We take this
opportunity to warmly thank the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and all our bilateral partners for their
support to our country in its journey towards social and
economic recovery. We encourage them to continue in
this direction. We are convinced that we will be able to
further enhance our performance if we reach the
completion point as planned and if our external debts
are forgiven.
We would like to encourage prospective investors
to visit Burundi. The Government has created an
environment conducive to foreign investment through
our new investment code. Tourism and the mining
sector are the main industries favoured by such
investors.
To conclude, we welcome the conclusions
reached at the summit of the Regional Peace Initiative
held on 4 June 2008 and the commitments made by the
parties concerned. We hope that the Security Council
will endorse them and support their implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make comments or ask
questions in response to the briefings we have just
heard.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by expressing my gratitude for the
briefings made by Ambassador Lidén, Ambassador
Nsanze and Minister Charles Nqakula and by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report on Burundi. My
delegation
supports
the
observations
and
recommendations contained in the report, including the
proposal to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). We would like
to underscore a number of points that are of particular
importance for our delegation.
First of all, Costa Rica would like to commend
the parties for achieving an agreement this past week

08-64243

on a number of the most sensitive issues of the peace
process. We hope that both parties will be able to meet
their commitments in such a way as to ensure a
successful conclusion to this last stage of the peace
process. We also acknowledge and express our
gratitude for the significant efforts deployed by the
Regional Peace Initiative and for South Africa’s
facilitation in this regard.
We are gravely concerned by the fact that there
are still child soldiers among the forces of the
Palipehutu-Forces Nationales de Libération (PalipehutuFNL), and we forcefully call upon that group to
unconditionally release all children associated with its
movement.
Finally, in the light of having just yesterday
celebrated the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, my country would like
to express its concern at the arrests of members of the
political opposition, members of the communications
media and representatives of civil society. Costa Rica
considers such behaviour unacceptable. It is as
unacceptable in this case as it would be in any other
case in any other region of the world.
We welcome the news just shared with us by the
Ambassador of Burundi with regard to the
establishment of an independent human rights
commission, and we hope that further steps will be
taken in this direction. However, listening to the
speakers and considering the contents of the report of
the Secretary-General, our concerns remain.
We call on the authorities of Burundi to respect
the rights to the freedom of expression and of
association and to ensure the due procedural rights and
the fair trial of all detainees.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue discussion on this
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

7
