180

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace;
2. Calls upon Governments to continue taking the measures necessary for achieving substantial progress in the
implementation of the relev;mt recommendations of the Programme of Action with a view to ensuring equal participation by women as agents and beneficiaries in all sectors
and at all levels of the development process;
3. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations
system, including the regional commissions, to reserve adequate resources for, and pay increased attention to, the
implementation of the Programme of Action, particularly
as regards the dissemination of information on the participation of women;
4. Urges the regional commissions to report in full to
the Economic and Social Council, at its first regular session
of 1982, on the evolution of the situation of women in all
the sectors of their development programmes, in order to
strengthen and reorient the programmes and reporting methods of those commissions, so as to reflect more adequately
the regional concerns of women;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
first regular session of 1982, to consider the implementation
of the Programme of Action, giving high priority in this
regard to the report of the Commission on the Status of
Women;
6. Emphasizes the role of the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the
focal point for the organizations of the United Nations system with regard to the implementation of the Programme
of Action, in order to achieve the goals and objectives of
the Decade, and requests the Secretary-General to give the
Centre the assistance required to enable it to carry out its
mandate;
1. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
at its twenty-ninth session, to be held in February 1982, to
give priority to the question of the preparations for the World
Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women, to be held in 1985,
which will mark the end of the Decade, with a view to
submitting to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session, through the Economic and Social Council, specific
proposals on that question;
8. Stresses the need for close and continued co-operation between the United Nations system and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to allow the Institute to carry out its
mandate;
9. Takes note with satisfaction of the effective contribution made by the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women to the implementation of the Programme
of Action;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its thirty-seventh session, a report on the
steps taken to implement the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/127.

Consideration within the United Nations of
questions concerning the role of women in
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the objectives of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,

Recalling further its resolution 3~/78 of 5 December 1980
in which it emphasized the need to integrate the objectives
of the United Nations Decade for Women into the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 98
Having taken cognizance of the report prepared by the
Ad Hoe Working Group on the Social Aspects of the Development Activities of the United Nations, 99 established
pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/
45 of 11 May 1979, and, in particular, of paragraphs 80 to
82 of the report,
Having also taken cognizance of the report of the Secretary-General, which contains a comprehensive outline of
a world survey on the role of women in development, 100
l. Recommends, in the light of paragraphs 80 to 82 of
the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Social
Aspects of the Development Activities of the United Nations, that documents concerning the integration of women
in development should be made available to the Third Committee under the relevant agenda item;
2. Expresses the desire that the recommendation in
paragraph 1 above should be brought to the attention of the
General Committee of the General Assembly;
3. Expresses also the desire that the Third Committee
should be seized of the world survey on the role of women
in development, whose comprehensive outline is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General;
4. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to give special attention at its twenty-ninth session, to be
held in February 1982, to questions pertaining to the participation of women in development, under its agenda item
3 concerning the implementation of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year; 101
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Commission on the Status of Women is consulted in the
preparation of the world survey on the role of women in
development requested by the General Assembly in paragraph 10 of its resolution 35/78 and, to the extent possible,
regarding any survey or proposed action concerning women.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 198/

36/128.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/135 of 16 December 1976, in
which it approved the establishment of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/13 of 6 May 1981, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note of the progress made towards the full establishment of the Institute,
Convinced that the Institute can, with adequate resources,
make a valuable contribution to the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women, 102 as well as to realizing the
9

"

Resolution 35156, annex.

99

E/1981/3.

A/36/590.
Report of the World Conference of the International Women's Year,
Mexico City, /9 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E 76. IV. I), chap. II, sect. A.
102
Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July 1980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 80. IV. 3 and corrigendum). chap.
I, sect. A.
l(X)

101
