UNITED

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

.T,HIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2442nd

MEETING:

NEW

25 MAY

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda

(S/Agenda/2442)

of the agenda

The situation

....................................

1

...............................................

1

in Namibia:

Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security

of Mauritius to the
Council ‘(S/15760);

Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

:
.

2442nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 25 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma; President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2442)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma
place at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
,Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

took a

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item [2439th to 244lst meetings], I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria; Angola, Austraha, Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Gambia, the Federal
Republic
of Germany,
Guinea,
India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Panama,
Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The meeting was caBed to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

At the invitation of the President, Mr.‘Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Joseph (Australia), Mr. Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. Adjibade (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr.
PelIetier (Canada), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. lbrahim
(Ethiopia). Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. van Well (Federal.
Republic of Germany), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rao
(India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia), Mr. Shearer
(Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr.
Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Traore (Mait), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr.
Ozores Typaidos (Panama), Mr. Marinescu (Romania),
Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Sallu
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca
(Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassole (Upper Volta), Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The situation

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the’ representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramlogun (Mauritius) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting,
I invite the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the other members of the delegation to take
places at the Security Council table.
1

.’

/

:

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation .from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria,
Chile and Venezuela in which they request to be invited to
take part in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite them to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

anguish, compare to the quest for peace, justice and selfdetermination
for the Palestinian people, who have
shared the same plight and suffered similar conditions.
12. By these deliberations the international community
is once again demonstrating its deep concern about the
fate of decisions taken by this body and the erosion of a
commitment undertaken unanimously five years ago by
members of the Council, which then comprised the five
members of the contact group. It would be exceedingly
dangerous if the Council were diverted from fulfilment of
its primary responsibility to ensure full implementation
of its resolution 435 (1978). It is the sacred duty of the
Council to.reaflirm its resolve to seek a just solution of the
Namibian problem .based on resolution 435 (1978). That
resolution, in the view of Kuwait, remains the basis for a
peaceful settlement. Any deviation from its provisions
and those of other relevant United Nations resolutions
would be at the expense and to the detriment of the
Namibian people.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Trucco (Chile) and Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela) took the places reserved for th&m at the side of the
Council chamber.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1578 1 containing the text of a letter dated 20 May 1983
from the representative of Mauritius to the President of
the Council.

13. We share the Secretary-General’s profound concern, expressed in his latest report, at the possibility that
“factors which lie outside the scope of resolution 435
(1978) should hamper its implementation”
[S/15776,
para. 191. We refer, in particular, .to the United States
attempt to establish a linkage between ,Namibian independence and the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola. In general, especially after listening to the statement by the representative of the United Kingdom
[2439th meeting], we are referring to the fact that the
other members, with the exception of France, have not
been forthright in denouncing that policy, which in our
view undermines the efforts to ensure implementation
of
the United Nations plan according to resolution 435
(1978). This can only be regarded as encouraging South
Africa in pursuing its delaying tactics with regard to a
negotiated settlement. Furthermore, that policy denies a
sovereign State, Angola, its inherent right to adopt measures to strengthen its security. We therefore reject that
policy of linkage. We must not fail to commend France,
a member of the contact group, for dissociating itself
from that policy, as it confirmed recently at the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence.’ We believe that
such a constructive position helps to emphasize the basic
issue and facilitates the, negotiating process, instead of
injecting extraneous matters.

7. The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
8. Mr. ABULHASSAN

(Kuwait)

(interuretation

from

Arabic): I should like at the outset,‘&,
‘.
-_
-*

-.
,-

to-convey to you
our congratulations on your assumption of the lofty position of President of the Council for this month. We are
confident that your wise and able leadership will be an
asset to the Council in its work.

-_.

9. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
who demonstrated remarkable
qualities during her presidency of the Council in the
month of April.
10. Kuwait attaches great importance to the current
debate on the situation in Namibia. Regrettably, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait was unable to participate in person in these proceedings and he entrusted me with the important task of
representing him and supporting the joint action undertaken by his African and non-aligned colleagues especially mandated by the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983 [see S/15675 and
Corr.1 and 21.

14. The five Western countries took upon themselves
the responsibility for pursuing efforts to ensure implementation of resolution 435 (1978). While reaffirming the
primary responsibility of the United Nations, and in particular the responsibility of the Council, to bring about the
implementation
of the independence plan for Namibia,
we cannot but emphasize the role of the contact group in
making this a reality. We have been assured by one
member, the United Kingdom, that they intend to persevere and to succeed. We can only hope that they will take
meaningful action in the fulfilment of their self-appointed
role.

11. Following the International Conference in Support
of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
held in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, the deliberations of
the Council on the situation in Namibia are yet another
instance where the international community is emphasizing its quest for peace and justice for the Namibian
people, which has suffered for too long from military
occupation, political suppression and economic exploitation. It is a quest for justice for a people which has repeatedly been denied the opportunity to enjoy prospects of
freedom and self-determination. It is a quest that we, with
2

15. So far, the situation has been disheartening; it
remains a source of comfort only to South Africa. The
apartheid regime continues to thrive in a situation free of
pressure. It has been assured repeatedly that the international community will not collectively apply any real sanctions. As recently as the beginning of this debate, we
heard with dismay that sanctions would not reinforce the
negotiation process, and we have the United States
Administration advocating a policy of so-called constructive engagement. That policy constitutes an obstacle and
only reinforces a regime bent on imposing its will on the
international community. We had a demonstration of
that only yesterday. That regime is bent on imposing its
own interpretation of the settlement plan. It has indicated
its idea of the form of government Namibia should have.
It has been indicated as well what allies and what political
regimes the neighbouring States should have.
16. The sacrifices made by the front-line States at a time
.when they have been the victims of direct military aggression, political intervention and economic destabilization
have been staggering.
17. South Africa’s persistence in pursuing these policies
against the front-line States was demonstrated recently by
its act of aggression against Mozambique. Kuwait condemns that wanton aggression, which is yet another manifestation of the animosity of the Pretoria rdgime against
independent African States. Pretoria’s apparent willingness to negotiate a peaceful settlement will be viewed with
suspicion as long as it persists in following a militaristic
.
policy.
18. We believe that one way of strengthening the negotiating process is to bring pressure to bear on the intransigent party. Such. action is not beyond the skill of the
members of the Council, especially those directly concerned with that process. We have noted with satisfaction
the efforts of the Scandinavian countries and the success
their initiative has brought about in the field of investment. Kuwait is co-operating with other States in imposing sanctions and enforcing the oil embargo against South
Africa. Kuwait observes and supports comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against the Pretoria regime, and we
will not hesitate to co-operate with others in the search for
effective means of bringing pressure to bear on South
Africa.
19. We have seen a liberation movement resolutely
avoiding the military option in order to contribute to the
success of the negotiating process. SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, has borne
with patience all the tactics aimed at obstructing a negotiated settlement. We call upon the Western States to demonstrate their good will by adopting a pragmatic position.
The current deliberations of the Council constitute an
opportunity for those countries to reinforce not merely
their commitment to a negotiating process, not merely the
effectiveness of the Council, but their own credibility in
professing their objective-and
may that objective be a
free and independent Namibia.

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Benin,
Mr. Tiamiou Adjibade. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
21. Mr. ADJIBADE
(Benin) (interpretation’ from
French): We are happy to convey to you, Mr. President,
our great satisfaction at seeing you occupying the position of President of this body in which, in the recent past,
your brilliant eloquence was employed to denounce the
injustices of our world.
22. Your ‘experience, your great diplomatic talents, the
high posts you have occupied in your great and beautiful
country, Zaire, and particularly your quality as an African all represent valuable assets in conducting successfully the work of the Council at such a crucial time, when
it is debating once again the disturbing question of
Namibia.
*’
23. We should like, above all, to express to the
Secretary-General our great appreciation for the clarity
and impartiality of his comments and the relevance and
courage of the conclusions he reaches in his report on the
question of Namibia [S/15776]. If we may be permitted
to express a hope, it is that the important contribution of
the Secretary-General will inspire the Council to conduct
constructive discussions which will lead to the immediate
and effective exercise by the oppressed Namibian people
of their inalienable right.
24. Finally, we should like to express our pleasure at the
presence among us in this chamber of that great freedom
tighter, our brother Sam Nujoma. The important statement
that he made before the Council [2439th meeting], with his
characteristic judiciousness, is significant and instructive.
His determination and vigilance, together with the selflessness of the fighting people of Namibia, constitute the surest
guarantee of the success of the arduous struggle being
waged so heroically by SWAPO.
25. Once again defying the international community, at
the precise moment when this new debate on Namibia,
this indictment of the crimes and abominations so cynically perpetrated by South Africa, is taking place, the
Pretoria Fascists are once again demonstrating their passion for destabilization
and aggression by unleashing
their murderous hordes bf outlaws against the peaceful
people of Mozambique.
26. Although the feeling of the international community on the question of Namibia is unanimous-that
is to
say, that the Namibian people,‘like the other colonized
peoples of yester-year, should be allowed to exercise
freely their lawful right to self-determination
and
independence- we fear that these deliberations may once
again serve merely as an opportunity for proclamations
of good faith behind which are concealed the hypocrisy
and cold calculations of those who in the past have
encouraged, and continue to encourage, the procrastinators of Pretoria to persist in their outrageous defiance of
the international community.

‘.

:

27. Since the adoption of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, terminating South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, the Organization has constantly sought and proposed solutions designed to restore
to the Namibian people their inalienable rights. However,
today, in 1983, nothing has changed; the Namibian people are still oppressed and deprived of their elementary
rights and have imposed upon them the most ~atrocious
foreign domination of the present era.

the militarization of their territory and its use as a base for
carrying out acts of aggression against the front-line
States, particularly Angola, Zambia and Mozambique, as
crimes that have created an extremely dangerous situation
in southern Africa, threatening international peace and
security.
36. It also denounced all attempts to link the question
of Namibia with external problems which have no connection with it, such as the presence of Cuban forces in
Angola.

28. This disquieting fact prompts us to ask more than
one tragic question. How many meetings, conferences,
talks, symposiums, seminars or other such things must we
hold on this question before the relevant resolutions of
the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the United Nations itself
begin to be put into effect?

37. Above all, the Conference reaffhmed its attachment
to the United Nations plan for Namibia approved in resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), which the Council had
laid down as the basis for a peaceful settlement which
would be universally accepted.

29. How many crimes, murders and acts of barbarism,
how many acts of aggression and oppression, how much
perfidy, how much treachery and how many delaying tactics by the inveterate racists of Pretoria must still be tolerated before an end is finally put to the martyrdom of the
Namibian people?

38. Resolution ,435 (1978), formulated and negotiated
with the assistance of all parties concerned, appeared to
be a compromise capable of winning the support of all
parties. Unfortunately, although South Africa had been
consulted and had given its consent at all stages of negotiation of the settlement plan approved in resolution 435
(1978), it continues illegally to occupy Namibian territory, five years after the adoption of that resolution by
the Council; thus persisting in its defiance of the
Organization.
’

30. What acts of courage, bravery, heroism and selflessness must we still expect from the valiant fighters of
SWAP0 before the women and children, the elderly and
the men of Namibia cease to be pariahs in the land of
their ancestors?

39. This unacceptable defiance and arrogance on the
part of a regime which has been outlawed by the international community gives rise to doubt as to the capacity of
the Organization to translate into actions and deeds its
own unanimously
accepted decisions. The persistent
defiance and arrogance of South Africa not only are an
insult to the whole international community but also
reflect above all the inability of the Council, and more
particularly the weakened political will of the great Powers, to intervene promptly and effectively when peace,
stability and international security are seriously threatened.

31. How much time, how many months or years, must
we still wait before the Namibian people are fmally able to
exercise their sacred right to self-determination,
sovereignty, independence and freedom?
32. The Pretoria Fascists are dreaming wild dreams. In
their obstinacy they are aiming essentially at blunting the
determination of the SWAP0 fighters and persuading the
international
community to bow to their attempts to
impose an internal settlement, which, as everyone knows,
would amount to the installation of puppets, traitors and
other groups in the pay of neozcolonial and racist
interests.

40. No matter how profound and incurable its political
blindness may be, no matter how impressive may be its
military arsenal of oppression, South Africa would not
persist in. its defiant attitude if it were not assured of the
culpable benevolence of certain allied Powers.

33. The International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, should-in
case that
should still have been necessary-have dashed these mad
dreams.

41. When one considers the vehemence with which certain States condemn that which, in other circumstances
and in their view, constitutes action prejudicial to human
rights, one can only wonder about the justification of
their attitude towards a regime which has elevated to a
system of government the denial of the most elementary
human rights. One can only be indignant at the misuse of
the right of veto in the Council to oppose the adoption of
.concrete political and economic measures to compel
South Africa to withdraw from Namibian territory and
spare Namibia the horrors of abominable, inhuman racial
discrimination.

34. Indeed, in the Paris Declaration on Namibia,2 the
Conference, solemnly proclaiming its unreserved support
for the struggle of the Namibian people under the leadership of SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of
the -Namibian people, condemned the intensification of
barbarous repression, the policy of bantustanization and
the efforts to destroy the national unity .and territorial
integrity of Namibia.
.’
35. It condemned the ruthless exploitation of the Namibian people, the shameless plundering of their resources,

42. Given all the precautions which the members of the
contact group have contrived to adopt in order to accom4

modate South Africa in their actions designed to prevail
upon it to take part in the implementation
of the settlement plan, with the formulation of which it was associated and to which it had given its consent, we can only
be even more fully convinced that South Africa is just one
link in a vast and complex process of exploitation in
which the Powers which make up the contact group
participate-by
means of their firms and their international and multinational
corporations. We can’ thus
understand the hesitation or the refusal to exert real. decisive pressure on South Africa.

impunity, is extending its aggression and occupation of
the territory of others to neighbouring countries, particularly Angola, Mozambique and Zambia.
48. Another fact, no less significant when one looks at
the record of the Namibian situation, relates to the result
of the action undertaken by the contact group, which
volunteered its assistance to bring about a peaceful settlement. In spite of its good intentions so often affirmed,
and which we appreciate, the contact group has not been
able, over the last live years, to discharge the task which
it set itself very willingly. The only net result of the work
of those five years seems to be that the contact group has
helped South Africa to gain time to consolidate its
entrenchment and to exploit the vast riches of Namibian
territory more successfully.

43. It is easy to realize, in consequence, that the’ true
nature of the struggle being waged by the Namibian
people is essentially anti-imperialist,
anti-colonialist and
anti-racist.

49. Fettered by.its own contradictory interests, the contact group has rather become a brake on the process of
Namibian independence, which is and must remain the
final goal. That is not an accusation but a simple statement of fact, and we hope that our friends, the members
of the contact group, will understand us properly. In the
course of five years of effort, the contribution
of the
contact group to the settlement of the Namibian problem
is unfortunately far from that hoped for. This is affirmed
by SWAP0 and our own country, Benin.

44. The results of five years of effort by the contact
group-which
we should like to commend-prompt
one
to think that the optimism-to-order
displayed by the
Member States concerned and the publicity accompanying each of their actions are nothing but a smoke-screen
to camouflage the delaying tactics aimed at imposing a
neocolonial solution on Namibia in order to safeguard
selfiih political, economic and military interests,, sacrificing the rights of the Namibian people in an attempt to
obtain recognition, at the international level, for the
puppets who, in such a docile and shameful manner, serve
the interests of Pretoria.

50. Five years in the life of an oppressed people struggling for its freedom and independence is a great deal,
and it is too much. The good will of the individual
members of the contact group will determine whether, in
spite of everything, we shall place our continued, albeit
eroded, confidence in that group.

45. Again, one cannot but believe that, in endorsing the
South African demand for granting constitutional guaraxitees to the white minority in Namibia, the member States
of the contact group have actually given their blessing by
so doing to a racist policy which wishes to see the whites
continuing to enjoy privileges that are denied, .to the
blacks.

51. It is for the Council to take a calm decision. Our
analysis may seem simplistic to some, but we earnestly
hope that the members of the contact group themselves
will prove us wrong in our assessment by implementing,
before December 1983, the provisions of resolution 435
(1978).

46. Only recently, in deciding to grant a credit of’one
billion of special drawing rights to South Africa, against the
will of the international community as clearly expressed in’
General Assembly resolution 37/2 of 21 October 1982, the
International Monetary Fund, dominated as the Council
knows, simply made a direct and substantial contribution
to the strengthening of the arsenal of repression, oppression
and aggression of the neo-Nazis of Pretoria. That decision
of the Fund is in itself a defiance of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and of international morality; it is also
an offence to the conscience of the world, because it is an
encouragement of the crime of aparrhefd, an encouragement of a crime against humanity.

52. Be that as it may, it is up to those members of the
group that do not .always share certain of its approaches,
or have felt it necessary, like France, to dissociate themselves publicly from certain manoeuvres, to lead the way
for the members that wish only a neo-colonial type of
independence for Namibia, or are ,striving to link Namibian independence to extraneous issues.
53. TO link the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola to the process of the decolonization of Namibia
is tantamount not only to meddling in affairs that concern two sovereign States, ‘but also to facilitating and
indemnifying crimes daily committed by the soldiery of
South Africa against the independent States and peoples
of that, region. It is also an attempt to rob the Namibian
problem of its true dimensions, that is to say, as a manifestation of colonial domination and a violation of the
principles and objectives of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as of the decisions and resolutions of the
Organization.

47. In sharing with the Council this distressing record
on Namibia, the first conclusion to which we are ineluctably driven is the crushing defeat of South Africa in its
diabolical designs, despite the size of its resources and the
scope of the crimes to which it has resorted. South Africa
has been categorically repudiated by the valiant.Namibian
people, and the puppet regime which it has attempted -to
impose disappeared into thin air at the beginning of this
year. South Africa keeps going thanks to an armed dictatorship which, supported from outside and guaranteed
5

54. We should like, however, to stress publicly, with
appreciation, as we have not ceased to do in private, the
positive individual acts of certain members of the contact
group-to
wit, the Federal Republic of Germany and
France-acts that might have contributed decisively to a
solution of the problem before us if those contact group
members had not been thwarted ‘in their efforts by the
solidarity which the group is supposed to observe among
its members. We urge those countries to pursue their
efforts, even outside the contact group, and we hope that
their good intentions vis-ci-vis the Namibian problem will
soon bear fruit and thus demonstrate that the confidence
reposed in them has not been in vain.
55. The tragedy of Namibia is not just the illegal occupa-.
tion of a Territory; it is not just the denial of the most
basic rights of a people; it is not just apartheidand racism;
it is the unabashed exploitation of a people, the ruthless
plundering of its resources, and this in defiance of Decree
No. 1 for the Protection of the -Natural Resources of
Namibia, enacted on 27 September 1974 by the United
Nations Council for Namibia.3
56. The rate at which these corporations are plundering
the country will inevitably lead, in the final analysis, to the
exhaustion of its resources-which cannot fail to have
disastrous effects on the future economic life and viability
of an independent Namibia. There is every reason to
believe that they wish first of all to exhaust the significant
natural resources of Namibia before permitting it to
accede to independence, in order to place in a difficult
situation any authentic future, administration
of that
country, which will thus be forced into economic dependence upon South Africa.
57. It is high time to put an end to this vast conspiracy.
It is time to put an end to the enslavement and exploitation of the Namibian people. The international community can no longer tolerate the arrogance and the constant
defiance of the two black sheep of the Organization, Israel
and South Africa, the numerous misdeeds of whose
unholy alliance have too long gone unpunished.
58. It is therefore left to the Council, strong in its prerogatives, to adopt whatever firm and effective measures are
necessary to further the Namibian cause and to guarantee
the long-suffering Namibian people the immediate exercise of their inalienable rights. In this regard, the conclusions of the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,2 the
report of the Secretary-General [ibid.] and the important
statement of the President of SWAPO, our brother Sam
Nujoma [2439th meering3, are all documents of the highest
importance, which should inspire and guide the members
of the Council in their deliberations, whose importance
for the non-aligned
countries requires no further
demonstration.
59. The Council must, inter alia, reaffirm the relevance’
of all the resolutions of the Organization on this question,
resolutions confirming the right of the Namibian people to
self-determination and independence, affirming the integ-

rity of their Territory, including Walvis Bay and the other
islands off the‘ Namibian coast, and condemning the
apartheid regime for its crimes and its shameless exploitation of the resources of the Namibian people.
60. The Council must categorically reject all attempts
to establish a link or a parallel between the independence
of Namibia and problems which have nothing to do with
that issue, in particular, the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola.
61. The Council must, above all, revitalize the United
Nations plan approved in resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978), adopted unanimously by the Council, by requiring that it be implemented immediately without any restriction, modification, or escape clause. In other words,
the Council must create the necessary conditions to make
the independence of Namibia the reality of realities
before .December 1983.
62. What is happening in Namibia is not just a flagrant
and persistent violation of international law; it is also a
crime against humanity and a permanent denial of the
dignity and identity of man.
63. The time has come, therefore, for the Council to
impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
64. The Benin delegation, for its part, wishes to reaffirm its position of principle of total support for the just
struggle of the Namibian people and to congratulate the
United Nations Council for Namibia, which, under the
leadership of its President, Mr. Paul Lusaka of Zambia,
is sparing no effort to discharge its responsibilities as the
legal Administering
Authority of Namibia until. independence.
65,. To all oppressed peoples fighting for independence,
freedom., national
unity and territorial
integrityparticularly the Palestinian people, the Sahrawi people,
the people of Cyprus and the people of Timor fighting
for the liberation of their territories from the grip of the
colonizing invader of the twentieth century-the revolutionary people of Benin will never cease to offer their
active support and solidarity in the most. practical
fashion in so far as they are able.
66. Our delegation wishes to pay a well-deserved tribute to the valiant peoples of the front-line States, particularly those of Zambia, Mozambique
and, above all,
Angola, for the tremendous sacrifices they .have constantly made to thwart the repeated acts of aggression by
Pretoria, which is using Namibian territory as a springboard for subversive and destabilizing
operations
against the other States of the region. Benin reaffirms its
total solidarity with the front-line peoples, who enjoy the
unreserved support of the OAU and the Non-Aligned
Movement.
67. The Benin delegation expresses the hope that, on
this occasion, the Council will measure up to its respon-

sibilities and not disappoint the hopes that the international community and the’people of Namibia have placed
in it-hopes of seeing.the valiant people of Namibia exercising freely and immediately their inalienable right to
independence under the leadership of SWAPO.

numerous resolutions of the General Assembly, all to the
benefit of the South African regime, which is dramatically
strengthening its hand and reaping many advantages as a
result of its fruitful relations with those who are exploiting
the wealth that lbelongs to the people of Namibia alone.

68. It will depend on the Security Council whether. the
final, inevitabie victory of the Namibian people will be
that of the gun or the olive branch. Ready for the revolution, the struggle continues!

76. In‘ spite of. the laudable willingness of SWAPO, the
sole legitimate representative-of the people of Namibia,
to seek a peaceful solution of this colonial problem, day
after day South Africa is raising more obstacles to this
process, of independence or altering its true nature. In the
April issue of Africu Now, a report was published to the
effect that South Africa is promoting an independence
plan for Namibia that would involve the dismemberment
of the Territory. According to that “independence plan**,
the northern part of the Territory, that is, the part bordering on Angola, would be given to the counterrevolutionary Angolan puppet, Jonas Savimbi, and, in
keeping with Pretoria’s calculations, that would make it
possible for the whites in the remainder of the Territory
to become the most numerous ethnic group and guarantee that they would retain power and be able to continue the well-known
practices of apartheid and
bantustanization, thus more easily extending their role as
a United States-type policeman in southern Africa. The
plan is abominable from every point of view and stands
little chance of success, but it gives us a clear idea of the
true intentions of,Pretoria with regard to the decolonization of Namibia.

69. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Although my delegation has had an
opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Umba di Lutete on
Zaire’s assumption of the presidency of the Council, I
should like to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s pleasure at your excellent conduct of our discussions this month when there has been a great deal of hard
work. This prompts us to believe that the entire international community, Africa and, in particular, the people
of Namibia will in the course of this debate benefit
greatly from your leadership.
.
70. We wish also to extend our best wishes to the Minis-’
ters for Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned countries who
are taking part in this debate. We bid welcome in a spiritof solidarity to Comrade Sam Nujoma, President of
heroic SWAPO, and are delighted to have him with us.
71. Five years after the adoption of resolution 435
(1978) and more than half a century after South African
military forces entered the Territory, peace, freedom and
independence for the people of Namibia are still goals
that necessitate hard work.

77. Nevertheless, we are absolutely convinced that
South Africa’s intransigence is neither spontaneous nor
born of a feeling of independent self-sufftciency. Its irrational attitude is based on the unswerving support it
receives from a permanent member of the Council, which
does not hesitate to display its friendly attitude towards
the racist Pretoria regime, with which it obviously shares
certain values and aspirations.

72. We hope that this debate will be a starting-point in
our efforts to achieve the goals that we have set ourselves,
which are not only an aspiration of the people of Namibia
but also an objective of the entire international
community.

78. It was the United States that, in 1981, when it
appeared that significant progress was being made in the
talks on Namibian independence, invented for South
Africa the pretext of the presence of Cuban troops in
Angola and their withdrawal as a condition of the granting of independence to the Territory. South Africa has
managed to make good use of this contribution by the
United States, but the international
community
has
vigorously and unambiguously rejected that manoeuvre,
while SWAPO, with justice on its side, has taken appropriate action.

73. A sense of frustration has permeated the atmosphere
owing to the impossibility of achieving substantive progress in the process of Namibia’s independence; selfseeking forces are feverishly at work trying to maintain
an intolerable status quo that benefits only those who
with impunity exploit Namibia’s wealth and profit .from
the fact ,that South Africa is a mercenary State.
74. The colonial occupation of Namibia is illegal from
every point of view, according to the advisory opinion of
the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 19714 and
the overwhelming verdict of the whole world.

79. In January of this year at Harare in the presence of
Chester Cracker, the United States representative at the
negotiations,
Comrade Sam Nujoma,
the leader of
SWAP@ stated:

75. It must be stressed that at this stage, I2 years after
the advisory opinion of the Court was handed down, the
scourge afflicting the people of Namibia has assumed
intolerable proportions. Foreign interests and transnational corporations are relentlessly plundering the Territory’s wealth and depriving the people of Namibia of their
undeniable heritage, in open violation of Decree No. 1 for
the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia3 and

“The Reagan Administration
introduced a collateral issue that has led to an impasse in the negotiations
on Namibia over the past six months. Washington’s
insistence on linking Namibian independence to the
withdrawal of Cuban .forces from Angola has provided South Africa with a convenient excuse for delay7

ing the implementation
independence.”

of the United

Nations plan for

‘Wnfortunately
. . . the positive side of the balance
sheet has been set back by the emergence of other
issues which were neither raised nor envisaged at the
time .when resolution 435 (1978) was adopted or in
the subsequent negotiations under United Nations
auspices. These issues now apparently constitute the
main reason for the delay in the implementation
of
the United Nations plan. I am deeply concerned that
factors which lie outside the scope of resolution 435
(1978) should hamper its implementation.”
[S/Z5776,
para. 29.1

80. One clear objective’of the United States is to create
obstacles and conditions that are unacceptable not only to
the people of Namibia but also to the other members of
the contact group. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, Mr. Claude Cheysson, at the recent International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence, openly criticized the attempt to
link the two issues, and it is known that other Western
countries- do not accept that linkage. It would seem that
the world has become polarized on this issue, with the
United States and South Africa at one extreme and the
international community at the other.

85. There is therefore an overwhelming international
agreement with regard both to the unavowed intention
behind that manoeuvre and to its inappropriateness.
Nevertheless, its sponsors continue to persist with it.

8 I. In its resolution 37/233 B of 20 December 1982, the
General Assembly firmly rejected the persistent attempts by
the United States and South Africa to establish any linkage
or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and
the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola, a manoeuvre
that is aimed solely at slowing down the decolonization
process in Namibia and constitutes interference in the internal affairs of Angola.

83. The Seventh Conference of I-Ieads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in March
this year at New Delhi; referred to the matter in the following terms:

86. This of course means that the United States now
finds itself at odds with all of Africa. The entire continent
has forged a monolithic and indestructible united front
against South Africa and its abhorrent system of apurtheid, its policy of destabilization and aggression against
the front-line States and its unlawful colonial occupation
orNamibia.
Yet the United States continues to stand by
South Africa. Its position is particularly eloquent, a clear
example of the parameters used to measure democracy
and freedom by one that calls the criminal ex-Somozist
guards “freedom fighters”, and describes as “terrorists”
the Namibians who are fighting to liberate their unlawfully occupied territory, a territory that has been plundered and whose people have been brutally repressed.
Africa-like
the Arab nation-must
not lose sight of the
fact that in this regard the choices of the United States
have already been made: apartheid and Zionism, abominable creations spawned by the same empire.

“In this connection, the Conference most categoritally rejected the linkage or parallelism being drawn by
the United States Administration
between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban forces
from Angola. This continued insistence constitutes an
unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of the
People’s Republic of Angola.*’ [See S/I5675 and Corr. I
,
and 2. annex, sect. I, para. 48.1

87. We have recently been informed of the latest aggression by South Africa against Mozambique.
We are
deeply outiagedand.wennhesitatingly
express our strong
rejection of this action. That, then, is the kind of peace
that is intended for southern Africa. Nicaragua requests
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique to convey its sincere feelings of solidarity to the people and
Government of Mozambique.

More recently, the front-line States, in the communiqu&
issued following the meeting of heads of State or Govemment held at Dar es Salaam, on 12May of this year, with
reference to this already refuted argument,

88. There is, however, an even greater danger. The
development of South Africa’s nuclear capability, which
would be impossible without the transfer of technology
by certain Powers, entails unimaginable risks of destruction and suffering, not only for southern Africa but for
the, whole of that continent. The newspaper The Star, of
Johannesburg, in its issue dated 3 May, in an article
entitled “South Africa able to produce 15 nuclear
bombs’*, reports on the level of nuclear technology
achieved’by the Pretoria regime. I should like to read a
brief excerpt from that article:

82. That rejection was also reflected in the joint communique issued by the Government of Nicaragua and a mission of consultation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia when the mission visited Managua on 21 and 22
April 1983.5

“reiterated their rejection of the United States policy
according to which the independence of Namibia was
subject to the withdrawal of Cuban forces fron Angola.
’ They affirm that such insistence undermines efforts to
implement the United Nations plan and thereby serves
to perpetuate South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia.*’

“South Africa now has enough enriched uranium
for 15 nuclear bombs and could have enough for 60
bombs by 1987. This point is made in a study of
nuclear-weapons potential carried out by a major
American newspaper chain recently and read into the

84. We fully support the approach taken by the
Secretary-General in his further report on the implemen-’
tation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439
(1978) on this subject. This is what he says:
8

Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire, a
Democrat from Wisconsin. Senator Proxmire referred to
the report as extraordinarily well documented and said it
underlined the urgent need to stop the spread of nuclear
weapons.“*
89. We are quite sure that, if those Powers with strong
economic, political and military links ,with South Africa
were to exert constant pressure on that country, the possibilities of a solution to the colonial problem before us
would become much greater. The attitude of SWAP0
and its willingness to co-operate with the United Nations
in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) greatly
contribute to the only solution acceptable in this case, an
independent Namibia with its territory intact, including
Walvis Bay and the adjacent islands. Any attempt to fragment the Territory is quite unacceptable.
90. The decolonization of Namibia cannot be postponed. We should like to see a willingness on the part of
all the permanent members of the Council to act in support of the people of Namibia and not against them. The
disheartening veto of 1981 must be relinquished to history
and buried. We must act decisively; the action should not
be limited to the sacrifices and heroism of the Namibian
people; it is a task for all of us and for the Council in
particular.
91. The Secretary-General, with his customary common
sense, prudence and insight, has informed us in his recent
report:
“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
on Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful and prosperous future for the region as a whole.
The delay also has an adverse effect on international
relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing
sense of frustration and mistrust, with all that that
implies for peace and security in the region.” [Ibid,
para. Id.]

92. For that reason, the role of the Council on this
occasion, in exercise of the mandate assigned to it by the
international community, is important for two reasons.
On the one hand, it must uphold the inalienable right of
the people of Namibia through the impiementation
of
resolution 435 (1978); and, on the other hand, it must
ensure the maintenance of international peace and secu* Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

rity, thereby putting an end to an intolerable and anachronistic situation which, if prolonged, could lead to an
aggravation of the conflict. We cannot evade our obligation. Under General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966, Namibia is the direct responsibility of
the United Nations, but the attainment of its independence largely depends on our forthrightness and determination in facing this challenge.
93. The International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence
appealed to us to take immediate action, and it did so in
the following terms:
“The Conference, therefore, calls upon the Security
Council to meet at the earliest possible date to consider further action on the implementation
of its plan
for Namibia’s independence, thereby assuming its primary responsibility for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Five years after the adoption of that
resolution it is high time that the Security Council
assumed fully the central role in its implementation
and established the Council’s own time-frame for such
implementation.“6
94. Whereas the contact group has been unable in five
years to carry out the tasks it assumed and whereas the
outlook is rather gloomy in this area, the SecretaryGeneral, in the opinion of my delegation, is in a position
to play a decisive role in the implementation
of resolution 435 .(1978). Nicaragua would support such a wise
assignment, which could only further the process of independence and thereby benefit the people of Namibia.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

NOTES

’ Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Narnibian Peovle for Indeuendence, Paris, 25-29 April 198.3
(A/CONF.120/13);
2 Ibid., part

three,

pa; one, p&a. 31.
paras. 166-195.

s See Official Records of the GeneraI Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 24, vol. I, annex II.
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I. C.J. Reports 1971, p. 16.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 24, para. 879, sect. 2 (d).
6 Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),

part

three,

para.

193.

?

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

90-60205-March

cm300

York

.
.,

:,^

.

1991--2,050
