United Nations

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4625

th meeting
Thursday, 17 October 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Jiang Jiang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mrs. d’Achon
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Koonjul
Mrs. Arce de Jeannet
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 10 October 2002 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1132).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-64396 (E)

*0264396*

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

The meeting was resumed at 10.10 a.m.
The President (spoke in French): Before calling
on the first speaker inscribed on my list, I should like
to inform members of the Council that I intend to
adhere to the timetable, that is to say, to begin the
meeting at 10 a.m. and to suspend it at 1 p.m., to
resume at 3 p.m. and suspend at 6 p.m. I count on the
cooperation of speakers in order to be able to begin
promptly and be able to hear all speakers.
I should also like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of
Mauritania, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ould
Deddach (Mauritania) took the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Morocco. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to extend to you, Mr.
President, my delegation’s congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish you every success in carrying
out your task. I would also like to take this opportunity
to convey our appreciation to the Ambassador of
Bulgaria for his remarkable conduct of the Council’s
proceedings during the month of September.
The Council is meeting today to consider the
issue of Iraq’s implementation of international
resolutions. This meeting has great importance for both
the security and stability of the countries and peoples
of the region and for international peace and security.
This fact is borne out by the enormous number of
delegations that have requested to speak in this debate
to express their keen interest with regard to
implementing international law and avoiding any steps
that could aggravate the situation or threaten peace and
stability in the region.

2

There is no doubt about the need to respect
international law and, in particular, the resolutions of
the Security Council, which is the body with the
primary and important responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
conviction stems from the fact that when the Security
Council adopts resolutions it does so on our behalf, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and in line with the provisions of
Article 24 of the Charter. It is on that basis that the
Council’s resolutions enjoy the support of the
international community and, hence, the necessary
conditions for their implementation.
With regard to Iraq, the resolutions adopted by
the Council since 1990 have made clear the obligations
that must be met by that nation before the sanctions
imposed on it are lifted. Despite difficulties and
obstacles during the last 10 years, Iraq has in fact
cooperated with the United Nations and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
implement the provisions of the relevant international
resolutions. The good offices of the Secretary-General
have made it possible to convince the Iraqi authorities
to agree to the return of inspectors. That willingness
was reaffirmed in Iraq’s letter of 16 September 2002 to
the Secretary-General. In that letter, Iraq expressed its
readiness to receive inspectors and to discuss the
necessary arrangements for the prompt discharge of
their tasks. Meetings were subsequently held at
Vienna — on 30 September and 1 October 2002 —
between Mr. Blix and the Iraqi side, during which the
Iraqi side reaffirmed its resolve to cooperate with
international inspectors and to allow them to carry out
their tasks without conditions or restrictions. The
briefing made to the Council by Mr. Blix on 3 October
included references to the points agreed between Iraq,
the United Nations and the IAEA. It has been agreed
that those points would be referred to as the rules of the
game. This has given the impression that most of the
difficulties that have impeded the work of inspectors
will be overcome.
The founding fathers of the Organization
established the common defence system provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. That system was designed
in a way that makes resorting to the use of force the
very last means available to the Security Council, after
all other means have been exhausted. Foremost among
those means is the use of economic sanctions to bring a
State to implement the Council’s resolutions. The

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

objective of sanctions is therefore to persuade the
country concerned of the need to comply with
international law and to avoid the use of force.
Avoiding the use of force is central to both the role and
the responsibilities of the United Nations, especially of
the Security Council.
On that basis, and given the fact that Iraq has
agreed to accept the prompt and unconditional return of
inspectors, the Security Council must now consider
whether the resolutions it has thus far adopted are
sufficient to enable inspectors to carry out their
functions without impediment, or whether it should
adopt a new resolution. Whatever the situation may be,
our interest in showing respect for international legality
and the provisions of the United Nations Charter makes
it incumbent upon us to give an opportunity to the
inspectors to return to discharge their task and await
the report that will be presented by Mr. Blix before
taking any other measure.
The peace and security of the States and peoples
of the Middle East makes it necessary for all those
countries, without exception, and I repeat without
exception, to respect international law and to comply
with all relevant United Nations resolutions. It must be
recalled here, that the resolutions of the Arab Summit
in Beirut have consolidated the reconciliation between
Iraq and Kuwait. They reaffirmed the need to respect
the independence and sovereignty of Iraq, and the need
for it to cooperate in order to finally close the file of
Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons. They
also affirmed the need to avoid any need for military
action against Iraq.
In order to ensure the security and stability of the
Middle East, the region must be made into a zone free
from nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. In this regard, I must reiterate the
consistent support of the Kingdom of Morocco for
declaring the Middle East a zone free from those
weapons in order to ensure the security and well-being
of all peoples of the region.
We cannot ignore or gloss over the humanitarian
aspect of the situation in Iraq because those who suffer
ultimately are the Iraqi people. We must not forget the
tragedy that the brotherly people of Iraq have lived
through for the past 10 years. Large numbers of
children continue to die as a result of malnutrition and
disease, while others are denied their right to
education. As for adults, the pitiful financial situation

impels them to sell their personal effects, a common
sight on the streets of Baghdad, in order to provide for
their families and loved ones.
Taking into account this critical situation in
which the Iraqi society finds itself, the Security
Council must help Iraq overcome this crisis and
authorize the resumption of weapons inspections in
accordance with United Nations resolutions; the
objective is to enable the Iraqi people to return to a
normal stable life.
In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the Security
Council, as the custodian of international legality and
of the credibility of the Organization, will arrive at a
common vision and agree to the arrangements for the
return of the inspectors to discharge their task. That
would give new hope to the peoples of the region and
of the whole world, thus avoiding the scourge of
another war; for if it were to take place, it would have
dire consequences on the stability of a large number of
States.
The President: I thank the representative of
Morocco for his kind word addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): We are grateful to the NonAligned Movement for its initiative in requesting this
open debate, which could have been convened even
earlier at the initiative of the members of the Security
Council themselves. Developments in the past few
months have raised very serious concerns, as the
international community seems to be drawn into the
dreadful logic of war.
This is a critical matter that concerns the
Membership of the United Nations as a whole.
International peace and security are clearly at stake, as
is the very credibility of our Organization, its
principles and methods of work. Not only should the
Security Council benefit from the views of nonMember States on the most appropriate steps to be
taken, but also the wider membership of the United
Nations needs to be appraised on the difficult political
choices which are being considered by the Council.
In moments like this, our collective choices must
be guided by the need to ensure unconditional respect
for the norms of international law embodied in the
United Nations Charter and for the mandatory

3

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

decisions adopted by the Security Council, as well as
by the possibility of resorting to the instruments
provided in the Charter in order to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security; the use of military
force must only be considered as a measure of last
resort.
As Brazilian Foreign Minister Celso Lafer stated
at the Assembly’s second meeting, at the outset of the
general debate of the current session:
“The use of force at the international level
is admissible only once all diplomatic alternatives
have been exhausted. Force must be exercised
only in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and in a manner consistent with the
determinations of the Security Council.
Otherwise, the credibility of the Organization will
be undermined in a way that will not only be
illegitimate, but that also gives rise to situations
of precarious and short-lived stability. In the
specific case of Iraq, Brazil believes that it is
incumbent on the Security Council to determine
the necessary measures to ensure full compliance
with the relevant resolutions. The Security
Council’s exercise of its responsibilities is the
way to reduce tensions and to avoid risking the
unpredictable consequences resulting from wider
instability.”
There must be no mistake whatsoever on what the
entire international community expects from Iraqi
authorities. The fact that Iraq has blatantly refused to
cooperate with the United Nations in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions is a
matter of great concern, and not without consequences
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Iraq must abide strictly and unconditionally by its
obligations under those resolutions. The international
community requires full and verifiable assurances that
Iraq has completely demobilized its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction and that it is not in a
position to resume them.
The Security Council must act in accordance with
the international community’s desire that inspections in
Iraq be resumed as soon as possible, with a view to
ensure the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction. To that end, full compliance and
cooperation on the part of the Iraqi authorities is
absolutely necessary. Inspections must be carried out
independently by the United Nations and the

4

International Atomic Energy Agency with unrestricted
cooperation on the part of Iraq.
The Council should also be encouraged to define
positive incentives for full compliance that would lead
to the alleviation and gradual lifting of the sanctions
regime. If and when they are needed, further measures
of enforcement should be considered by the Security
Council in the light of an evaluation of the findings of
the inspections.
We trust that this debate will give the Security
Council a clearer picture of the views of the Member
States on this matter of great concern to us all.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Switzerland. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to speak on the issue of
Iraq.
Switzerland stands firmly against all forms of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, whether
this concerns the production of or efforts to produce
such weapons. These weapons first and foremost
present a threat to civilian populations. Switzerland
also shares the concern that such weapons could fall
into the hands of international terrorist networks. It
will continue working to promote comprehensive
disarmament that is verifiable and well-balanced at the
regional and global levels.
Switzerland should like to see the Iraqi
Government respect the obligations incumbent upon it
in accordance with the Security Council resolutions
regarding inspections. It notes that the policy of
armament pursued by that Government in recent years
gives rise to serious suspicions. It believes that the only
way to allay these suspicions is for the latter to accept
unconditionally the presence and the inspections of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) on its territory.
Switzerland supports without reservation the
efforts of the Security Council, of the SecretaryGeneral and of the head of UNMOVIC. It has
communicated to the head of UNMOVIC that it would

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

be willing to play an active part in the UNMOVIC
mission should its assistance be required. It is of the
opinion that all so-called presidential sites must also be
listed and made accessible to the inspectors without
restriction. Finally, it considers that the inspections
must be thorough and lead to the effective elimination
of any illegal weapons that may be found.
Switzerland believes that all peaceful means
should be exhausted in order to achieve these aims.
The possible use of force should not be considered
without account being taken of all the potential shortand long-term consequences at the political, security,
humanitarian and economic levels. Switzerland is
particularly apprehensive about the risks facing the
civilian population. It is equally concerned about the
impact that an armed conflict could have on regional
stability.
Switzerland believes in this context that the
primary objective to be pursued by the international
community is the elimination of any illegal weapons
that may be discovered in Iraq. It also welcomed the
willingness shown by President Bush on 12 September
2002 to seek a solution to the current crisis in the
framework of the Security Council. It also welcomed
both the Iraqi Government’s announcement of its
decision to conform to the pressing demands of the
international community by accepting the return of
disarmament inspectors, as well as the constructive
results of the talks in Vienna.
Switzerland considers that all procedures
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations must
be respected and that recourse to the Security Council
is indispensable when the use of force is envisaged. In
particular, it points out the risk of a precipitous
interpretation of the notion of legitimate defence from
a preventive perspective that extends beyond the scope
provided for in the Charter. As such, it favours a twostage approach that would permit the Council to assure
itself, on the basis of the report of the inspectors, that
Iraq has fulfilled its obligations and, in the event that
this should not be the case, to take all necessary
measures with full knowledge of the facts.
Switzerland attaches great importance to respect
for Security Council resolutions. While recognizing the
specific nature of each conflict, it will continue to
strive to ensure the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions in the name of the credibility and
effectiveness of international law.

There is undeniably a need to act, and to act with
determination, in order to ensure the implementation of
United Nations resolutions, but action must be taken
jointly within the framework of the United Nations.
Only the United Nations can confer international
legitimacy on an action against Iraq.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Switzerland for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Bangladesh. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We felicitate you,
Sir, upon your assumption of the Council presidency.
We express our confidence in your ability to bring our
deliberations to fruition. We also commend
Ambassador Tafrov’s leadership last month.
Bangladesh maintains a strong preference for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We have consistently
made this point in the past, including on the floor of
this Council. As always, Bangladesh believes in
diplomatic and political solutions to international
disputes. These must be achieved through constructive
discussions.
While we acknowledge the need for the
enforcement of Security Council resolutions, such
enforcement actions should be based on the norms and
mores of international law and backed by the United
Nations. The objective of any enforcement action
should indeed be the need to enhance security, peace
and stability. On the specific issue at hand, we
welcome Iraq’s decision to allow the return of weapons
inspectors. The inspectors should have total and
unfettered access in the course of the discharge of their
assigned responsibilities. No impediment must be
placed on the work of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission. Furthermore,
Iraq must comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions on this issue.
However, in the ultimate analysis, every possible
effort should be made to avert war. Wars cause death
and destruction. They disrupt economies and they
exacerbate human suffering. These views, as this
debate amply demonstrates, are evidently shared by a
preponderant majority of the membership of the United
Nations. They must be heard, listened to and heeded.

5

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Bangladesh for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation joins others in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also wish to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria,
for his stewardship of the Council last month.
We thank you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council for convening this very important open
meeting on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait, in
response to the request of the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement. My
delegation associates itself fully with the statement that
he made yesterday, outlining the position of the
Movement on this issue. This meeting is most timely
because the attention of the entire international
community is focused on the impending decision of the
Council.
Malaysia is among those who had called for this
meeting so as to enable the larger membership of the
Organisation to express their views before the Council
takes action on this issue. This is because the decision
that the Council is about to take on Iraq is of crucial
importance, not only to Iraq but also to the region and
the entire international community. We think it is
appropriate that, on an issue as important as this, the
views of all Member States of the United Nations be
heard. We thank the Council for the courtesy of
listening to the non-members first.
The issue before the Council relates to the return
of United Nations arms inspectors to Iraq, after an
absence of four years, to continue with the Councilmandated task of disarming Iraq of the remaining
weapons of mass destruction that it is alleged to have
in its possession. That task has now been entrusted to
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), established by
Security Council resolution 1284 (1999), under the
leadership of a disarmament expert of vast experience,
Mr. Hans Blix.

6

Under the terms of that resolution, the Council
entrusted Mr. Blix and UNMOVIC to carry out its
mandate, guided by the principles of professionalism,
independence, rigour and transparency, to ensure that
an effective inspection regime could be put in place.
The independent or United Nations character of
UNMOVIC is essential and must be preserved if it is to
carry out its work with credibility. This is particularly
important, given the well-known problems besetting its
predecessor, the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) which made that fateful decision to pull
out of Iraq just before the bombing raids of December
1998, thereby abruptly terminating its painstaking but
otherwise useful work.
Mr. Blix has already had initial meetings with the
Iraqi side to work out the modalities of the return of the
arms inspectors under the new name and mandate. He
awaits the green light from the Council before
proceeding to Iraq. With Iraq’s acceptance of the
unconditional return of United Nations arms inspectors,
Mr. Blix is legally bound, under Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999), to proceed with the fulfilment
of his mandate.
Malaysia believes that with the assured
cooperation of the Government of Iraq, UNMOVIC
would be able fulfil its mandate and should proceed
accordingly, without the need for another Council
resolution. Mr. Blix, as we understand it, was ready to
proceed but became uncertain and confused as to the
purpose of the exercise, with the beating of the drums
of war coming to a crescendo. He now seeks guidance
from the Council, which is understandable if
UNMOVIC is to do its job well and has the blessing of
the Council.
However, any new instruction, if absolutely
necessary, must merely be to reinforce the thrust of
resolution 1284 (1999). Any departure from that
resolution — which would include, as widely
speculated, the threat of use of force, among other new
elements, some of which are unprecedented — would
only, and unnecessarily, complicate the work of
UNMOVIC. UNMOVIC must be given a chance to
complete the work of UNSCOM, and Iraq must be
given a chance to demonstrate full compliance and
cooperation with the United Nations and the
international community, without threats of the use of
force. We believe that Iraq has heard and will heed the
clear and unambiguous message of the international

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

community on the issue of its commitments regarding
its obligations.
Therefore, the issue before the Council should not
be one of authorizing use of force against Iraq on the
presumption of Iraqi non-compliance with resolution
1284 (1999), but one of allowing UNMOVIC to
commence its work in Iraq as expeditiously as possible.
The focus in the Council should be on promoting
United Nations diplomacy to resolve the problem
through effective inspections and weapons destruction,
not on legitimizing war against Iraq to effect “regime
change”. Removing the head of State or Government of
a sovereign State is illegal and against the Charter, and
it must never be a project that has the endorsement of
this Council. The provisions of the Charter on this
matter are very clear and unambiguous, as has been
underscored by many speakers in this debate.
At the same time, the disarmament efforts must
be a part of a clear sanctions-lifting plan, so that the
debilitating humanitarian crisis in Iraq can be brought
to a swift end. The success of this current exercise
requires the fullest cooperation of the Government of
Iraq in every respect. It is time to bring to a close a sad
chapter in the history of the region and to forge a new
relationship among the regional States, one based on
reconciliation, trust and confidence with one another,
and a shared common heritage.
This, however, could only come about with Iraq’s
full cooperation in other areas, under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including an
immediate accounting for and return of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war and missing third-country nationals, as
well as national archives and other properties illegally
taken from Kuwait during the Iraqi invasion of that
country. Only these actions on the part of Iraq would
ensure the return of normalcy in the relations between
Iraq and Kuwait. We would therefore urge Iraq not to
lose this window of opportunity and to do what is right,
in the interest of peace and tranquillity of its people,
the region and the world.
My delegation welcomes the fact that the issue of
Iraq is now being dealt with by the Security Council,
where it rightfully belongs. The matter must be dealt
with by the full Council, involving all of its members
at every stage of the deliberations. It must be resolved
through the Council’s own mechanisms and processes,
based on established principles and norms of
international law and the Charter of the United

Nations. It is up to Council members to ensure and
preserve the integrity of its decision-making process
and to do their utmost to resolve the problem without
recourse to military action. The beating of war drums
and talk of “regime change” are, therefore, completely
out of place and unwarranted. They detract from the
business at hand, which is the dispatch of UNMOVIC
inspectors to Iraq, and complicate the situation.
It is clear that the overwhelming majority of the
international community does not wish to see or
support military action against Iraq. This is not
surprising, as no one wants to see the prolongation of
the utter misery of the Iraqi people after almost twelve
years of the most debilitating sanctions. The innocent
people of Iraq will be among the first and most
numerous casualties in any use of force against Iraq.
For their sake, war must be avoided. Diplomacy must
be given every chance to work. Its success far
outweighs, and is more enduring than, anything that
military action could bring to bear on the situation.
This is the message that the Secretary-General
himself has repeated often enough, both in the context
of the question of Iraq and other conflict situations. In
his opening address to this session of the General
Assembly on 12 September 2002, the SecretaryGeneral staunchly stood up for diplomacy and
multilateralism. The Council can do no less as
multilateralism, which entails United Nations
diplomacy, is the raison-d’être of the United Nations.
He said it most poignantly at the second meeting of the
General Assembly’s current session when, referring to
the sanctity of the rule of law, he declared:
“... every government that is committed to the
rule of law at home, must be committed also to
the rule of law abroad. All States have a clear
interest, as well as a clear responsibility, to
uphold
international
law
and
maintain
international order”.
The alternative to diplomacy and the multilateral
process is recourse to the use of armed force, with all
its unintended consequences to peace, security,
including
human
security
and
development.
Unintended consequences could affect, as well,
international efforts to combat international terrorism,
which will surely be further complicated and may well
unravel in its wake.

7

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Surely, with the ushering in of the new century
and millennium, and the high hopes and expectations
contained in the Millennium Declaration, the Council
will not wish to squander the gains garnered over so
many years of careful, painstaking and productive
diplomacy.
All Members of the Organization are custodians
of the Charter, but especially so the Members serving
on the Security Council, both permanent and nonpermanent. They must ensure that the Charter is upheld
and protected, not undermined or set aside. There must
be consistency and even-handedness in its actions and
decisions and no double standards. What is required of
Iraq, with respect to compliance with Council
resolutions, must also be required of others,
particularly Israel, which has ignored many of them
with impunity.
In dealing with this and other issues of peace and
security, the Council has a grave responsibility to
ensure that the international system, based on the
corpus of international laws and norms, will be
preserved and strengthened. Members of the Council
will have to ensure and satisfy themselves that their
action in the Council will serve the larger interests of
the international community, not just their own narrow
national interests. At the end of the day, the Council
will be judged as to whether its decision upholds
international law and international legitimacy,
strengthens the United Nations and the multilateral
process, promotes peace and security, or the opposite.
It will be judged as to whether by its decision the
Council chooses the path of constructive diplomacy or
that of destructive war, with all its implications to
regional and international peace and security.
This is, indeed, a heavy responsibility that each
member of the Council must bear on behalf of the
international community in whose name, and hopefully,
in whose interests, the Security Council acts. The
responsibility is particularly awesome for the
permanent members who, by virtue of the special
power vested in them, will determine, more than
others, the final outcome of this issue. We trust they,
and other Council members, will do what is right.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Malaysia for his statement and for the
kind words he addressed to me.

8

The next speaker is the representative of
Lebanon. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, it gives me pleasure to express our
sincere thanks for your prompt response to the request
of the delegation of South Africa, in its capacity as
chair of the Non-Aligned Movement, to hold this
public meeting to discuss the question of Iraq and
related developments.
Allow me, Sir, to take this opportunity to express
Lebanon’s condolences to the countries whose
nationals perished in the tragedy that took place in
Indonesia as a result of the terrorist act in Bali.
Resort to the United Nations and implementation
of its resolutions, in particular those of the Security
Council concerning any question, ensures the peaceful
settlement of such questions and prevents States from
resorting to unilateral military action that could result
in tragedy and danger that might not be confined to the
geographical location of the problem. This fact applies
to Iraq.
The Beirut Summit of the League of Arab States
reaffirmed the unanimous view of the Arab leaders that
the solution to the problem of Iraq can only be
achieved through dialogue between Iraq and the United
Nations, without exposing it to a war that would
increase the suffering of its people.
Using the logic of dialogue during the Beirut
Summit, the Republic of Iraq undertook steps to
respect the independence, sovereignty, security and
territorial integrity of the State of Kuwait, and to avert
anything that might lead to a repetition of the actions
of 1990. Those undertakings were warmly welcomed
by the Arab leaders and also constitute a preliminary
step towards Iraq’s cooperation in reaching a prompt
and final solution to the question of the Kuwaiti
prisoners-of-war and the return of Kuwaiti property in
accordance with relevant international resolutions.
Within that atmosphere of cooperation, the Arab
leaders at the Beirut Summit adopted a number of
positions that support Iraq and that called for the
following: first, respect for the independence,
sovereignty, security, unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq. Secondly, the resumption of dialogue between the
United Nations and Iraq, which began in a constructive
and positive atmosphere, in order to complete

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Thirdly, they called for the lifting of
the sanctions imposed on Iraq and an end to the
suffering of its brotherly people in a manner that
ensures security and stability in the region.
In addition, the Arab leaders expressed their total
rejection of an attack on Iraq and noted that a threat to
the peace and security of any Arab State is a threat to
the national security of all Arab States.
Since the Beirut Summit, Iraq adopted a number
of additional constructive steps that proved its
commitment to addressing the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In the 16 September 2002 letter,
from the Foreign Minister of Iraq to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Iraq responded to the
appeals of the United Nations Secretary-General and
those of the Member States. The letter contained Iraq’s
decision to allow the unconditional and unrestricted
return of United Nations weapons inspectors. It
constituted a first step towards a comprehension
solution that would ensure implementation of the other
provisions of the Security Council resolutions.
Once again, the logic of dialogue proved that it
alone can ensure implementation of the Security
Council resolutions on Iraq. The consultations held
between Iraq, Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei led to the conclusion of an agreement with
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna
on 1 October 2002, on the practical arrangements for
the return of the United Nations weapons inspectors, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The urgent task now is the return of United
Nations weapons inspectors to ascertain that Iraq no
longer possesses weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Hans Blix expressed the readiness of his team to
return to Iraq on the basis of existing resolutions.
Therefore, the adoption of any new resolution would
create complications that have no legal justification.
The transformation of the Middle East region into
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction, in
particular of nuclear weapons, and the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
those relating to the conflict in the Middle East,
without any distinctions between States, is an essential

precondition for the establishment of lasting peace and
security in the region.
However, what we see in reality is that Israel has
consistently defied internationally binding resolutions.
It has ignored Security Council resolution 687 (1991),
which calls for the establishment of a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. It has
refused to implement resolution 487 (1981), which was
adopted following the Israeli act of aggression against
Iraq in 1981. That resolution called upon Israel to place
its nuclear facilities under the comprehensive
safeguards regime of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).
Israel has continued to stockpile weapons of mass
destruction in its arsenal, particularly nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons, without any international
deterrent. Israel has also ignored, indeed even
challenged, the 29 Security Council resolutions
adopted on the question of Palestine, the latest of
which was resolution 1435 (2002), which demanded
that Israel withdraw from the recently reoccupied
Palestinian territories and towns.
Israel has resorted to violence, aggression and the
perpetration of crimes against humanity in order to
implement its expansionist and settlement policies. It
continues to reject all the efforts made for the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and peaceful
settlement of the Middle East question, the latest of
which was the Arab peace initiative, which was
endorsed by the Beirut Summit. Israel responded to
that initiative, which enjoyed unanimous Arab and
international support and was welcomed by the
Security Council in its resolutions 1397 (2002) and
1435 (2002), by reoccupying the West Bank, killing
people and destroying property.
Despite all of this, the Security Council has thus
far taken no steps to ensure Israel’s implementation of
its resolutions; thus it seems that Israel has impunity in
this respect. This situation can only reinforce the view
of the Governments and the peoples of the region that
double standards do exist in international relations. The
application of international law is limited to Iraq while
Israel is allowed to remain above the law.
This view that a double standard exists in the
implementation of Security Council resolutions has
also been expressed by anti-war demonstrators in
Europe and in America. An article entitled “Double

9

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Standards”, which appeared in the latest issue of The
Economist, on 12 October 2002, stated:
(spoke in English)
“It is no longer being asked by Arabs alone.
‘No war against Iraq, free Palestine’ has become
the slogan of anti-war demonstrators in Europe
and America. The two conflicts have become
entwined in the public mind in a way that the
West’s politicians cannot ignore. When he sought
last week to talk a sceptical Labour Party into
supporting action against Iraq, Tony Blair,
Britain’s Prime Minister, got his biggest cheer for
the bit of his speech that said that United Nations
resolutions should apply in Palestine as much as
in Iraq.”
(spoke in Arabic)
This is a further reaffirmation of the need for the
Security Council to adopt a single standard in dealing
with its own resolutions in order to ensure that justice
prevails.
In conclusion, in its capacity as Chairman of the
Arab Summit, Lebanon hopes that Iraq’s positive
response to the international will and its readiness to
accept the return of international inspectors will help to
put an end to the suffering of its people and lead to a
comprehensive solution that would lead to the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and most importantly to the lifting of the
sanctions on Iraq. Those sanctions have killed 1.8
million Iraqis thus far, most of them women, children
and the elderly.
Lebanon also looks forward to the creation in the
Middle East of a zone free from weapons of mass
destruction and to an end to the threats to use force
against Iraq, and to respect its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Lebanon for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Nambiar (India): Mr. President, at the
outset, I would like to congratulate you for your
initiative in holding this open meeting on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait. We have just concluded a

10

lengthy debate in the General Assembly on the issue of
the Security Council’s report and on its reform and
restructuring. One of the issues raised by a large
number of speakers at that debate pertained to the
desire to see greater transparency in the functioning of
the Council and in the relationship between the Council
and the general membership of the Organization. The
decision to hold an open meeting to discuss an issue of
considerable import to the larger membership of this
Organization addresses this concern directly and is
therefore both opportune and timely.
India has a vital interest and high stakes in the
peace and prosperity of the Gulf region. Our relations
with this region have developed as a result of centuries
of deep historical, cultural, religious and economic
contacts. Today, approximately 4 million Indians reside
in the Gulf region. In Iraq itself, we had substantial
trade interests and projects which were affected after
1991. Under the “oil-for-food” programme, India is a
significant exporter. Developments in the region thus
affect India.
India had welcomed the remarks made by the
President of the United States during the debate in the
General Assembly on 12 September 2002 indicating
that the United States would work with the Security
Council for the necessary resolutions on Iraq. We had
also welcomed the resumption of diplomatic efforts
under the auspices of the United Nations to try to end
the impasse on inspections.
During the debate in the General Assembly, many
leaders emphasized that adherence to the multilateral
system is an indispensable imperative for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Secretary-General, too, in his address to the General
Assembly, had stressed this point and had conveyed
that, while Article 51 of the Charter provides States the
right of self-defence, if attacked, when it came to
addressing the broader threats to international peace
and security, there was no substitute for the unique
legitimacy provided by the United Nations. In
contemplating the use of force, the question of
legitimacy and the international rule of law are
important. Twelve years ago, faced with a case of
aggression, the Member States showed their
willingness to authorize action under the authority of
the Security Council. These were reflected in Security
Council resolutions 686 (1991) and 687 (1991) of
1991. Without such authority, any support for a
campaign would not be forthcoming.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

India recognizes the desire of the international
community to see full compliance by Iraq with all
relevant United Nations resolutions, including those
relating to the repatriation of Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and to the return of all Kuwaiti property.
Such a desire cannot, however, justify any unilateral
action against Iraq without the agreement of the United
Nations. We are of the view that given the current
configuration of circumstances, any undermining of the
territorial integrity of Iraq could have unforeseen and
destructive geopolitical implications that could extend
even beyond the region.
While saying that, we recognize that it has been
four years since the most recent United Nations
inspections in Iraq took place. The need for an update
to tighten the inspection regime and sort out “loose
ends” was recently elucidated by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission, Mr. Hans Blix. If the
Security Council were to see the need to review the
situation and lay down fresh guidelines for the
weapons inspectors to go into Iraq, India would be
supportive of that process. However, before deciding
on a new mandate it would be important for the
Council to reflect on the objective of such an exercise.
The purpose of any such action should be to achieve
disarmament in Iraq as laid down in the relevant
resolutions.
In ensuring this objective, the proposals
concerning the inspection regime have to be
commensurate with the task at hand — that is,
inspections must be designed to enforce the elimination
of weapons of mass destruction in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Council. Some of the
proposals being advanced pertaining to the role and
presence of particular Council members in inspections,
extra-territorial interviews of Iraqi nationals and the
use of United Nations armed guards to accompany
inspectors would seem unprecedented and could attract
adverse public attention internationally. We believe that
the conditions attached to any new resolutions, and the
modalities of their implementation, should not be such
as to make them unworkable or effectively to invite
their rejection.
Some speakers in the General Assembly debate
on the Security Council have made reference to the
exclusivity claimed by the five permanent members in
the context of recent deliberations and contemplated
actions with respect to Iraq. Our view is that such a

narrow base for decision-making can only detract from
the unity and cohesion that must be generated and
sustained on an issue so grave in nature and of such
magnitude.
India believes that while there may be a rationale
for a tightened inspections regime, there is an equally
compelling case for the creation of an enabling
environment for compliance with the relevant
resolutions. Such a step has been envisaged in Security
Council resolutions themselves — and I refer in this
context to section D of resolution 1284 (1999). We
believe that sanctions against Iraq should be lifted in
tandem with full and effective compliance by Iraq with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We also
believe that sanctions should not have an adverse
humanitarian impact on the lives of ordinary Iraqi
citizens.
In conclusion, I wish to join a large number of
other delegations that have expressed themselves on
this subject, and to reiterate that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a State are inviolable. Any action
to limit these attributes can be taken only under the
express provisions enshrined in Chapter VII of the
Charter.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that all
possible alternatives that can help avoid recourse to
military action be actively explored under United
Nations auspices. Every effort must be made to ensure
that peace and stability are maintained in the region,
for what we do could well represent a defining moment
in the way relations among States are ordered. There
should be no precipitate action that adversely affects
the interests of the countries of the region or of
countries which have vital stakes in the region. The
action of the Council must not only possess legitimacy;
it must also be seen to possess legitimacy. For our part,
we believe that the urgent task as a first step is to
facilitate the return of inspectors to Iraq. The Council
should fashion its approach with this basic task in
mind.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Viet Nam. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding so
quickly to the request by South Africa, in its capacity
as the country currently chairing the Non-Aligned

11

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Movement, to convene this important debate on an
issue of great concern to all Members of the United
Nations. I also believe that by doing so, you are
keeping the members of the Council more attuned to
the groundswell of opinion of non-Council members,
which in turn may help in the consultations of the
Council members on the much-discussed draft
resolution.
The issue of the looming confrontation with
regard to Iraq is being inflated to such an extent that it
could erupt any day now with a military attack against
that country. Iraq is being depicted as an outcast that
has developed and stockpiled weapons of mass
destruction and has relations with the hated Al Qaeda.
But is there any concrete evidence to prove that beyond
any reasonable doubt?
I believe that in this case the devil is not so black
as it is being painted. While that second allegation
seems to be groundless — as a recent Central
Intelligence Agency report found — the first is simply
based on the argument that if Iraq refuses to go along
with a United Nations resolution, it must have
something to hide. Only experts can say whether or not
Iraq has developed and stockpiled weapons of mass
destruction. Now that the Iraqi Government has
accepted, without any conditions, the return of
international weapons inspectors to Iraq, a hurdle has
been removed. So let the inspectors come back and do
what they are mandated to do; pre-emption and
prejudgement will not help their task. A political, not a
military, approach is the only way to resolve the
deadlock. We are convinced that diplomatic efforts
towards this end will bring more credit to the Council.
The gist of the question is this: if the political
will is for war, peace will not have a chance; but if it is
for peace, then we Member States should stick to the
Charter of the United Nations, giving peace at least the
last chance. Article 51 and Article 2 of the Charter are
very clear about this issue. I am not going to waste the
Council’s time by quoting from them here. But in this
connection, my delegation fully agrees with the
statement made by the Secretary-General in the 2nd
meeting of the General Assembly, on 12 September
2002, when he said:
“Any State, if attacked, retains the inherent right
of self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter.
But beyond that, when States decide to use force
to deal with broader threats to international peace

12

and security, there is no substitute for the unique
legitimacy provided by the United Nations.”
In this connection, my delegation wishes to make
it clear that any attempt to change the political system
of a sovereign State by sheer force of arms is
unacceptable, as it constitutes a blatant violation of the
Charter and of international law, and creates a very
dangerous precedent in international relations. I believe
that nobody wants to turn this world into “Apocalypse
Now”.
In recent history we have witnessed the full-scale
escalation of a war due to merely a decision under a
similar circumstances. We therefore call on the
international community to do whatever it can to avoid
any flexing of military muscle, which will surely
endanger peace and stability in this region and the
world over.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Djibouti. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to state how pleased I am to see you, Mr.
President, presiding over the affairs of the Council for
this month.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered yesterday by Ambassador Dumisani
Shadrack Kumalo of South Africa on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I also wish to express my
delegation’s appreciation of the Council’s positive
response in holding this emergency meeting on the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
Given the conflicting objectives being pursued
both within and outside the United Nations, the
uncertainties clouding the current international political
climate are daunting. We are at a crossroads of history.
As many who have spoken before me have already
indicated, this debate has one major objective: to
enable the more than 175 nations at the United Nations
that are not members of the Security Council to be
heard and to have their views carefully heeded.
The heavy burden of responsibility placed on the
Council cannot be underestimated. This is so because it
seems — we are all in agreement — that the Security
Council has the mandate and sole responsibility to
decide upon Iraq’s disarmament regime, the return of
inspectors, the conduct of inspections and ensuring

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Iraq’s full compliance with all relevant resolutions.
Further, in the event of any non-compliance, refusal or
obstruction by Iraq, the Security Council alone has the
mandate to chart the next course of action. We believe
that through patient and thoughtful negotiations,
however tough, there will emerge a unified,
internationally acceptable policy toward Iraq. We also
believe that no one wants a war and that everyone
recognizes that if a military action were authorized by
the Council, it would be only as a justifiable last resort.
We always need to be reminded that if the
justification for the use of force is the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, then the logical
solution lies in the return of inspectors to Iraq to carry
out comprehensive and unrestricted inspections. If this
process is given a chance, Mr. Hans Blix and his
colleagues would soon embark upon their duties and
the Council could expect a report in due course on the
level of cooperation and on the degree of compliance
or non-compliance by Iraq. It is therefore up to Iraq to
live up to the promise it has reiterated many times in
the last few weeks that they assert their complete
readiness to receive the inspectors and agree to resolve
all issues that may block the road to joint cooperation.
The Council is, indeed, confronted with an
unprecedented situation requiring its immediate
consideration. The Council must be satisfied with the
accuracy and impartiality of information it receives,
and which is expected to form the basis of crucial
decisions. More than ever before, the integrity and
credibility of the Council is at stake, for the
international community believes that any decision or
action the Council finally embraces will be taken with
great care and conviction. The Council’s choice must
be made with moderation, judiciousness and utmost
fairness. As the primary custodian for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council understands only too well that the challenge
before it today is one affecting us all. Accordingly, the
international community places its faith in the hands,
heads and hearts of the members of the Council.
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait is an old
story which never seems to go away, while the people
of Iraq continue to experience abject poverty and
deplorable living conditions. It is unfortunate and
unacceptable for the fate of a whole nation to be
ensnared by an international political football that
continues to have dire humanitarian consequences.
While there has obviously been an interruption of

inspections since 1998, we continue to believe that
until that time, significant progress had been achieved
in disarming Iraq. The current state of negotiations
between the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and Iraq
offers a glimpse of hope which needs to be seized. Let
us not squander this opportunity to achieve the core
objectives contained in Security Council resolutions
686 (1991), 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), while
ensuring full respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Iraq.
Iraq also needs to ensure compliance in good
faith and cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross for finding a lasting resolution of the
Kuwaiti claims, particularly with respect to Kuwaitis
missing since 1991.
My country obviously aligns itself with the Arab
perspective of cautioning against the war option at a
time when the international community is mobilized to
combat terrorism, following the tragedy of September
11 and against the backdrop of the destruction and
bloodshed prevailing in the Palestinian territories.
These are issues that are crying for urgent attention and
lasting solutions. They deserve the concerted action of
the international community. No amount of
prevarication and neglect will therefore be a substitute
for dealing with the core problem in the Middle East:
the occupation of Arab lands by Israel.
President Bush’s speech to the General Assembly
on 12 September galvanized the international
community because, as expected, it opened up the
diplomatic option in the current crisis. That was a wise
and very encouraging move, which accepted the
primacy of international collective security. In his
landmark speech on the same day, the SecretaryGeneral made a number of important observations on
the necessity and sagacity of working together to
uphold international law and to maintain international
order. Only by multilateral action, he said, can we
defeat terrorism and tyranny, give people a chance to
escape the ugly misery of poverty, ignorance and
disease, and ensure the benefits and opportunities of
open markets for all. Therefore, we could not agree
with him more when he says that this universal
Organization has a special place.
In conclusion, Sir, as the late United States
President, John F. Kennedy, stated:

13

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

“When written in Chinese, the word ‘crisis’ is
composed of two characters. One represents
danger, and the other represents opportunity”.
In essence, we are here today to make a fateful choice
between these two conflicting alternatives.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Djibouti for his kind words.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Israel in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion on the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of
Israel to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of
Liechtenstein, whom I invite to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Like many other
speakers before us, we welcome this open debate on an
issue that is of singular importance for global security
as well as for the future of this Organization. It would
hardly be appropriate to say that discussions on the
topic before us have never been held before — quite
the contrary, every aspect has been covered from every
possible angle. But not in this format and not in this
room, and this is what is needed, since any action of
the Council on this issue requires the broadest possible
consensus.
There can be no doubt that all Security Council
resolutions, on Iraq or otherwise, must be implemented
in full. Defiance and non-compliance with legally
binding decisions undermine the effectiveness, as well
as the credibility, of the Organization as a whole and
must, therefore, not be accepted. It is thus imperative
that the Council act with common resolve to enable the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) to resume the work that the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) was

14

never able to finish, and that Iraq extend unconditional
cooperation and provide full and unrestricted access to
all sites and facilities UNMOVIC chooses to visit. The
destruction and removal of all weapons of mass
destruction, as mandated by the Council 12 years ago,
must finally be carried out. While a new resolution to
this end is not strictly needed from a legalistic point of
view, it is at this point certainly a political necessity.
Given the implications of the present situation, clarity
of the rules governing compliance by Iraq will be of
the essence. Furthermore, these rules must be designed
in a manner that ensures that the inspection process
remains credible at all times.
If ensuring full compliance with its decisions is
indispensable for the Council’s credibility, the Council
is, at the same time, also facing another challenge: as
an Organization designed to promote peace and, in
particular, to provide for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, it must do everything possible, and be seen as
doing everything possible, to ensure compliance with
and implementation of its decisions without resorting
to the use of force. Military action should, therefore,
only be contemplated if all other means have failed and
non-compliance by Iraq has been clearly established.
It is the Security Council that provides for the
terms for the inspection regime, and the Council is
therefore
the
arbiter
of
compliance
and
implementation, based on the findings of UNMOVIC.
In accordance with the Charter, it is also the Council
that must authorize the use of force.
There are clearly enormous consequences of the
use of armed force in Iraq, which the Council has to
weigh carefully before making such a decision. First,
there is the risk of further instability in an already
deeply troubled region, the existing instability being
caused not least by the non-implementation of Security
Council resolutions. But there is also the question of
what involvement or action the Council foresees for the
time after a possible armed intervention. Given these
questions and the magnitude of what is at stake, it is of
crucial importance that the Council acts with the
broadest possible unity and the strongest possible
support from the membership as a whole. This — and
only this — can provide for the necessary political
legitimacy.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Liechtenstein for his kind words.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, whom I
invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (spoke in French): Mr. President, first of all I
wish to thank you personally, as well as the other
Council members, to have granted my request to take
the floor before this body, which is the main guarantor
of peacekeeping and international security. I am aware
of your great abilities as a diplomat, Sir, and therefore I
am confident that the Council’s work will be
productive this month. Let me also thank our friend
and colleague, the Ambassador of Bulgaria, who
conducted the work of the Council brilliantly during
the last month.
We are pleased to see that relations between Iraq
and Kuwait, two independent and sovereign States,
United Nations Members and members of the NonAligned Movement, have once again become normal.
We encourage these two friendly countries to continue
to do their utmost in order to resolve pending issues.
This would contribute to establishing peace, security
and stability in the region.
My country, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, has been following the question of Iraq very
closely and with the greatest attention. During their
meeting on 18 September, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Non-Aligned Movement encouraged Iraq
and the United Nations to intensify their efforts in the
quest for a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
all the issues pending between them. The Ministers
also insisted on the urgency of a peaceful solution to
the question of Iraq in order to preserve the authority
and the credibility of the Charter of the United Nations
and of international law, as well as peace and stability
in the region and throughout the world.
There is not the shadow of a doubt that the
question of Iraq dominates the current international
agenda. Why is that the case? What should we do — or
rather, how should we resolve this question? Some
advance a multitude of arguments on their side to
defend tooth and nail the use of force to achieve their
objective. Others provide an opposite viewpoint,
preferring the peaceful settlement of disputes. In our
humble opinion, and based on the Charter and

international law, we should explore all peaceful means
to resolve the outstanding problems and should do
everything possible to avoid war, which can only cause
more suffering for the Iraqi people. The people of Iraq
are martyrs who have committed no crime; they have
already suffered too much and deserve to suffer no
longer. The world would render a great service to the
Iraqi people by helping to find a peaceful solution to
this question.
We are told that the question of Iraq concerns the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Moreover,
it is stated unequivocally that Iraq possesses chemical
and biological weapons and will have the ability to
manufacture nuclear weapons in the near future. In that
regard, many countries maintain that it is up to the
United Nations — the sole universal international
organization — to conduct inspections on the ground
and to verify the veracity of the statements made. We
are pleased to note that Iraq, in order to prove its
sincerity, has unconditionally accepted United Nations
inspections. In that context, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic calls for the immediate
resumption of United Nations inspections in Iraq and
expresses the hope that the question of Iraq will thus be
resolved swiftly and peacefully.
In today’s world, where dialogue and cooperation
among States continues to prevail, it is important that
the international community call firmly and vigorously
for the settlement of disputes through the path of peace.
In our view, any conflict, no matter how complex, can
and must be resolved peacefully. In that spirit, we
appeal to the international community to do all it can in
order to resolve the question of Iraq swiftly and, above
all, peacefully.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for his kind words.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Angola. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. I should also like to express my
appreciation to the previous President for the able and
wise manner in which he conducted the proceedings of
this body during his mandate.

15

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Secondly, I should like to acknowledge the
foresight of the presidency of the Non-Aligned
Movement for requesting that this meeting be
convened, and the foresight of the Security Council —
particularly that of the current presidency — for
convening it, thus allowing for the participation of
every Member State in a discussion of the most
important and serious international crisis today. The
consequences of not reaching a consensus on the issue
before us could be far-reaching and could affect each
and every Member State, as well as the Organization.
The choice before us is between peace and war. And
the options are whether or not the international
community has a role to play in the resolution of this
crisis in a world that is becoming increasingly
multilateral.
Angola has always expressed its commitment to
the United Nations, especially to the Security Council,
whose mandate is to maintain international peace and
security. My Government, in joining the United
Nations shortly after its independence, affirmed the
principles and values that constitute the essence of the
Charter of this noble Organization.
My Government condemns any unilateral action
by any Member State that threatens international peace
and security, betrays the principles of the Organization
and undermines its role. Consequently, in 1990, Angola
unequivocally condemned the invasion of Kuwait by
the military forces of Iraq. My Government is
confident in the Security Council’s ability to carry out
its mandate. Therefore, it is imperative that the
Government of Iraq redouble its efforts for the full and
immediate implementation of Security Council
resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), as they
constitute the only internationally recognized avenues
towards achieving peace and justice through consensus.
Furthermore, the implementation of those two key
resolutions can be the cornerstone for a solution of the
current crisis. We believe the record of the
implementation of those two key resolutions has
provided the international community, as well as the
Iraqi Government, with the necessary understanding of
mutual concerns, thus removing all perceived obstacles
to their full and immediate implementation.
During the last few days, the Iraqi Government
has expressed its readiness to respect and implement
the resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
with regard to the unconditional return of inspectors to
Iraq. The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and

16

Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency are the established mechanisms
through which that commitment should be carried out.
My Government welcomes the progress thus far
achieved. However, we share the concern of other
Member States in stressing that meaningful progress
will only be registered once unconditional and
unrestricted inspections actually take place.
I believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, and in particular through
the Security Council, should continue to work with the
Iraqi Government in order to achieve meaningful
progress in the resolution of the crisis. Security
Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284 (1999), and
all subsequent resolutions on the situation in Iraq,
remain viable and relevant instruments. Our efforts
should therefore be directed at ensuring their full
implementation.
In conclusion, Angola believes that before taking
any measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, the
international community must seek a peaceful solution
under the auspices of the United Nations, taking into
account that the measures foreseen in Article 42 of the
Charter must be taken only as a last resort, and then
only if they represent the collective will of the
international community as embodied by the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Angola for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I have the pleasure to express to you,
Mr. President, our happiness at seeing you preside over
this meeting. Allow me also to thank the members of
the Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in a debate of such great importance. In that
regard, we would also like to express our gratitude to
South Africa for its initiative in calling for the holding
of this meeting in its capacity as the current Chair of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
Like other Arab and Islamic countries and the
overwhelming majority of the world’s peoples and
States, Palestine is deeply concerned and harbours

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

serious apprehensions about what we are witnessing
with regard to the increasing possibilities of a new
outbreak of war in the Middle East region. We are also
worried about the growing possibility of the use of
military force against Iraq — a sisterly Arab member
country of the United Nations — as well as about the
possibility of invading and occupying it. Were such
things to occur, they would of course lead to further
destruction in Iraq and to further suffering for its
people. Moreover, such events would also have
profound negative consequences on the region as a
whole, encourage extremism and heighten hatred
towards those who actually undertook such actions. It
is very difficult to imagine stability in either Iraq or the
region if such events take place. Using military force or
going to war is definitely no solution. It must be
avoided.
Despite the beating of war drums we have been
hearing recently, there have been some positive
developments. On the one hand, this question has been
referred to the United Nations instead of taking
unilateral action; and, on the other hand, Iraq has
accepted the unconditional return of inspectors. We
believe we should build on these two elements and that
the current crisis should be resolved through a rapid
return of inspectors to ensure that there are no weapons
of mass destruction, thereby reassuring the
international community with regard to this important
issue.
The Security Council has adopted enough
resolutions on this subject. The recent negotiations in
Vienna and Iraq’s subsequent position seem to point to
the possibility of reaching acceptable arrangements
between the United Nations and Iraq with a view to
ensuring full compliance with the resolution calling for
the destruction of all weapons of mass destruction and
verifying that there are no such weapons in Iraq.
Nevertheless, if the members of the Council find it
necessary to adopt a new resolution, it will be
important that such a resolution not contain impossible
demands or mandate the use of force in advance. A
new Council resolution should serve as a bridge
leading to the implementation of its previous
resolutions and not as a bridge to war.
Just prior to the last crisis, Arab States had indeed
made great headway towards Arab reconciliation with
regard to the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. The
Beirut Summit was a very important step in that
direction. We would like to reiterate our commitment

to the spirit of the Summit and to its decisions and
resolutions, including with regard to cooperating with
the Tripartite Commission to resolve the issues of the
return of Kuwaiti property and of Kuwaiti prisoners
and third-party citizens being held in Iraq.
It is very difficult for the Arab street to believe
that the use of force against Iraq would serve to uphold
international law and legitimacy or to ensure respect
for the resolutions of the Security Council. It is doubly
difficult to believe when all Arabs — and indeed the
entire world — have witnessed how Security Council
resolutions are violated and rejected and how the
provisions of international law are flouted by a single
State. That State is, of course, Israel, which is
considered by the Council to be the only occupying
Power in the world today and which, incidentally, has
illegally acquired several weapons of mass destruction.
Just a few hours ago, Israeli tanks once again destroyed
the homes of civilians in Rafah, killing at least five
people and injuring forty. What we need here is for
Members to try to regain, even partially, credibility for
the Council and for this international Organization.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
observer of Palestine for the kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus has been closely following the
developments relating to Iraq, as well as consideration
of this issue within the United Nations. We welcome
the format of today’s meeting of the Council.
Noting that it is necessary for Iraq to implement
the United Nations Security Council resolutions, the
President and the Government of the Republic of
Belarus welcome the decision made by the Iraqi
leadership on the resumption of the work of United
Nations inspectors in that country without any
preliminary conditions. Through this decision, Iraq has
demonstrated its aspiration for a constructive dialogue
with the United Nations and the international
community. Belarus calls upon the States members of
the Security Council to support this constructive
approach, opening up a political way out of the present
complicated situation. We support the outcome of the
consultations on this problem held in Vienna.

17

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Belarus cannot agree with the position taken by
those States that see the settlement of the Iraqi issue
only through the use of force. We support political and
diplomatic means for the settlement of this issue under
the auspices of the United Nations and stand against
any unilateral military actions without relevant United
Nations Security Council mandate.
According to the United Nations Charter, the
Security Council is the body bearing primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this connection, the Council
should not allow a military action against Iraq, which
could result in a major international conflict with
unforeseen consequences.
Constructive dialogue between the Iraqi
leadership and the United Nations Secretary-General
and the international community as a whole and
ensuring the unimpeded work of United Nations
inspectors are, in our opinion, the key guidelines of
agreed international efforts on the road towards a
peaceful settlement of the Iraqi issue.
The Republic of Belarus welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 1409 (2002),
which considerably simplified the implementation of
the oil-for-food programme. We call for further stepby-step mitigation of the United Nations regime of
sanctions against Iraq, which undermines the social and
economic situation in that country and has led to
serious humanitarian consequences for its population.
Belarus seeks political settlements to all disputes
on the international agenda. We express hope for an
objective consideration of the Iraqi issue and call upon
the Security Council to take a balanced decision in the
interest of peace and security, not only in the Middle
East but on a global scale as well.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Mr.
President, my sincere congratulations for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are fully confident that your capabilities and wisdom
will guide the work of the Council to our desired
objectives. I would like to extend my thanks and
gratitude to your predecessor, my friend the

18

Ambassador of Bulgaria, for directing the work of the
Council last month. I would also like to extend thanks
to my friend, the representative of South Africa, for
requesting the convening of this meeting to hear the
views of States and their positions vis-à-vis the issue.
Bringing peace, security and stability to the world
requires a more active role for the United Nations, as
well as an intensification of diplomatic efforts and
political endeavours. Undoubtedly, such diplomatic
means, as well as a full and in-depth analysis of the
different aspects of the problem, its impact and results
on the regional and international levels, are the best
means of maintaining international peace and security,
instead of resorting to the use of force.
The present phase of the situation in the Arabian
Gulf region is very sensitive and fraught with a myriad
of risks. The matter requires rationality and
farsightedness in order to avoid the outbreak of another
war that would have unforeseen and unpleasant results
leading to instability in the region, and may have an
adverse impact on the peace and stability of the entire
world. Also, conducting such a war may lead to the
rekindling of hatred, hostility, spite, vengeance and
violence, as well as to humanitarian catastrophes that
the world could very well do without.
Iraq’s acceptance of the return of United Nations
inspectors, as well as its assurances of facilitating
United Nations inspectors mission and its pledge not to
impede their work, should lead to accelerating the
return of the inspectors to complete their task. The
inspectors would be expected to submit a report stating
that Iraq is free from weapons of mass destruction and
that Iraq is implementing all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the release of Kuwaiti and third
country prisoners of war and the return of Kuwaiti
property. This would undoubtedly lead to the lifting of
the economic sanctions that have been imposed on Iraq
and that are hurting the brotherly Iraqi people. This
would also help to preserve the unity, security and
territorial integrity of Iraq.
In addition to the United Nations insistence that
Iraq implement all resolutions of international legality,
we cannot ignore the contempt that the Israeli
Government has shown for such resolutions. The
United Nations is not very satisfied with Israel’s
implementation of the many resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

There is no doubt that the United Nations lack of
resolve to ensure the implementation of these
resolutions of international legality and the
international community’s disregard of Israel’s refusal
to implement them are among the main reasons for the
ongoing tragedy and instability in the Middle East. The
statement of one minister of the Israeli Government
that all Security Council resolutions should be filed in
the dustbin brings home for us the fact that Israel is not
committed to honouring resolutions of international
legality. According to Israel, such resolutions are not to
be implemented and have no inherent procedure for
implementation. Israel has flouted all resolutions
adopted since 1948 and heeds only those warnings
made by powerful and influential countries. This in
itself is a challenge to international legality and
disregard for the peace and security of the region.
Double standards and Israel’s lack of commitment
to the implementation of the resolutions of
international legality diminish the Council’s credibility.
Indeed, they encourage other countries to flout and
disrespect this legality. It cannot be claimed that
resolutions not issued under Chapter VII are nonbinding; if they are, of what value are they? Security
Council resolutions, under whatever chapter they may
be adopted, are binding on the international
community, particularly since they address issues of
international peace and security. They are especially
binding on the permanent members of the Security
Council, because those countries have participated in
drafting and adopting them.
That commitment and the obligation to
implement these resolutions have a bearing on the
credibility of those States. It is assumed that the
Security Council will take practical steps to ensure the
implementation of its resolutions when the party
concerned refuses to do so, as has occurred in many
other parts of the world, including with respect to the
Iraqi situation today.

region and the world by the evil nature of Saddam
Hussein’s regime.
While the entire international community is
united in the fight to eradicate international terrorism,
Iraq, with its production of weapons of mass
destruction, continues to be a menace to the
international community. Today, we in the United
Nations face a reality in which one party is pursuing
the empty rhetoric of excuses and is in breach of
several Security Council resolutions, while the
international community has engaged in a long
discussion regarding the form and legality of an action
that is important and morally justified.
Albania is of the opinion that immediate action
by the Security Council is of the utmost importance.
We believe that the position of the United States, as
stated on 12 September before the General
Assembly —
“We cannot stand by and do nothing while
dangers gather. We must stand up for our security
and for the permanent rights and hopes of
mankind” (A/57/PV.2, p. 9) —
is the most realistic position. Albania restates its full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and of
the Security Council to find a fair solution to the Iraqi
question.
No dictatorial regime that has demonstrated an
aggressive nature in international relations, suppresses
human rights and commits crimes against its own
citizens has the moral right to represent the sovereignty
of the people of its country, whose will and ideas are
kept bound by the chains of a criminal authority.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Albania. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Not long ago, Albania was under a dictatorial
regime. The results of elections under that regime were
99.99 per cent in favour of Big Brother. In reality, it
was a prison for the entire country and State
sovereignty was represented by the will of a single
dictator. Such dictatorial regimes generate continuous
crises to prolong their own existence. In averting such
crises in the future, the action of the international
community to secure peace and stability in the region
is as important as the establishment of freedom and the
legal rights of the people who suffer under such
totalitarian regimes.

Mr. Nesho (Albania): We have followed with
deep concern the current events in the Middle East, as
well as the threat posed to the peace and security of the

Three years ago, we recognized the difficult
position of the Security Council in deciding on the
intervention of the international community against the

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Saudi Arabia for his kind words
addressed to me.

19

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

genocide committed by the criminal regime of
Milosevic against the Kosovar Albanians. Many States
were undecided with regard to intervention against a
sovereign State. Moreover, the propaganda of the
Milosevic regime presented the conflict as a clash of
civilizations and a threat to Christianity from the
Albanian Muslims of Kosovo. In the name of peace,
security and the protection of human rights, the action
of the international community proved to be right, vital
and far-sighted in preventing a human tragedy.
That intervention was meant not to demonstrate
prepotency, dominance or a unilateral stand, but to
defend the right of the people to live in freedom. It was
conceived not to protect Muslim Albanians against the
Christian Orthodox Serbs, but to save both from a
criminal regime that had kidnapped their rights. The
intervention was intended to preserve and guarantee the
future of the international system. The humanitarian
intervention of the civilized world in Kosovo not only
justified itself, but also introduced an important
precedent in international relations.
Today, we are facing a situation in which the preemptive action of the international community is
necessary in order to avert a possible world catastrophe
precipitated by the use of weapons of mass destruction
by an uncontrolled regime. The strength of our actions
depends on the Security Council’s decision and our
common responsibility towards the people of the
world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Albania for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker on my list is the Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
to the United Nations. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): At the outset I
would like to express our deep appreciation to the
President of the Council for convening this open debate
on the question of Iraq. I would like also to express our
appreciation to the delegation of South Africa for its
courageous and constructive initiative on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement in requesting the convening of
this important meeting.
In his statement before the annual coordination
meeting of Foreign Ministers of members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), held in

20

New York on 17 September 2002, Mr. Abdelouahed
Belkeziz, Secretary General of the OIC, stressed that
the gravity of the situation in Iraq continues to
preoccupy our organization despite the breakthrough in
Arab-Iraqi relations earlier this year.
The continuation of the sanctions imposed on
Iraq, with their severe social and humanitarian
consequences, has inflicted much harm on a whole new
generation in Iraq. The Secretary General expressed
concern that this will have extremely negative
repercussions for this Islamic country for many years
to come. He expressed the hope that Iraq would be able
to settle all its problems with its sisterly neighbours.
Foremost among these problems is the issue of the
missing Kuwaitis. It is also hoped that Iraq could settle
its problems with the United Nations, particularly with
regard to the return of the United Nations inspectors to
resume and complete their mandated tasks.
Following that meeting, the OIC Foreign
Ministers issued a statement welcoming the decision of
Iraq concerning the return of the United Nations
inspectors to Iraq, in response to the appeals made by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, by the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, and by
Arab, Islamic and other States as a first step towards a
comprehensive solution to relations between Iraq and
the Security Council. Normalized relations would lead
to implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
to the lifting of sanctions imposed on Iraq, to
respecting its security and sovereignty and to
establishing the Middle East as a zone free from
weapons of mass destruction.
The Ministers called upon all States to abide by
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, to refrain from the threat or use of force
against Iraq, and to respect its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
It has been repeatedly stated before this body that
there should be no double standards when it debates the
issue of non-compliance with its resolutions by any
Member State. The history of the United Nations and
its records testify to the fact that some of its Member
States have defied its resolutions. Israel is a clear
example. However, the United Nations, including the
Security Council, has not resorted to the use of force
against such countries. I would like to refer to an
article published in the Inter Press Service on 11
October 2002, quoting Professor Stephen Zunes,

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

Associate Professor of Politics at the University of San
Francisco and Middle East Editor for Foreign Policy in
Focus. He wrote that there were an additional 91
Security Council resolutions about countries other than
Iraq that were currently being violated, 31 of which
dealt with Israel.
We strongly support the call for seeking a
peaceful solution to the issue of Iraq in a way that
preserves the authority and the credibility of the United
Nations, as well as the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law.
Undoubtedly, the recent decision by Iraq to allow
the United Nations inspectors to return unconditionally
and to facilitate their task, as well as the positive
outcome of the meetings held in Vienna between Iraq
and the United Nations, are steps in the right direction.
They enable the Security Council to play its mandated
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security and spare the region the catastrophes of war
and destruction and alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people, which has lasted far too long and must be
ended.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Cambodia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): May I first of all once
again congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I had the benefit of addressing the Security
Council under your able leadership on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
the open meeting on progress achieved in the area of
counter terrorism. At that meeting I reported on the
vigorous efforts of ASEAN countries to jointly and
individually combat terrorism. It is therefore with
profound sadness that we witness the heinous and
disastrous attacks by terrorists against two ASEAN
member States, Indonesia and the Philippines. I wish to
express my deepest condolences to the Government
and people of Indonesia, the Government and people of
Australia and other countries for the massive loss of
life and deep suffering caused by the attack of
international terrorism in Bali, and also to the

Government and the people of the Philippines for the
terrorist bombings today. We must once again
underscore the importance of regional and international
cooperation against international terrorism.
May I also express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his inspiring message delivered yesterday
by the Deputy Secretary-General, Madam Louise
Frechette.
May I also express my gratitude to Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa for requesting this
emergency meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
fully agree with him that the Security Council is being
asked to consider a matter that has important
repercussions for the entire United Nations. The
maintenance of peace and security lies at the heart of
the United Nations Charter, and the Security Council,
being the main body dealing with collective security,
should be accountable to the entire membership of the
United Nations. As Mr. Kumalo stated yesterday, the
Security Council has to uphold the aspirations of peace
and security for the United Nations as a whole, and not
just for the select few.
The holding of this open meeting of the Security
Council will allow us, the 191 Members of the United
Nations, to express our views regarding the grave and
dangerous situation in which we find ourselves today.
We should strive for a momentum of peace to prevail in
this grave situation and must at all costs avoid war.
The situation in Iraq has been an issue that has
been the subject of discussion in this body for more
than 12 years now. Nine resolutions have been adopted
that not only called for Iraq to allow inspection and the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction, but also on
the return of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and the return of
Kuwaiti property. We should therefore not lose sight of
the fact that adequate machinery already exists within
the United Nations system to deal with this issue. We
believe that peaceful efforts in the framework of
United Nations mechanisms should be fully utilized
and, if necessary, strengthened. We therefore agree
with the majority of Member States that all avenues
must be exhausted and that the use of force should only
be utilized as a means of last resort. War will have
disastrous consequences and create a humanitarian
disaster of enormous proportions.
We therefore strongly urge Iraq to comply with
all Security Council resolutions unconditionally and in

21

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

an unfettered manner. We are pleased to note that Iraq
has responded to the calls of the United Nations
Secretary-General and many Member States, with a
positive attitude in its discussions in Vienna with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and by sending letters
to the Secretary-General declaring its acceptance of the
return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq
unconditionally.
We trust now that the speedy return of the
weapons inspectors is imperative as a means to
alleviate international tensions in this grave and
dangerous situation. Compliance by Iraq with all
United Nations resolutions should allow the sanctions
imposed on Iraq for the past twelve years, which have
caused innumerable sufferings for its innocent civilian
population, to be lifted as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Jamaica. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Neil (Jamaica): Mr. President, I wish to thank
you and the members of the Council for allowing
Jamaica to participate in this open debate in response
to the request of the Permanent Representative of
South Africa, acting on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. This is a matter of great importance for the
world community.
Under Article 24 of the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council is entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security on behalf of the membership of the
Organization. It further requires that in discharging
these responsibilities, the Council shall act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.
As it is thus accountable to the wider
membership, it is fitting and proper that the Council
should hear the views of Member States on a matter of
major importance involving the issue of war and peace.
There is a great deal at stake, as the eyes of the world
are on the Security Council and on the United Nations,
and whatever is decided will have significant
implications for the future of the Organization and for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

22

At the heart of the matter is the question of
compliance with the decisions of the Council by
Member States and the enforcement options that the
Council may choose to exercise.
The Security Council’s resolutions 661 (1990),
687 (1991) and 715 (1991) among others, imposed
certain obligations to be fulfilled by Iraq, which may
only have been partially implemented. It should be
clear that Iraq is obliged to comply with these
resolutions, which require the destruction and cessation
of further development of weapons of mass destruction
and the fulfilment of certain obligations with respect to
the return of Kuwaiti property and missing persons.
These resolutions should be fully implemented.
Iraq should give unfettered access to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) inspectors in order to verify
compliance with its disarmament obligations. Jamaica
is hopeful that such arrangements can be made in view
of the assurances given by Iraq and in the light of the
agreement reached on during meetings with the
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, Mr. Hans Blix, in
Vienna from 30 September to 2 October 2002.
We believe that the matter can be resolved by
peaceful means. The prospect of war should be avoided
with all its manifold consequences, including death and
destruction and the humanitarian tragedy that is the
bitter legacy of war.
There is not much information available to us on
the direction in which the Council is moving, but we
would expect it to make reasonable arrangements for
inspections to be carried out in Iraq as soon as possible.
We must also register our concern at aspects of
the decision-making process in the Council, especially
with respect to the role of the elected members and the
pre-eminence of the members with the veto power. Our
view is that the full involvement of the elected
members of the Council at all levels of the decisionmaking process is vital for giving legitimacy and
authority to the Council’s decisions.
We ask the Security Council to act in a fair and
objective manner, bearing in mind its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and the avoidance of
military confrontation. We are concerned that the
integrity of the system of collective security under the
Charter will be endangered by any unilateral action,
which would weaken the fabric of international law.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

We make these observations because of the value
we place in the United Nations system and the scheme
for collective security under the Charter. It is of great
importance for all of us in the international community
and particularly for small States. We should strengthen
it and guard against the acceptance of any doctrine or
policy which would circumvent the multilateral system
and undermine the principles that sustain a world order
of peace and security, the non-use of force, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the sovereign
equality of States. Jamaica would urge that whatever
action the Council should take, it should not
compromise these principles.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Jamaica for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, we are
delighted to see you presiding over this very important
and historic debate on a subject that has been described
by some as the survival of the human race.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank our brother and colleague Ambassador Kumalo
of South Africa, who has assisted you in facilitating
this debate.
The debate before us concerns a grave issue with
serious implications for multilateralism in the conduct
of our business in the United Nations. At risk is a
Member of this Organization that is small by all
standards and is being threatened with military action
by powerful neighbours.
Iraq, whose case has been before the Security
Council since 1991, risks having its case dealt with
outside of this body — a body whose responsibility it
is to provide international peace and security for all of
humankind. The whole world therefore expects those to
whom these positions of heavy responsibility have
been entrusted to desist from pursuing selfish national
interests. Instead, they should strive to preserve the
authority and credibility of the Charter of the
Organization.
The Council may recall that, when it was dealing
with the question of the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in
1991, Zimbabwe was presiding over this body. We
strove then to put together an international coalition to

deal with the matter. The result was a unified action by
the international community to rectify untoward
international behaviour on the part of Iraq. That result
was a demonstration of what multilateralism can
achieve. To this day there are no regrets as to those
actions.
The Charter of the United Nations encourages the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Any action taken by a
Member State before the dispute-settlement channels
offered by the United Nations have been exhausted
represents a complete breach of international law. In
particular, unilateral measures taken outside of the
United Nations may register short-term gains but will
be very harmful in the long term. Yesterday we had the
opportunity to hear from some delegations about the
possible consequences for the subregion if the issue of
Iraq is handled outside the United Nations.
The Government of Iraq has agreed to receive
United Nations inspectors and to give them full and
unfettered access to all the areas they need to inspect.
Members of the Organization need to be vigilant in
guarding against tendencies to try to settle disputes
outside of the provisions of the Charter. We have
resolution 687 (1991) on the inspection of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq. Let us use that resolution and
wait for a report from the inspectors. Iraq must comply
with resolution 687 (1991) and other relevant
resolutions.
My delegation finds it ironic that, at a time when
the Iraqi authorities have agreed to the return of United
Nations inspectors, there is talk of adopting a new
resolution, with stiff requirements meant either to
humiliate the Iraq authorities or to force Iraq to reject
the conditions and so stop the inspectors from
travelling to that country. This is the old gunboat
diplomacy against weak adversaries, and here the
goalposts are being shifted. We believe that this world
body’s responsibility is to disarm the Iraqi war
machinery, particularly with respect to dangerous
weapons of mass destruction — chemical, biological
and nuclear. The question of regime change is a new
phenomenon which makes clear that, instead of being
true to their word, as usual, the mighty are bent on
shifting the goalposts to suit their agendas.
No State, big or small, should threaten other
States with the possible use of weapons of mass
destruction. We call for resolute action by this body
against such States. We are of the view that Iraq’s level

23

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

of destructive capacity should also be of concern to its
neighbours, which, in any case, feel the greatest threat.
We have not heard cries from these neighbouring States
about potential threats from Iraq, except, of course,
from Israel.
Like other Members who have spoken before us,
my delegation is concerned that, while we are —
rightly — rushing to render useless Iraq’s capacity to
produce and to own weapons of mass destruction, we
do not see the same zeal on the part of members of the
Council to do away with the weapons of mass
destruction that they themselves own. Other members
of the Council have even decided not to sign
disarmament treaties that seek to make the world free
from these dangerous weapons.
We are also concerned that, whereas there is a
rush to have Iraq abide by Security Council
resolutions, the same rush is not displayed when it
comes to Israel, which has flouted no less than 28
Security Council resolutions. The murdering and
maiming of Palestinian people and the destruction of
Palestinian homes does not, in our view, seem to
concern the Council. Israel, after violating Security
Council resolutions with impunity, has been shielded
by the same members which today want to wage war
on Iraq. It is common knowledge in the Security
Council and to one and all that that country has
weapons of mass destruction. It, too, must be disarmed.
The Security Council should address this double
standard in order not to bring the Charter of the United
Nations into disrepute.
Let me conclude by reiterating that we need a
solution which will quickly put an end to the sanctions,
which have brought so much suffering to the people of
Iraq. Let the inspectors proceed with their business, so
that the suffering of the people of Iraq and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction can be buried in the pages
of history once and for all.
The question before us today is about doing the
correct thing. It is about the credibility of
multilateralism, adherence to international law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. My delegation urges
the Council to opt for multilateralism and for the
upholding of international law, which gives credibility
to this body. The law of the jungle should not creep
into this Organization.

24

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Zimbabwe for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Qatar. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation,
sincerely to thank you for giving us the opportunity to
address the Council. We wish also to thank you for
convening this important meeting, at which Member
States can express their views on the very serious Iraqi
situation, which has greatly deteriorated. The tension
prevailing in the world because of the question of Iraq
is indeed a matter of concern and a threat to
international peace and security.
Qatar has always believed in the important role of
the United Nations, the Security Council in particular,
in maintaining international peace and security. That is
why the State of Qatar has always expressed its full
support for all resolutions of international legitimacy
aimed at the achievement of peace and security in the
world. Following the terrorist attack against the World
Trade Center in New York, Qatar clearly and
unequivocally expressed its condemnation of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. We shall
always work in conjunction with all States to combat
terrorism in all its forms. My delegation would like to
express its condemnation of the terrorist attack that
took place in Bali on Saturday and to convey sympathy
and condolences to the families of the victims and to
the friendly people and Government of Indonesia.
A few months ago, many political complications
emerged on the international scene, and they should be
resolved through recourse to international law.
International law should be fully respected. The
political situation is changing on a daily basis, giving
rise to new and contradictory tendencies.
We are grateful to the Non-Aligned Movement
for requesting the convening of this meeting. There has
been a rapid development in events that may lead to the
outbreak of a war whose consequences would extend to
all the States of the region and beyond.
We have welcomed the outcome of the Beirut
Arab Summit held last March, as well as the decisions
and resolutions adopted there, including the final

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

declaration concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. It called, inter alia, for full cooperation to
resolve the problem of Kuwaiti prisoners and detainees
and third country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti
property to Kuwait. We consider that to be a step in the
right direction.
We are very optimistic about the decision of Iraq
to accept the return of the international inspectors and
to comply with Security Council resolutions, as well as
about the resumption of the dialogue between Iraq and
the United Nations. We also welcome Iraq’s declaration
that it has no weapons of mass destruction. We had
hoped that those developments would lead to
international détente and that the United Nations and
the great Powers in the Security Council would
immediately allow the return of the inspectors in order
to assess the situation. That is what the situation calls
for, and it would be fully in keeping with the principles
of the Charter and of international law.
We all know what led to the fall of the League of
Nations: the unilateral decision by the world Powers at
that time to take decisions outside the context of
international law and legitimacy. That led to a
destructive war that claimed millions of lives. The
United Nations was established in 1945 to prevent the
repetition of such a war. Its Charter was drafted very
carefully to make it incumbent on all States, and the
founding States in particular, to respect the Charter and
accept the rule of international law in international
relations.
We would not like any State to act outside
international law as enshrined in the Charter or refuse
to respect international law. That is why we are calling
for full respect for resolutions of international
legitimacy. We consider the Security Council to be the
only body mandated to decide what necessary steps
should be taken in order to enforce compliance by any
State with international law, without discrimination.
The current situation is extremely dangerous. It
may lead to the destruction of an entire region and even
have consequences for States outside the region, to say
nothing of its negative impact on the current alliance to
combat terrorism. We believe that such a conflict
would lead to an increase in and spread of terrorism.
Given the current situation, we must find a peaceful
solution and refrain from the use of force. It is the duty
of all the States Members of the Organization to work
together to put an end to the crisis and to resolve it

politically on the basis of United Nations resolutions
and respect for international law.
We should give up selectivity and double
standards when dealing with the issue of weapons of
mass destruction and respect for international law. The
Council must be transparent in its working methods;
the United Nations does not deal with all States in the
same way. Security Council resolutions relating to
Israel must be applied with the same seriousness and
insistence. Israel has an arsenal of weapons of mass
destruction and refuses to accede to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call upon
international law to be applied so that Israeli
installations can be placed under comprehensive
safeguards.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Qatar for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahendran (Sri Lanka): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to assure you of our full cooperation. I
would also like to record our deep appreciation for the
excellent work done by the representative of Bulgaria
during his presidency of the Council last month.
We thank you, Sir, for having convened this open
debate on the matter before us, at the request of the
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Sri Lanka has long urged Iraq to fully comply
with all relevant Security Council resolutions and
respect its international commitments so as to avoid a
further escalation of tensions in the region. We believe
that Iraq should comply with Security Council
resolutions immediately and unconditionally and that
the hand of the Council should be strengthened, since it
is the Security Council that has the primary
responsibility under the United Nations Charter to
preserve the peace.
The Secretary-General, in his statement,
conveyed the same message and warned the Council
against division. It is therefore abundantly clear that
the time has come for all Members of the United
Nations to give the necessary support in the Security
Council for the weapons inspectors to return to Iraq

25

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

with all the powers they need for a thorough regime of
inspection. The Secretary-General said that Iraq’s
decision to readmit the inspectors without conditions is
an important first step, but only a first step. Full
compliance remains indispensable, and it has not yet
happened. Iraq must implement the disarmament
programmes required by the Council’s resolutions.
Sri Lanka welcomes the decision of the
Government of Iraq to allow the weapons inspectors
entry into the country without any conditions. We hope
that Iraq’s decision will pave the way for the weapons
inspectors to resume, without further delay, their work
in that country towards the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction.
In order to have access to whatever the inspectors
may wish to look into, it may well be necessary — if
the Security Council deems it so — to pass a new
resolution, strengthening the inspectors’ hands so that
there are no weaknesses or ambiguities, and the new
measures must be firm, effective, credible and
reasonable.
Therefore, the Sri Lanka delegation recommends
to the Council that we act in a way that removes the
lacuna that was present in the 1991 inspection regime
and strengthens the hand of the Council, as well as the
Secretary-General, by engaging in a cooperative effort
to establish guidelines in order for the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to undertake the inspections
comprehensively.
We appeal to Iraq to cooperate fully with the
United Nations in order to make the Organization an
effective instrument in maintaining peace, as stipulated
very clearly and unambiguously by the Charter.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Sri Lanka for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Nepal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and through you, your
country, Cameroon, for the guidance you have been
affording the Security Council in the cause of
international peace and security. I vividly remember
how profoundly the Economic and Social Council

26

benefited from your leadership only last year in the
cause of development, and I wish to express my
delegation’s support for your efforts in steering the
deliberations here to a fruitful and just conclusion.
On 12 September 2002, the Secretary-General set
the tone of this year’s general debate when he said that
the Middle East, Iraq and South Asia constitute the
existing threats to international peace and security. He
also explained why multilateralism offers the best
possible solutions to such problems. Today, under your
able presidency, Sir, the Council is debating the
situation in Iraq, one of those great hotspots in the
international security landscape. My delegation should
like to hope and believe that the deliberations here
would be taken on board while charting our collective
course on the very sensitive and complex issue before
the Council.
Nepal joined the United Nations out of her
conviction that the Organization was the best and only
way to go about averting the scourges of wars and
devoting all available energy to the promotion of
peace, development and human dignity. In the 47 years
since then, Nepal has always worked hard and
responsibly, be it on the Security Council, on which she
has had the honour to serve twice, or elsewhere within
the United Nations system, including in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, or outside it, in the interest of
peace and security around the world, as well as for the
development and the welfare of humanity.
Nepal believes that membership in the United
Nations comes with an undeniable responsibility to
ensure that the Charter principles are always upheld in
the pursuit of the purposes of the Organization. Respect
for the sovereign equality of all members, the peaceful
settlement of international disputes and avoiding the
threat or use of force to violate the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State constitute the
inviolable principles of the conduct of international
relations. Likewise, the fulfilment of obligations in
good faith, providing assistance to the United Nations
in its Charter actions, and non-intervention in issues
essentially within domestic jurisdiction constitute other
core principles that must be respected as well.
Nepal’s firm belief in and commitment to the
solemn purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations flow directly from, and
are deeply engraved in, the constitution of our country.
Accordingly, Nepal has always abided by both the

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

spirit and words of all those principles and purposes,
and our passion to do so remains as strong as ever. Let
me also add that Nepal’s own experience as a victim of
terrorist violence at home, deflecting the already scant
resources that could otherwise be employed to propel
development, has further reinforced our commitment to
the twin purposes of peace and development. More
than ever before, we are convinced that one will not be
achieved without the other.
I made reference to the United Nations Charter
principles and Nepal’s convictions because we believe
that the situation in Iraq, as well as that existing
between Iraq and Kuwait, cannot be addressed without
unflinching commitment on the part of all Member
States to these very purposes and principles of the
United Nations. We must derive our strength, moral
and legal as well as otherwise, from the framework of
the United Nations Charter and international laws that
reflect our collective conscience. This is the view that
Nepal has always maintained at the United Nations and
within the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), whose
statement yesterday at the Council we support.
At the NAM ministerial meeting in Durban last
April, we welcomed the assurances given by the
Republic of Iraq to respect the independence,
sovereignty and security of the State of Kuwait and to
ensure its territorial integrity. We underscore the
importance of implementing such policies to ease
tensions and to promote understanding in the region,
and call for action that would place those guarantees in
an operational framework, manifest not only in good
intentions but also in good-neighbourly relations and
non-interference in one another’s domestic affairs.
In the same vein, we also call on all sides to
respect in spirit and in action the independence,
sovereignty, security and territorial integrity of Iraq by
not using external force, unless clearly authorized by
the Council as a measure of last resort. Until other
Charter measures have all been utilized, particular care
should be taken before setting out to ignite a spark in
an already volatile region — a spark which could well
spread to the entire world. We also firmly believe that
the sanctions on Iraq should be lifted so that the harsh
suffering of its people, including women, children and
the elderly, can be halted and stability and security in
the region be promoted.

In the context of current developments having
grave implications for the situation in Iraq, Nepal
welcomes the most recent resumption of dialogue
between Iraq and the United Nations and the events
that have followed, which should ensure a complete
implementation of
relevant
Security
Council
resolutions. In that connection, I wish to place on
record our sincere appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his untiring efforts to address the situation
in Iraq while upholding the ideals of the United
Nations in dealing with these issues.
In that context, while we firmly maintain that
there is no room for action against Iraq — or against
any other State for that matter — outside the United
Nations Charter, we also call on Iraq to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and to assure
the world through convincing action that there is no
impending danger from their side to international peace
and security.
Likewise, we are firm in our conviction that
multilateralism is the only acceptable path to ensuring
collective global security. Unilateral action, however
pious its objective may be, undermines the integrity of
international law and flouts the fundamental principles
of the rule of law, causing uncertainties and the loss of
hope, especially among the weak and vulnerable
Members of the Organization. Full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions by all parties
constitutes the only means for establishing durable
peace, security and stability in the region and
elsewhere.
Finally, as Nepal is duty-bound in its commitment
to maintaining international peace and security and to
making the world a safer place to live in for ourselves
and for posterity, we call on the Council to harness this
public meeting to find a peaceful and just way to
ensure peace and security in the region and at the
global level and to avoid the devastating scourges of
war.
We should like to believe that a peaceful solution
should be possible if we collectively resort to making
the United Nations a genuine centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of our common
purposes, so clearly and categorically spelled out in
Article 1 of the Charter of the Organization.

27

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 2)

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nepal for his kind words.
There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the

28

concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.
