Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 105
Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations,
1. Decides that in order to make the necessary determination whether or not, for the purposes of paragraphs 3
(c) and 4 of resolution 661 (1990), humanitarian circumstances have arisen, the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 ( 1990) concerning the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait shall keep the situation regarding
foodstuffs in Iraq and Kuwait under constant review;
2. Expects Iraq to comply with its obligations under
resolution 664 (1990) in respect of third-State nationals
and reaffirms that Iraq remains fully responsible for their
safety and well-being in accordance with international
humanitarian law including, where applicable, the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949; 105
3. Requests, for the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2
above, that the Secretary-General seek urgently, and on a
continuing basis, information from relevant United Nations and other appropriate humanitarian agencies and all
other sources on the availability of food in Iraq and Kuwait, such information to be communicated by the Secretary-General to the Committee regularly;
4. Also requests that in seeking and supplying such
information particular attention be paid to such categories
of persons who might suffer specially, such as children
under 15 years of age, expectant mothers, maternity cases,
the sick and the elderly;
5. Decides that if the Committee, after receiving the
reports from the Secretary-General, determines that circumstances have arisen in which there is an urgent humanitarian need to supply foodstuffs to Iraq or Kuwait in order
to relieve human suffering, it will report promptly to the
Council its decision as to how such need should be met;
6. Directs the Committee that in formulating its decisions it should bear in mind that foodstuffs should be
provided through the United Nations in co-operation with
the International Committee of the Red Cross or other
appropriate humanitarian agencies and distributed by them
or under their supervision, in order to ensure that they
reach the intended beneficiaries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to use his good offices to facilitate the delivery and distribution of foodstuffs
to Kuwait and Iraq in accordance with the provisions of
the present resolution and other relevant resolutions;
8. Recalls that resolution 661 (1990) does not apply to
supplies intended strictly for medical purposes, but in this
connection recommends that medical supplies should be
exported under the strict supervision of the Government of
the exporting State or by appropriate humanitarian agencies.

the specific circumstances as may be necessary under the
authority of the Security Council to halt all inward and
outward maritime shipping, in order to inspect and verify
their cargoes and destinations and to ensure strict implementation of the provisions related to such shipping laid
down in resolution 661 (1990);
2. Invites Member States accordingly to co-operate as
may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of resolution 661 (1990) with maximum use of political
and diplomatic measures, in accordance with paragraph 1
above;
3. Requests all States to provide, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, such assistance as may
be required by the States referred to in paragraph 1 above;
4. Also requests the States concerned to co-ordinate
their actions in pursuit of the above paragraphs of the
present resolution using, as appropriate, mechanisms of
the Military Staff Committee and, after consultation with
the Secretary-General, to submit reports to the Security
Council and the Security Council Committee established
by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait, in order to facilitate the monitoring of the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted at the 2938th meeting by
13 votes to none, with 2 abstentions (Cuba and Yemen).

Decision
At its 2939th meeting, on 13 September 1990, the Council decided to invite the representative of Kuwait to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait".

Resolution 666 (1990)
of 13 September 1990

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 661 (1990) of 6 August 1990,
paragraphs 3 (c) and 4 of which apply, except in humanitarian circumstances, to foodstuffs,
Recognizing that circumstances may arise in which it
will be necessary for foodstuffs to be supplied to the
civilian population in Iraq or Kuwait in order to relieve
human suffering,
Noting that in this respect the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 ( 1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait has received communications from several Member States,
Emphasizing that it is for the Security Council, alone or
acting through the Committee, to determine whether humanitarian circumstances have arisen,
Deeply concerned that Iraq has failed to comply with its
obligations under Security Council resolution 664 (1990)
of 18 August 1990 in respect of the safety and well-being
of third-State nationals, and reaffirming that Iraq retains
full responsibility in this regard under international humanitarian law including, where applicable, the Geneva

Adopted at the 2939th meeting by
13 votes to 2 (Cuba and Yemen).

Decision
At its 2940th meeting, on 16 September 1990, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Iraq, Italy and
105

22

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
