A /74/PV.30

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

30th plenary meeting

Monday, 11 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Balé (Congo),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 88
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/74/287)
Draft resolution (A/74/L.10)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to Mr. Cornel Feruta, Acting Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to
introduce the report of the Agency for the year 2018.
Mr. Feruta (International Atomic Energy Agency):
Staff and member States of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) were deeply saddened by the
untimely death of Director General Yukiya Amano,
in July. A veteran diplomat and an expert in nuclear
non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament, he
had led the Agency with distinction for nearly 10 years.
Director General Amano was passionately committed
to helping developing countries make full use of nuclear
science and technology to generate electricity, produce
more food, manage water supplies and treat cancer,
among many other things.
Last month, the IAEA Board of Governors appointed
Mr. Rafael Grossi to serve as the next Director General
for a four-year term starting on 3 December. I wish him
every success during his term of office.

The IAEA’s annual report for 2018 (see A/74/287)
details important recent developments in all areas
of our activities. The motto “Atoms for Peace and
Development”, which is part of the legacy of Director
General Amano, encapsulates the unique dual role of
the Agency. We contribute to international peace and
security by verifying that nuclear material remains for
peaceful use, and we help to improve the well-being
and prosperity of the people of the world through
the peaceful use of nuclear technology. The Agency
contributes directly to the achievement of nine of the
17 sustainable Development Goals and indirectly to
several more. Our safeguards inspectors are on the road
every day of the year, keeping track of nuclear material
to verify that it is not diverted from peaceful activities.
We serve as the global platform for cooperation on
nuclear safety and security, helping countries to keep
nuclear and radioactive material and technologies safe
and out of the hands of terrorists and other criminals.
Despite pressure on our budget in recent years,
we have continued to deliver high-quality services.
We have seen steady growth in our membership over
the decades and a constant increase in demand for our
services. The Agency now implements safeguards for
183 States. The number of facilities and the quantities
of nuclear material under IAEA safeguards continues
to increase. The number of States with additional
protocols in force stands at 136.
In the past year, we continued to verify and
monitor Iran’s implementation of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). We continued to keep the IAEA

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-36086 (E)

*1936086*

A/74/PV.30

Board of Governors and the Security Council informed
of developments related to the implementation by
Iran of its commitments under the JCPOA, including
the latest ones, on the installation of new advanced
centrifuges and enrichment-related activities. I have
just informed the IAEA Board about the resumption of
uranium enrichment at Fordow. Last week, I informed
the Board of Governors about a matter regarding
the completeness of Iran’s safeguards declarations
under its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
Additional Protocol. It is important for Iran to respond
substantively and satisfactorily to Agency questions
concerning a location in Iran. I hope that, after the
Board meeting last week, substantive engagement by
Iran will lead to the clarification of all relevant aspects.
The Agency will continue to engage with Iran in an
effort to resolve this issue. The Agency continues to
verify the non-diversion of nuclear material declared
by Iran under its Safeguards Agreement. Evaluations
regarding the absence of undeclared nuclear material
and activities in Iran continue.
It has been more than 10 years since IAEA
inspectors were required to leave the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The Agency continues to
monitor the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme, including through satellite
imagery. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear activities remain a cause for serious concern.
They are a clear violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and are deeply regrettable. The
Agency remains ready to play an essential role in
verifying the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme if a political agreement is reached
among the countries concerned. I call upon the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply fully
with its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, cooperate promptly with the Agency and
resolve all outstanding issues.
As far as safeguards implementation in the Syrian
Arab Republic is concerned, our assessment remains
that it was very likely that the building destroyed at
the Deir ez-Zor site in 2007 was a nuclear reactor that
should have been declared to the Agency by Syria
under its Safeguards Agreement. I call on Syria to
cooperate fully with the Agency in connection with the
unresolved issues related to the Deir ez-Zor site and
other locations.
The IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is our
key mechanism for helping member States make optimal
2/30

11/11/2019

use of peaceful nuclear science and technology. The
main focus of technical cooperation spending last year
were health and nutrition, nuclear safety and food and
agriculture. It is important that technical cooperation
funding be maintained at a level that ensures that we
can meet the growing demand for Agency services. This
year we have provided prompt assistance to Member
States in response to crises. For example, an emergency
mission that included experts from the Agency and
the World Health Organization (WHO) visited Dhaka
to assess the feasibility of applying the sterile-insect
technique to control the worst outbreak of dengue fever
in Bangladesh since 2000.
Cancer remains a key focus of our work. The IAEA
and WHO launched a road map in September towards
a national cancer-control programme that sets out
milestones that countries can follow in establishing
nuclear medicine, diagnostic imaging and radiotherapy
services. The installation this year at the IAEA’s
dosimetry laboratory of the first linear accelerator
enables the Agency to provide expanded dosimetry
calibration services to member States, which helps to
ensure that cancer patients receive exactly the right
dose of radiation. That was part of the modernization
of the IAEA nuclear applications laboratories, one of
the most important projects ever undertaken by the
Agency, and which is now at an advanced stage. In
August, the Insect Pest Control Laboratory was handed
over to the Agency by the contractor and we began a
phased transition into operation. The new flexible
modular laboratory building, now known as the Yukiya
Amano Laboratories, will be ready for use next April.
The Agency’s latest annual projections show that
nuclear power will continue to play a key role in the
world’s low-carbon energy mix, despite a declining
trend for installed capacity up to 2050. Last month,
we held our International Conference on Climate
Change and the Role of Nuclear Power. The conference
provided a platform for the objective discussion of
the scientific case for making more use of nuclear
power to help combat climate change. The IAEA Low
Enriched Uranium Bank in Kazakhstan, which is
intended to provide assurance to countries about the
availability of nuclear fuel for nuclear power reactors,
became operational in October when it received its first
shipment of low enriched uranium.
The great benefits of nuclear technologies are
sustainable only if they are used safely and securely.
IAEA safety standards are used by almost all countries
19-36086

11/11/2019

to protect people and the environment from the harmful
effects of ionizing radiation. This year, we completed
a revision of the structure of the safety standards to
make them stronger and easier to apply. The next IAEA
International Conference on Nuclear Security will take
place at the ministerial level in Vienna next February. I
expect the conference to consolidate our achievements
in nuclear security in the past decade and help shape
our approach in the coming years.
Increasing the proportion of women on the Agency’s
staff, especially at senior levels, also remains a priority.
For the first time, women represent more than 30 per
cent of staff at the professional level and above.
Finally, I express my thanks to the IAEA Board
of Governors for the confidence it has placed in me
as Acting Director General, as well as to all member
States for their active support for the Agency. I am
most grateful to Agency staff for their hard work and
commitment. The continued professionalism, loyalty
and dedication of the Agency’s staff make the IAEA
what it is — an organization of excellence.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the representative of Sweden to introduce
draft resolution A/74/L.10.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I am pleased and honoured
to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/74/L.10, entitled “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency”. I am doing so in Sweden’s capacity
as Chair of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors for the period from
September 2019 to September 2020. This is the first
time that Sweden holds this important office, having
previously provided to the Agency Directors General
Mr. Sigvard Eklund and Mr. Hans Blix who, between
them, steered the Agency though more than 35 years
of service. Sweden’s chairmanship of the IAEA should
be seen as a reflection of our unyielding support to the
Agency and the priority afforded by my Government
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to a
shared responsibility for peace and security.
Following consultations held in Vienna on
16 October, this year’s draft resolution was unanimously
approved for transmission to the General Assembly.
It was also supported here in New York in a meeting
held on 23 October to which all United Nations States
Members were invited. This year’s text also contains a
tribute to Director General Yukiya Amano, whose tragic
death in July came as a shock to us all. Mr. Amano was

A/74/PV.30

an excellent Director General with an illustrious career
as a Japanese diplomat. He presented the Agency’s
report in this Chamber on numerous occasions over the
past decade.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
emanates from a requirement in the IAEA statute, as
well as a cooperation agreement signed by the United
Nations and the IAEA in 1957. Following the usual
practice, the text of the draft resolution takes note of the
resolutions adopted and decisions taken by the IAEA
General Conference at its sixty-third regular session
and reiterates the strong support of Member States to
the Agency and its mandated activities. We hope that
the General Assembly will adopt the draft resolution
without a vote, thereby stressing the importance the
international community attaches to the IAEA and the
wide scope of its work.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
Republic of North Macedonia, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Liechtenstein and the Republic of
Moldova align themselves with this statement.
Let me start this intervention by paying tribute to
the late Director General Amano and expressing our
condolences for his sudden passing.
We are pleased to support the draft resolution
(A/74/L.10) on the report (see A/74/287) of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), a report
that again reaffirms the indispensable role of the
Agency with regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and in assisting the development and practical
application of atomic energy for peaceful uses, as well
as in technology transfer and in nuclear verification,
safety and security. We also note with satisfaction the
amount of strong support that was expressed for the
Agency’s work.
The EU is fully committed to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. We reiterate
our firm support for the full, complete and effective
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as the cornerstone of the
global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the essential
foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament in
accordance with its article VI and an important element

19-360863/30

A/74/PV.30

in the development of nuclear energy applications for
peaceful purposes.
The EU reaffirms its full support for the
establishment of a zone free from nuclear and all other
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems
in the Middle East and is funding a United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research project to compile
ideas for the way forward.
The IAEA safeguards system is a fundamental
component of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
plays an indispensable role in the implementation of the
NPT. We underline the primary responsibility of the
Security Council in cases of non-compliance. The EU
further recognizes the serious proliferation challenges
that continue to be a threat to international security,
as well as the need to find peaceful and diplomatic
solutions to them.
In that regard, the EU expresses its resolute
commitment to, and continued support for, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and is
determined to continue working with the international
community to preserve the JCPOA, unanimously
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2231 (2015).
In that context, the EU deeply regrets the withdrawal
of the United States from the JCPOA and the reimposed
sanctions, and calls on all countries to refrain from
taking actions that impede the implementation of
JCPOA commitments. The EU is deeply concerned
that, as confirmed by the IAEA, Iran has exceeded
the JCPOA stockpile limit of enriched uranium and
is enriching uranium above the maximum level of
3.67 per cent allowed by the JCPOA. We are also deeply
concerned about the recent activities of Iran, as reported
by the IAEA, regarding the expansion of its centrifuge
research and development activities and the preparatory
work to feed two cascades of centrifuges in Fordow,
as well as regarding the pending questions on the
completeness of Iran’s safeguards-relevant information
and the incident about one IAEA safeguards inspector.
Those activities are extremely worrisome.
We note Iran’s stated intention to remain within the
JCPOA. We urge Iran to reverse those activities and
return to full JCPOA implementation without delay and
to cooperate fully and in a timely manner with the IAEA,
particularly on matters relating to the implementation
of its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and
Additional Protocol. The EU restates its full support
for the IAEA’s long-term mission of verification and
4/30

11/11/2019

monitoring of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments and
recalls the importance of ensuring the necessary means
for the Agency to carry out its role.
Likewise, the EU urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to embark on a credible path towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
and to take concrete steps in that direction. The EU
encourages the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to further engage in meaningful discussions with all
relevant parties as the international community works
towards lasting peace and security on the Korean
peninsula. The EU urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, return to the NPT and to IAEA
safeguards at an early date and sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Finally, the EU urges Syria to cooperate promptly
and transparently with the Agency to resolve all
outstanding issues, including through concluding and
implementing an additional protocol as soon as possible.
The EU continues to call for the universalization
of comprehensive safeguards agreements, together with
additional protocols, without delay. The EU strongly
supports continued improvement in the effectiveness
and efficiency of safeguards implementation through
the implementation of State-level approaches.
Furthermore, the EU is actively supporting the Agency’s
safeguards system through the European Commission’s
Safeguards Support Programme, the Instrument for
Nuclear Safety Cooperation and through our member
States’ own support programmes.
The EU and its member States attach the utmost
importance to the worldwide implementation and
continuous improvement of nuclear safety. We invite
all countries to demonstrate their commitment to
safety and find safe radioactive waste management
solutions. In 2018, the EU member States and other
participating countries completed the first topical peer
review on management of ageing nuclear power plants
and research reactors under the EU directive for safety.
We stand ready to share our experience during the
eighth review meeting of the contracting parties to the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, to be held in 2020. The
EU has also provided its expertise via so-called stress
tests in a number of neighbouring countries with a view
to building a more robust, sustainable and transparent
nuclear safety framework worldwide.
19-36086

11/11/2019

A/74/PV.30

The EU stresses the need to continue strengthening
nuclear security worldwide in order to prevent nuclear
terrorism and the misuse of nuclear and radioactive
material. To that end, we highlight the importance of
becoming party to and fully implementing the relevant
treaties, the amended Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, and underline the importance of Security
Council resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016). In
the context of the EU strategy against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, we are actively
supporting international initiatives that contribute to
strengthening nuclear security. For the period 2014 to
2020, the EU is dedicating more than €100 million to
the EU’s regional chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear centres of excellence initiative.

of the Sustainable Development Goals. Nuclear
technologies can make life-changing contributions to
the health and well-being of people all over the world.
The European Union supports the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and technology both with technical
expertise and an average financial contribution of
€15 million a year.

The EU strongly supports the central role of the IAEA
in improving the global nuclear security framework
by strengthening international cooperation, offering
advisory services and providing direct assistance
to member States. The EU welcomes the ongoing
preparations of the 2020 International Conference on
Nuclear Security and encourages all IAEA member
States to participate at the ministerial level and commit
to an ambitious and forward-looking ministerial
declaration. We further call on IAEA member States to
ensure the availability of sufficient resources for IAEA
nuclear security activities. Together with its member
States, the EU is among the biggest donors to the IAEA
Nuclear Security Fund. Our funding helped the Agency
to assist countries to upgrade and ensure the physical
protection of selected facilities and to improve their
national regulatory infrastructure.

Belarus supports the work of the IAEA in every
area of its mandated activities and has always believed
that international cooperation should be based on an
understanding of our shared interest in the sustainable,
multilateral and safe use of nuclear technologies. Today
we are seeing an ever-increasing number of States
considering the potential of nuclear technologies for
ensuring their energy security, meeting the ambitious
commitments made in the framework of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and being used in other
applications in order to make more dynamic progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals.

The EU remains firmly committed to the benefits
of multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle and
ensuring that high standards of safety, security and
safeguards are implemented to protect our collective
non-proliferation interests. The EU has supported the
establishment of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank
with around €25 million. We noted with satisfaction
that the Agency aims to have the low-enriched uranium
delivered to the storage facility before the end of 2019.
In conclusion, the EU and its member States
continue to be strong supporters of the IAEA’s Technical
Cooperation Programme, to which they are the secondlargest contributor. We strongly support the Agency’s
activities aimed at developing radiation and nuclear
technologies and their application for the achievement

Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Belarus, I
would like to pay tribute to the memory of Mr. Yukiya
Amano, the late Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and express my sincere
gratitude for his significant contribution to the work
of the Agency and his efforts to ensure that peaceful
atomic energy can serve the sustainable development of
every country and people in the world.

Belarus has already made the decision to develop
a national nuclear-energy programme, which when
implemented will enable our country to meet one third
of its needs for affordable and reliable electricity and
significantly reduce its greenhouse-gas emissions. It
has already added momentum to our development of
related sectors, industries and scientific knowledge.
Belarus makes active use of international expertise
and supports the IAEA’s efforts to develop and provide
member States with effective tools for advisory and
technical assistance on a wide range of nuclear and
radiation safety issues.
We believe firmly that we must maintain a special
focus on nuclear security and that the international
community’s trust in the peaceful uses of the atom
depends to a great extent on the results of the Agency’s
work in that area. Nuclear security must remain
indivisible. It must be justified both technically and
practically and free from any political considerations.
We hope that issues of nuclear safety and security will

19-360865/30

A/74/PV.30

11/11/2019

be exclusively unifying in nature and that international
cooperation will be based on respect for the sovereign
right of States to develop their own versions of
nuclear power.

this year Singapore will be a sponsor of draft resolution
A/74/L.10, on the report of the IAEA. I would like
to comment briefly on the Agency’s work in three
important areas.

We are pleased that the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme is widely recognized and
is particularly valuable to member States, including
Belarus. The technical cooperation projects under way
make it possible to use the best international practices
for the sustainable development of national nuclear
energy programmes, nuclear science and technology
and nuclear medicine, among others. Belarus is
grateful to the Agency for its major contribution to the
sustainable development of the regions of Belarus that
were affected by the Chernobyl accident.

First, with regard to the role of the IAEA in
non-proliferation, as the sole competent authority
responsible for verifying States’ fulfilment of their
safeguards obligations, the IAEA plays a crucial
role through its safeguards system, which is a
confidence-building measure and an early-warning
mechanism for the international community. However,
recent developments pose a challenge to the Agency’s
work in that area. The way forward on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is unclear in
the wake of the withdrawal of the United States in May
2018 and Iran’s actions since July 2019. The future of
the JCPOA itself is in doubt. Singapore urges all parties
to fulfil their JCPOA obligations and uphold this key
international agreement. We also urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to abide by its international
obligations and reiterate our full support for the
peaceful denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

We fully support the IAEA’s work in monitoring the
implementation of the safeguards system in accordance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and view those activities as an important
element in the global international security architecture
and as a basis for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
We agree that it makes sense to further strengthen
and improve their effectiveness. At the same time, we
believe that it is important to ensure that the safeguards
mechanisms remain clear, objective and technically
regulated. They should be based on mutual trust and
agreements concluded among the parties concerned at
the international level. We support the IAEA’s efforts to
strengthen physical nuclear security. The global nature
of risks and threats in the area of physical nuclear
security requires appropriate action both on the part of
States and of the Agency, which plays a coordinating
role in international cooperation in that regard.
In conclusion, on behalf of Belarus, I would like
to express our appreciation for the work done by the
IAEA since the Assembly’s previous session and to
support our adoption of draft resolution A/74/L.10, on
the Agency’s annual report (see A/74/287).
Mr. Tang (Singapore): Singapore congratulates
Ambassador Rafael Grossi on his recent appointment
as Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. He will have our full support and cooperation.
We also pay tribute to the late Director General Yukiya
Amano, who will be remembered for his important
contributions to the work of the Agency and for ably
guiding it through many challenging issues. My
delegation thanks the IAEA for its comprehensive
annual report (see A/74/287) and is pleased to note that
6/30

Secondly, it is important to remain vigilant
regarding the IAEA’s role in nuclear safety and security,
especially with regard to new and unconventional
threats such as cyberattacks. We welcome the Agency’s
development of updated computer security guidance for
nuclear facilities and its first-ever international training
course on protecting computer-based systems in nuclear
security regimes in 2018. We call on it to ensure that its
nuclear safety guidance documents remain updated on
innovations in nuclear technology, such as small- and
medium-sized and modular reactors and transportable
nuclear power plants. In that regard, Singapore is pleased
to be supporting the Agency’s work in helping member
States to build emergency preparedness and response
capacities as part of its Emergency Preparedness and
Response Standards Committee.
Finally, in the area of technical cooperation, the
IAEA’s Technical Cooperation Programme plays a
critical role in helping member States address their
development priorities and future energy needs.
Singapore is pleased to be a partner with the Agency
in its efforts to provide technical assistance to
fellow developing countries. Under the enhanced
Singapore-IAEA third-country training programme
memorandum of understanding, signed in 2015,
Singapore and the Agency have conducted regional
workshops for developing countries on topics such
19-36086

11/11/2019

as emergency preparedness and response, nuclear
regulatory law, and food safety. We have also hosted
several training fellowships.
At the regional level, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) signed practical arrangements
with the IAEA in September. This will deepen ASEAN’s
ties with the Agency, and broaden our cooperation
through research activities, the sharing of best practices,
and other capacity-building projects. Singapore looks
forward to contributing to these projects.
In closing, I would like to reaffirm Singapore’s
firm commitment to providing active and meaningful
support to the work of the IAEA. We look forward to
deepening our cooperation in the years ahead.
Mrs. Mills (Jamaica): At the outset, let me begin by
extending, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Jamaica, heartfelt condolences for the passing of
Director General Yukiya Amano, who gave unselfishly
and unreservedly in his dedicated years of service to
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). He
will be sorely missed and forever held in the highest
esteem and respect.
My delegation wishes to express appreciation for
the highly comprehensive report provided on the work
of the IAEA for 2018 (see A/74/287).
Jamaica has benefitted tremendously from its
engagement with the IAEA. As a result of the Agency’s
strong emphasis on capacity-building through technical
cooperation, we have witnessed the strengthening and
deepening of our relationship with the organization
since we first became a member some 54 years ago.
Since that time, we have collaborated with the Agency
on a range of national projects that have responded to
some of our key priorities and concerns in such areas
as agriculture, medicine, water-quality control and
infrastructure development.
Jamaica has nine active national projects and is
also participating in approximately 30 regional and
three interregional projects. It is noteworthy that the
value of the national projects currently being funded in
Jamaica stands at €2.6 million. We deeply appreciate
the fact that approval has been granted for the funding
of new projects for the 2020-2021 cycle, which will be
focused, inter alia, on coastal and marine pollution. As
a small island developing State acutely dependent on
our marine resources for our socioeconomic survival,
support in this area is of particular significance.

A/74/PV.30

Throughout 2019, Jamaica has hosted a number
of regional capacity-building workshops, including
workshops on radiation protection in medical imaging,
water-resources assessment using isotope hydrology,
and the application of stable isotope techniques in
environmental-enteric-dysfunction assessment and
understanding its impact on child growth. Against this
background, we therefore have a special interest in
the elements of the annual report that detail how the
Agency manages its Technical Cooperation Programme
and its efforts aimed at improving the quality of the
programme, including through monitoring and
evaluating projects.
Jamaica strongly supports the work of the IAEA in
nuclear safety and security. We have read with interest
this aspect of the report and continue to be advocates
of the Agency’s work in this regard. We too are
receiving capacity-building and training to improve our
radiation-safety infrastructure. In fact, the Government
of Jamaica, through the Ministry of Science, Energy
and Technology and the International Centre for
Environmental and Nuclear Sciences, is working with
the IAEA to provide for effective control of the life
cycle of radioactive sources. Regulations governing the
use of ionizing radiation and nuclear sources were also
promulgated in 2019.
With respect to nuclear verification, we continue to
support the work of the Agency in this particular field.
We believe that it is central to our collective efforts
aimed at promoting and maintaining international peace
and security, given the Agency’s indispensable role
in detecting the potential misuse of nuclear materials
or technology. Jamaica therefore supports the work
undertaken by the Agency over the past year to enhance
safeguards, including through greater cooperation with
States and regional authorities.
The IAEA deserves commendation for its efforts
aimed at integrating the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) framework within the context of its work. This
approach augurs well for our collective move towards
the attainment of the SDGs by the fast-approaching
2030 target date. We applaud the attention being
given to climate change and sustainable development,
particularly in the context of SDG 7, as noted in the
2018 annual report. The signing in August 2018 of
the Practical Arrangement between the IAEA and
the Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre to
cooperate in the use of nuclear science and technology
to combat climate change as well as with a number of

19-360867/30

A/74/PV.30

other regional organizations and frameworks, including
the Caribbean Regional Fisheries Mechanism and the
Caribbean Public Health Agency, for the promotion of
technical-cooperation activities are also noteworthy.
It remains a source of satisfaction that the
membership of the IAEA continues to witness steady
growth. Against this background, Jamaica joins
other delegations in welcoming our fellow Caribbean
Community member State, Saint Lucia, as the newest
member of the IAEA. We look forward to cooperating
with Saint Lucia and all member States in advancing
the work of the Agency.
Ms. Matar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express the
United Arab Emirate’s appreciation for the joint action
taken with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). I take this opportunity to commend the
remarkable achievements of the late Director General
Yukiya Amano. During his dedicated professional
life, he managed the work and activities of the Agency
efficiently and was known as a strong supporter of
the uses of nuclear energy in the service of peace
and development.
We also congratulate Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi on
having been elected Director General of the IAEA. We
assure our support to him and have the confidence in
his capability as the head of the Agency.
My country underlines the important and essential
role played by the IAEA in enhancing the peaceful uses
of nuclear technology and in helping Member States
make use of nuclear energy and applications. In that
respect, we hail the efforts of the Agency to establish
platforms for assistance and exchange of scientific
knowledge among Member States in the fields of
nuclear safety and security and non-proliferation.
My country notes the importance of the verification
measures implemented by the IAEA and of full
compliance with the comprehensive safeguards system
and the additional protocol, which is considered to be a
tool that contributes to strengthening international trust
in the peaceful nature of nuclear programmes. Indeed,
through close cooperation with the Agency, the United
Arab Emirates has hosted 12 IAEA comprehensive
review missions, including the third Integrated Nuclear
Infrastructure Review in June 2018, which was the first
of its kind. In the same vein, we encourage Member
States that have current or future plans for the peaceful
8/30

11/11/2019

uses or development of nuclear energy to take advantage
of the review services provided by the Agency.
The Technical Cooperation Programme remains
an important means for supporting Member States in
benefiting from the peaceful applications of nuclear
technology. My country continues to cooperate closely
with the Agency in the technical sphere to develop its
national infrastructure and build essential capacities
for nuclear energy use in all sectors. Since 2010, the
United Arab Emirates has contributed to supporting
the work of the Agency by deploying 210 experts
in different areas. We have also led and helped to
implement a number of different initiatives, such as
the third Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review.
To preserve that progress, the Technical Cooperation
Programme should receive the necessary financing and
thereby provide States with technical assistance.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its
commitment to maintaining a robust partnership
with the IAEA through our responsible approach to
developing a national programme for nuclear energy
and the promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
My country also expresses its appreciation for the
work of the Agency and welcomes the achievements
presented in its annual report for 2018 (see A/74/287).
Mr. Kumar (India): We thank the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for its annual report
for 2018 (see A/74/287) and thank the acting Director
General of the Agency for providing additional
information on the main developments in the Agency’s
activities in 2019.
The report of the IAEA is an important publication
for understanding the crucial tasks performed by the
Agency, in both promoting and ensuring the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. India has co-sponsored draft
resolution A/74/L.10 on the activities of the IAEA.
We welcome the appointment of Ambassador Rafael
Mariano Grossi as the new Director General of
the IAEA.
My delegation joins others in expressing our deep
sorrow at the demise of Director General Yukiya
Amano in July. His contribution to the IAEA is well
known. During his tenure, India brought 12 facilities
under IAEA safeguards and signed the Additional
Protocol to the Agreement between the Government of
India and the IAEA for the Applications of Safeguards
to Civil Nuclear Facilities. Director General Amano’s
contribution, especially his vision for “Atoms for peace
19-36086

11/11/2019

and development”, which has global relevance, will be
remembered forever. India supports designating the
flexible modular laboratory at Seibersdorf, Austria, as
the Yukiya Amano Laboratories.
Today’s debate is an important occasion to reflect
upon the critical role the IAEA plays in supporting
countries in their pursuit of nuclear power in a safe
and secure manner, in providing technical cooperation
activities and in bringing nuclear applications to its
member States. Nuclear power remains an important
option for meeting the challenges posed by increased
energy needs, address concerns about climate change,
redress the volatility of fossil-fuel prices and ensure a
secure energy supply. The Agency needs to continue
its programmes of support to member States embarking
on or expanding their nuclear-energy programmes and,
most importantly, support them in enhancing their
capacity to foster public acceptance of nuclear energy.
India attaches importance to the Agency’s
work in the different fields of nuclear science. We
contribute to these activities through participation
in technical meetings and coordinated research
projects. The Agency’s programme and achievements
related to nuclear applications in, inter alia, food and
agriculture, human health and nutrition, water resource
management, protection of the environment are helpful
in meeting the needs of developing countries. India will
continue to support these Agency programmes through
provision of expert services and by offering training
slots in reputed institutions in India to experts from
member States.
India’s interaction with the IAEA remains
significant. I am happy to share that the twentyseventh IAEA Fusion Energy Conference, a forum
for discussion on key physics and technology issues,
was held in Gandhinagar, India in October 2018.
The Conference was hugely successful and saw the
participation of more than 700 experts coming from 39
countries. Out of 19 programmes organized at India’s
Global Centre for Nuclear Energy Partnership in 20182019, eight were conducted jointly with the IAEA, thus
reinforcing India’s collaboration with the IAEA in the
area of capacity-building.
I am pleased to share that, on 31 December 2018,
India’s Kaiga Generating Station set a new world record
for continuous operation for 962 days, while working
at a plant-load factor of 99.3 per cent. Tarapur Atomic
Power Station Units 1 and 2, which were connected

A/74/PV.30

to the grid in April and May 1969, have completed 50
years of safe operations. They are currently the oldest
operating power reactors in the world, producing nuclear
power at less than 3 cents per unit. Such achievements
demonstrate India’s ability to design, build and reliably
operate pressurized heavy-water reactors and lightwater reactors. India has plans for additional capacity
in nuclear-power generation, with 21 reactors in the
construction and planning stages. These reactors will
help achieve an additional capacity of about 15,000
Megawatts of electricity.
I am also pleased to share that India recently
launched a global cancer-care network called the
National Cancer Grid Vishwam Cancer Care Connect
(NCG-Vishwam) at the margins of the sixty-third IAEA
General Conference in Vienna, in September. NCGVishwam envisages the integration of the hospitals
and relevant cancer-care institutes in partner countries
with India’s National Cancer Grid so as to bring about
a paradigm shift in cancer care by sharing guidelines
on, inter alia, the management of common cancers,
the provision of second opinions, decision-making for
treatment and online resource-sharing.
India has made huge progress in the utilization of
radiation technologies for uses at the level of society.
We are willing to share our knowledge and expertise
in that domain with friendly countries. The process is
already under way through increased interaction and
genuine collaboration in all areas of nuclear technology
concerning human life, be it power, health, agriculture
or human-capital development. We are determined to
take this collaboration to a higher level.
India acknowledges the dynamic role played by the
IAEA in guiding peaceful uses of nuclear energy and
in ensuring safety and security and looks forward to
the Agency’s continued vital support for creating an
atmosphere conducive to the growth of nuclear science
and technology. India remains committed to supporting
the work of the IAEA.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea categorically rejects the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (see A/74/287) in
acknowledgement of the fact that it reveals unfamiliarity
with the prevailing reality in the country.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
continued to make proactive efforts in good faith
throughout the year to establish a lasting-peace regime

19-360869/30

A/74/PV.30

on the Korean peninsula. We have refrained from
conducting nuclear and intercontinental ballisticmissile tests for more than 20 months, which is the
clearest expression of our sincere goodwill and tolerance
with which we seek to fulfil the universal desire of the
international community for peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula.
The key to consolidating peace and stability and
achieving development on the Korean peninsula lies in
the thorough implementation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea-United States joint statement
agreed and adopted at the historic summit and talks
between the two countries, held in Singapore in June
2018. More than a year has passed since the adoption
of the joint statement. However, there has been scant
improvement in the relations between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the United States so far,
and the Korean peninsula has not extricated itself from
the vicious cycle of aggravated tensions that is entirely
attributable to the political and military provocations
by the United States, which has been resorting to an
anachronistically hostile policy against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The historic Panmunjom Declaration on Peace,
Prosperity and Reunification of the Korean Peninsula,
which caused great excitement among fellow Koreans
in the north, the south and overseas, as well as in the
international community, just one year ago, is now
at a standstill without even having advanced to the
main implementation phase. This standstill can be
attributed to the double-dealing of the South Korean
authorities, who shook our hands in a gesture of peace
before the people of the world but then, behind the
scenes, introduced ultra-modern offensive weapons
and held joint military exercises with the United States
targeting the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The introduction of the latest offensive weapons and
the United States and South Korea’s joint military
exercises targeting the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea constitute flagrant violations of and challenges
to the joint declaration between North and South and
the inter-Korean agreement in the military arena.
The IAEA report shows that the Agency has not
yet eliminated prejudice, distrust and unfair attitudes.
Moreover, it is quite absurd for the IAEA to circulate
reports that repeat stereotyped allegations made by
forces hostile to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. If the IAEA is truly interested in maintaining
10/30

11/11/2019

peace and security on the Korean peninsula, it should
take an impartial position free of prejudice and distrust.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico appreciates the presentation of the
annual report (see A/74/287) of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), as well as draft resolution
A/74/L.10, proposed by the delegation of Sweden. We
would like to express our sincere acknowledgement of
the work of the late Director General Yukiya Amano
and his contributions to promoting the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. My country also warmly
welcomes Mr. Rafael Grossi, the new Director General
of the Agency, who is not only a recognized expert in
the field of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
security but also the first Latin American to hold that
important post.
Ambassador Alicia Buenrostro Massieu, Mexico’s
representative in Vienna, presided over the most recent
General Conference of the IAEA. In that role, we
observed a consensus on the Agency’s value and role
as a fundamental part of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, an integral component in the verification of
compliance with the provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), and its
relationship and synergies with other treaties related
to non-proliferation, such as the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
in addition to being recognized as the institution that
spearheads the promotion of the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, scientific and technological security
and measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear and
radioactive materials.
I am pleased to inform the General Assembly that the
IAEA’s sixty-third General Conference was successful
and adopted various resolutions on strengthening the
Agency in the areas of nuclear science, technology and
applications, in addition to strengthening technical
cooperation and improving the efficiency of IAEA
safeguards. They also included resolutions on the
implementation of the NPT as well as IAEA safeguards
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Middle East.
The IAEA performs and should continue to play
a central role in promoting technical cooperation,
capacity-building and technology transfer to improve
access to peaceful and safe uses of nuclear energy,
particularly in developing countries. Mexico actively
promotes technical cooperation among developing
countries in the Latin American and the Caribbean. We
19-36086

11/11/2019

therefore continue to support the activities promoted
by IAEA in regional cooperation forums such as the
Regional Cooperation Agreement for the Promotion
of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America
and the Caribbean, which seeks to ensure that the
countries where nuclear science and technology is most
highly developed support the efforts of States that are
relatively less developed in this area.
Now more than ever, the use of nuclear energy and
other nuclear applications for peaceful purposes is key
to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that ensuring
that nuclear energy is used exclusively for peaceful
purposes is the only sensible option when we consider
the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of nuclear
weapons. Preventing those consequences is therefore
the foundation of our work, and we must not lose sight
of that.
Mr. Hassan (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express Egypt’s deep gratitude
to the late Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his sincere efforts in the past few years. We would
also like to express our condolences to his family and
the Government and people of Japan. We commend
Mr. Cornel Feruta, Acting Director General of the
Agency, for his efforts in the interim and sincerely
congratulate Mr. Rafael Grossi om his election as
Director General. We look forward to cooperating with
him as he continues to conduct all of the Agency’s work.
Egypt will welcome the General Assembly’s
adoption by consensus today of draft resolution
A/74/L.10, of which we are a sponsor, on the annual
report (A/74/287) of the Agency. We express our
appreciation to the secretariat of the Agency for
preparing the report and to Sweden for its efforts to
prepare and present the draft resolution.
As one of the founding States of the Agency, Egypt
has played a leading role in mapping our path towards
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the construction
of nuclear reactors. We attach great importance to the
Agency’s activities in the areas of the peaceful use of
nuclear energy and the strengthening of international
cooperation, technical support, safeguards and
verification, as well as nuclear safety and security.
Egypt has contributed to the efforts of the Agency
and its secretariat in all those fields, particularly as

A/74/PV.30

we prepare to operationalize the El Dabaa plant, my
country’s first nuclear-power plant.
We look forward to hosting the Agency’s
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Power in 2021. We
once again call for increased efforts to ensure proper
financing and resources so that the Agency can provide
the desired technical assistance and achieve balance
among the Agency’s three pillars, in accordance with
its statute, thereby fulfilling its purpose and dispelling
any impressions that it is merely a nuclear watchdog.
Ensuring the continuity and stability of the Agency’s
activities aimed at strengthening the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy is very important, particularly in
developing countries. At the same time, it must be
borne in mind that the peaceful use of nuclear energy is
an inalienable sovereign right.
In that context, Egypt is continuing its efforts
through its membership of the Agency’s Board of
Governors to support technical cooperation, nuclear
safety and security, with the necessary focus on the
interests of the countries of Africa and the Group of
77 and China, in order to enhance the Agency’s role
in development. We stress that the Agency is the
technically qualified international body mandated to
issue reports on States’ verification of their compliance
with their nuclear-non-proliferation commitments.
Egypt also stresses that the Agency has a pivotal role,
in accordance with its statute, in supporting nuclear
disarmament efforts, as well as in verifying the disposal
of nuclear weapons. That also gives it an important role
in maintaining international peace and security and
the fulfilment of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), including article VI.
Egypt attaches great importance to the Agency’s
activities in the implementation and objective
verification of IAEA safeguards against the misuse
of nuclear materials, in accordance with the NPT
and the comprehensive safeguards agreements that
constitute the legal base for the Agency’s work. That
requires achieving universality for the agreements.
We also stress that developing the safeguards regime
should not entail imposing any further obligations
beyond contractual commitments or encroach on the
sovereign decisions of States. The implementation of
the guarantees through a State-level approach must
be done in agreement with the States concerned, not
merely in consultation with them.

19-3608611/30

A/74/PV.30

In conclusion, Egypt looks forward to the Agency’s
implementation of its mandate to implement its
safeguards regime in the Middle East and establish a
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction there. We look forward to seeing efforts to
that end, in the light of the important forthcoming first
session of the Conference on the Establishment of a
Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and All Other Weapons
of Mass Destruction in the Middle East, to be held from
18 to 22 November under the presidency of Jordan.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes to the presentation of the
report (see A/74/287) by Acting Director General Feruta
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
the Agency’s work and expresses its condolences on the
passing of Director General Amano.
During the past year, pursuant to its mandate under
the Statute, the Agency has done a great deal of work
to promote the peaceful uses and wider application of
nuclear technology, strengthen global nuclear security
and safety, and safeguard the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Its relevant work supports the implementation
of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the maintenance of
international peace and security, and we commend it
for its efforts. Today the steady development of global
nuclear energy and the wider application of nuclear
technology are playing an increasingly prominent
role in promoting social and economic development,
ensuring energy security and tackling climate change.
At the same time, the international security situation is
going through profound and complex changes. Nuclear
non-proliferation and nuclear security challenges are
mounting, and the threat posed by nuclear terrorism
cannot be ignored. In that context, the Agency still has
much to do.
Next year will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the tenth Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Strengthening
the Agency’s work in the areas I have mentioned is also
part of the NPT’s purposes in helping to maintain peace
and foster development in our changing times. China
hopes that the Agency will focus on doing effective
work in the following areas.
12/30

11/11/2019

The first is the vigorous promotion of the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In response to the worldwide
development of nuclear energy and the needs of its
member States, the Agency should increase its resource
input, continue to provide robust support for States
members in developing and using nuclear energy and
apply nuclear technology on a wider scale. It should
also increase its technical and financial assistance to
developing countries and actively promote relevant
international cooperation so that the benefits of nuclear
energy can be shared by all.
The second is strengthening the Agency’s
safeguards system. Based on the principles of
objectivity and impartiality, the Agency should further
promote the universal application of safeguards,
consistently enhance the effectiveness and efficiency
of the comprehensive safeguards agreements and
their additional protocols and achieve the objectives
of safeguards by making good use of member States’
resources. We encourage the IAEA secretariat to keep
up its communication with member States with regard
to the State-level safeguards approach.
The third is advancing the healthy, safe development
of nuclear energy. The Agency should continue to
actively prepare nuclear safety standards and nuclear
security guidance, strengthen peer-review services,
assist member States in capacity-building and exchange
and share experiences in order to build a global nuclear
safety and security system based on high standards.
The fourth is facilitating the political and
diplomatic settlement of nuclear hotspot issues. China
commends the Agency for its efforts to facilitate the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and supports it in continuing to fulfil its
monitoring and verification mandate objectively and
impartially, as well as through the role it plays in
the safeguards relevant to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, based on a political solution to be
reached by the parties concerned, and thereby duly
contributing to bringing denuclearization and lasting
peace and security to the Korean peninsula.
By consistently following a sensible, coordinated
and balanced approach to nuclear security and adhering
to the principle of safety first, China has been actively
promoting the safe and efficient development of
nuclear energy. We have vigorously promoted the wider
application of nuclear technology by taking an active
part in international cooperation on the peaceful uses of
19-36086

11/11/2019

nuclear energy, and we are committed to doing what we
can to assist other emerging nuclear-energy countries.
We also steadfastly support the Agency in
fulfilling its safeguards mandate and maintaining
the international non-proliferation regime. China
stands ready to deepen its comprehensive cooperation
with the IAEA and further contribute to the cause of
international security and development.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to express my gratitude
for the comprehensive presentation of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for 2018
(see A/74/287) and to thank the delegation of Sweden
for facilitating draft resolution A/74/L.10, through
which the General Assembly will adopt the report.
The Argentine Republic reiterates its sorrow at the
death of Director General Yukiya Amano, who ably
and commendably led the International Atomic Energy
Agency for 10 years.
Argentina would like to highlight the leading
role that the IAEA plays in promoting the exclusively
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in administering
the safeguards system in accordance with the
provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. In line with its mandate promoting
atoms for peace and development, the Agency is also
required to support the efforts of its member States to
meet the 17 Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Nuclear science
and technology can contribute to that end in the areas
of energy, health care, food, water and environmental
protection, among others.
Argentina welcomes the Board of Governors’
appointment of Ambassador Rafael Grossi as Director
General of this prestigious and esteemed Agency and
thanks its member States, especially those in Latin
America and the Caribbean, for their major support
during the appointment process. Ambassador Grossi’s
appointment is an acknowledgement of the Latin
American and Caribbean region and its contribution
to international peace and security as a nuclearweapon-free zone. It also acknowledges Argentina
as a country with a long history of the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy, a robust nuclear programme, a
significant export policy and active diplomacy in the
area, which has made it possible to foster and expand
Argentina’s development of its nuclear sector for
peaceful uses.

A/74/PV.30

The Agency plays a key role in the promotion of the
peaceful uses of nuclear technology, which our country
has always been committed to, and we are certain
that the new Director General will make a decisive
contribution to the management of the Agency’s
affairs in the future. Nuclear energy plays a decisive
role in achieving a future of sustainability and energy
sustainability. In that regard, the work of the IAEA
must be considered and assessed by the international
community. With its various nucleo-electric projects,
Argentina hopes to be a relevant actor in that process.
With its prominent international profile, our
nuclear sector attaches vital importance to the
implementation of the international safeguards system.
The effectiveness of the IAEA verification system
regarding nuclear activities is essential to preventing
nuclear proliferation. It is undoubtedly the central pillar
on which the international community has worked for
decades to prevent the misuse of nuclear materials
and technologies.
In that regard, we reiterate the importance
of efficient, effective and technically sound
safeguards implementation activities, ensuring their
non-discriminatory nature. In addition, the Argentine
Republic wishes to reiterate the need for the safeguards
regime and its guarantees to be implemented in a
climate of cooperation and dialogue.
In that context, it is of the utmost interest to note
that this year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the entry into force of the quadripartite agreement that
Argentina has with the sisterly Federative Republic of
Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting
and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, which since 1991
has defined and regulated cooperation activities for the
application of nuclear safeguards. Argentina once again
highlights the constructive role and the significance of
ABACC both in the application of safeguards and in
building trust with the Federative Republic of Brazil.
Argentina’s commitment to the highest standards
of nuclear safety continues to be one of the pillars of
our nuclear policy. The Nuclear Regulatory Authority
is the independent technical and regulatory body
designated by law to monitor such activities, including
the proper inspection of the construction of nuclear
reactors. Argentina has affirmed that its new nuclear
power plants will be designed, located and constructed
in line with the principles of the Vienna Declaration on

19-3608613/30

A/74/PV.30

Nuclear Safety, and our country has already submitted
its national report for the eighth review meeting of the
contracting parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety,
to be held next year. Our nuclear sector continues to
work towards the seventh review meeting of the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management,
to be held in 2021.
The Argentine Republic wishes to express its
recognition and support for the work of the IAEA
concerning nuclear security. In that regard, our country
has repeatedly emphasized the Agency’s central role
in coordinating and strengthening the architecture
for nuclear security, while urging it to play a more
active role in that area. In that context, our country is
involved in the preparatory work for the International
Conference on Nuclear Security, to be held in February
2020, as a result of which we hope to see a ministerial
declaration to guide the Agency’s work in that field.
Argentina is actively participating in reviewing
the Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and is one of the
co-Chairs of the two meetings of legal and technical
experts planned for 2019.
Lastly, we would like to emphasize that nuclear
security elements come under the sovereign power
of each State and that progress and developments to
counteract terrorist threats must correspond to the real
risk that each country faces. On that basis, we reaffirm
the need to harmonize binding and non-binding
measures so that they move forward smoothly,
progressively and sustainably.
Argentina
understands
that
international
cooperation is essential to spread the benefits of nuclear
energy and its peaceful applications and is a key tool to
achieve development goals for the benefit of people.
The Argentine Republic participates actively and
aspires to become a focal point for training activities in
the region. Our country is a frequent venue for training,
education and human resources development activities
related to peaceful uses of nuclear energy under
the auspices of the IAEA. We will continue to work
and contribute resources to the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme, to which we provide
our experience and training and capacity-building
facilities. These have already benefited technicians and
professionals from our region and other parts of the
world. In that regard, we highlight the designation of
14/30

11/11/2019

our National Atomic Energy Commission as an IAEA
Collaborating Centre.
Ms. Al-Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It has
been 55 years since Kuwait became a State member of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
State of Kuwait continues to cooperate closely with the
Agency in order to benefit from its programmes and
build the national institutions and capabilities required to
implement vital economic and developmental projects.
It looks forward to enhancing such cooperation in order
to achieve the desired outcomes for our country.
Allow me to congratulate Mr. Rafael Grossi on his
election as Director General of the Agency. We wish him
every success in his new position. We must also recall
the role of the late Director General, Mr. Yukiya Amano,
who never failed to fully implement his mandate.
Our accession to the Agency coincides with our
election, for the fifth time, to the Board of Governors
for the period 2019-2021. Our membership reiterates
the trust placed in Kuwaiti balanced policy by the
international community as a result of our commitment
to and active participation in all the Agency’s activities
since 1964. We pledge further cooperation within
the board of Governors to strengthen the Agency’s
technical and professional activities in order to achieve
the aspirations of its Member States, particularly with
regard to promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear energy
for power generation, health care and the well-being
of people all over the world. Guided by the spirit of
strengthening cooperation between Kuwait and the
Agency, my delegation wishes to highlight some aspects
of such cooperation.
First, in November 2018 the Kuwait Cancer Control
Centre has been designated as one of two regional
centres under the Cooperative Agreement for Arab
States in Asia for Research, Development and Training
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology.
Secondly, the State of Kuwait hosted one of the
Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review consultative
missions, as well as one of the Agency’s six regional
sessions on the security of radioactive materials in Asia
and the Pacific.
Thirdly, we have signed a practical arrangement
agreement for enhancing cooperation on the protection
of the marine environment by strengthening institutional
and technical capabilities.
19-36086

11/11/2019

Fourthly, we have signed an agreement on
designating the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research
as an IAEA Collaborating Centre in the field of nuclear
technology uses.
We strongly condemn any nuclear tests that threaten
humankind safety. We also condemn any provocation
or conduct that harms international peace and security
and call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to comply with international conventions and relevant
Security Council resolutions. We welcome the recent
steps taken towards a dialogue, in the hope that such
initiatives will lead to stability on the Korean peninsula.
The State of Kuwait closely follows the periodic
reports of the Director General of the IAEA in relation
to the implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) on Iran’s nuclear programme, and in
that regard we stress how important it is for Iran to
continue its compliance with its international nuclear
obligations pursuant to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. We also stress the right of all States to
produce and develop nuclear energy for peaceful uses,
as stated in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We call on Iran to continue
cooperating fully and transparently with the IAEA, and
look forward to its ratification and implementation of
its Additional Protocol.
The State of Kuwait underscores its adherence to
the goal of creating a zone free of nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, which
would contribute to the stability of the region and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We therefore stress the importance of ensuring that
Israel accedes to the NPT, as it is the only State in the
region that is not party to the Treaty. It should place
all its installations under the IAEA’s comprehensive
safeguards regime.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize our continued
commitment to supporting the IAEA and its effective
work in building capacities that contribute to
achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to strengthening the nuclear security
and safety systems that can bring stability and peace to
the world.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would first like to
express our profound respect and appreciation for
Mr. Cornel Feruta, Acting Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), whose
distinguished leadership and outstanding capabilities

A/74/PV.30

have kept the Agency operating smoothly in the difficult
time following the sudden passing of Director General
Yukiya Amano. With regard to Director General
Amano’s death, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation for the messages of condolence
and sympathy that Member States have conveyed today.
Japan welcomes the appointment of Ambassador Rafael
Grossi as the new Director General of the IAEA. We
will fully assist him in his endeavours and continue to
work to strengthen the Agency’s functioning, in close
cooperation with other member States.
In recent years, the IAEA has placed particular
emphasis on increasing its efforts to promote the
peaceful uses of nuclear science and technologies
under Director General Amano’s motto, “Atoms for
peace and development”. That initiative contributes
to international socioeconomic development and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Japan will therefore continue to support the IAEA under
Director General Grossi by contributing technical,
financial and human resources to the Peaceful Uses
Initiative and other cooperative projects carried
out with domestic universities, research institutes
and companies.
In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, it is essential that we strengthen the IAEA
safeguards, which are our most important instrument
for ensuring nuclear non-proliferation. Japan supports
the IAEA’s work in making them more effective and
efficient. We attach particular importance to the
universalization of the comprehensive safeguards
agreement and its additional protocols, with a view to
strengthening the current international non-proliferation
regime. Japan also supports the central role of the IAEA
in strengthening the international nuclear security
framework and will work to ensure the success of the
International Conference on Nuclear Security in 2020.
We are taking every possible measure to combat
terrorism, including nuclear terrorism, in preparation
for major upcoming public events, including the Tokyo
2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games. In that regard,
Japan appreciates the support it received from the IAEA
for the tabletop exercises held in Tokyo last month.
I would now like to take this opportunity to
touch on some of the most pressing issues facing the
international non-proliferation regime today. Japan
deeply regrets the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated ballistic-missile launches, which

19-3608615/30

A/74/PV.30

violate various Security Council resolutions. We
strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to fully comply with all its obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions and take
concrete steps to achieve the complete, verifiable and
irreversible dismantling of all of its nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction, as well as its
ballistic missiles of all ranges and related programmes
and facilities. We urge it to come into full compliance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and IAEA safeguards. Japan also calls on
all States to fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Japan continues to support the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) with a view to strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime and securing
stability in the Middle East. In that regard, we are deeply
concerned about the measures taken by Iran to exceed
the limits set by the JCPOA and we strongly urge Iran
to return to its commitments, implement the JCPOA
and refrain from taking any additional measures that
could undermine it. The IAEA has an important role
in verifying and monitoring the implementation of the
JCPOA, and Japan will stand by it and support its efforts
to conduct impartial and professional verification and
monitoring activities.
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government, I
would like to reiterate Japan’s firm commitment to
further promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Next year the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
will be held here in New York. It is a crucial event
that will decide guidelines for nuclear disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, and Japan is doing everything in its power to
ensure its successful outcome.
Mr. Baek Yong Jin (Republic of Korea): The
Government of the Republic of Korea extends its
deepest condolences for the passing of Director General
Yukiya Amano. His dedication and achievement will
remain in the hearts of all peoples all over the world.
The Republic of Korea remains a firm supporter
of the mandate of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to accelerate and enlarge the
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world. We welcome the
annual report for 2018 (see A/74/287), which illustrates
16/30

11/11/2019

how the IAEA’s work contributes to the United Nations
by providing solutions to the major global challenges
confronting humankind.
The peaceful use of atomic energy must be
safe, secure and sustainable. The Republic of Korea
therefore attaches great importance to the Agency’s
active role in the realm of nuclear safety, including
through peer-review missions, which provide useful
feedback to IAEA member States in their efforts to
implement the fundamental principles, requirements
and recommendations for ensuring nuclear safety. We
urge all member States to cooperate closely with the
Agency in implementing the highest standards of safety
in order to protect health and minimize danger to life
and property.
The Republic of Korea also underlines the central
role of the Agency in coordinating international
activities and strengthening the nuclear security
framework. The third International Conference on
Nuclear Security, to be held in February 2020, will be
a timely opportunity for Member States to renew their
commitments to strengthening national nuclear security
regimes and enhancing international cooperation.
The fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in
2020 is a significant milestone. For five decades, IAEA
safeguards have facilitated cooperation on the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy by providing credible assurances
that States are honouring their legal obligations not to
misuse nuclear facilities or divert nuclear materials from
peaceful uses. The Republic of Korea also welcomes
the Agency’s efforts to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of its verification activities. The State-level
safeguards approach for each State under integrated
safeguards is an important way to focus the Agency’s
resources to achieve consistent safeguards results
within the scope of existing agreements. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to commend the
IAEA for its thorough, professional and impartial
monitoring and verification of Iran’s implementation
of its nuclear-related commitments. We also welcome
the IAEA’s readiness, in accordance with its mandate,
to play an essential role in the verification activities
of the nuclear programme of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea if a political agreement is reached
among the States concerned.
The Republic of Korea takes note of the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency for 2018,
19-36086

11/11/2019

reiterates its steadfast support for the IAEA and its
mandate, and is pleased to join the other sponsors of
draft resolution A/74/L.10, on the report.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank Mr. Cornel Feruta,
Acting Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, for presenting the report (see A/74/287)
on the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in 2018.
Draft resolution A/74/L.10, on the report of the
IAEA, which the General Assembly considers and
adopts every year, is derived from a 1957 agreement
between the United Nations and the Agency. It
reaffirms the Agency’s indispensable role in promoting
the development and application of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes, in technology transfer to developing
countries and in maintaining a nuclear verification and
security regime. My delegation sees this meeting as an
opportunity to inform the Assembly about the work
done by the Agency in 2018 and to provide Member
States with the opportunity to commit to and support
its continued work. We welcome the decisions taken
between 16 and 20 September during the IAEA’s
General Conference at its sixty-third session. In that
context, my country recognizes the sovereign right to
explore and apply nuclear technologies exclusively for
peaceful purposes, as established in article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
At the same time, we reaffirm our obligation to working
towards general and complete disarmament as the only
guarantee for ensuring international peace, security
and stability.
At the global level, countries should further
promote the exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear
science and technology and prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons in order to continue contributing to
sustainable development and world peace. My country
recognizes the benefits that nuclear technology can
bring to the peoples of the world, not only in terms of
generating electricity but also in areas such as health,
agriculture, food security, the environment, among
many others. For that reason, El Salvador is firmly
convinced that through concerted efforts, cooperation
and the development of synergies among countries for
the appropriate and peaceful use of nuclear technology,
it will be possible to achieve excellent results that are
conducive to scientific development for the benefit of
our populations.

A/74/PV.30

El Salvador would like to highlight the important
role of the IAEA Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy, particularly in helping countries examine
their cancer-control capacities. We hope to be able to
work together more closely in the future with a view to
improving the efficiency of radiology medicine services
as part of a comprehensive cancer-control framework
that supports the training of health professionals and
promotes cancer-control initiatives. We would also
like to thank the Agency for the efforts its mission
team undertook in my country in 2018 to review our
radiation safety regulatory infrastructure, providing
us with advice and support in our efforts to improve
our national radiation safety regulatory framework. We
would therefore like to reiterate that it is essential for
countries to work together with the IAEA to promote
the use of nuclear energy to improve the quality of
health, increase health coverage and food production
and supply, more effectively prevent and reduce
the negative effects of climate change and improve
responses to natural disasters, among other highpriority aspects that play a role in achieving genuine
human development.
El Salvador appreciates the constant and
invaluable support of the IAEA in the implementation
and strengthening of the uses of atomic energy in
technology and science, which has enabled our country
to make significant progress with regard to its uses of
atomic energy for those purposes. It is an area in which
we hope to continue deepening bilateral cooperation
relations with the IAEA and in which we recognize
its important added value as an Agency. In efforts to
continue strengthening cooperative relations between
El Salvador and the IAEA, on 8 October in Vienna
our 2019-2023 country programme framework, which
helps align the Agency’s cooperation with the priorities
of the Salvadoran Government. Furthermore, in order
to contribute to global efforts to achieve effective
nuclear physical security and ensure the efficient
implementation of international instruments, my
country is pleased to announce that it has joined the
Incident and Trafficking Database, which has proved
helpful in detecting incidents and preventing them
when they involve the illicit trafficking or malicious
use of nuclear energy and which supports and ensures
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.
El Salvador welcomed Mr. Rafael Grossi’s recent
appointment by the IAEA Board of Governors as the
next Director General of the Agency for a four-year

19-3608617/30

A/74/PV.30

term starting on 3 December. I wish him every success
during his term of office. We are pleased that he will
be the Agency’s first Director General from the Latin
American and Caribbean region. My delegation would
also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
and thank Mr. Cornel Feruta for his dedication and
excellent work during his tenure as Acting Director
General of the IAEA. Lastly, we want to reiterate our
firm commitment to continuing to work hand in hand
with the Agency, and we urge the Member States to
continue to support it.
Mr. Leschenko (Ukraine): This year marked a
turning point in the history of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of Director
General Yukiya Amano for his wisdom and talent in
running the Agency and his efforts in advocating for
and strengthening nuclear and radiation safety and
nuclear security worldwide. Director General Amano
was a visionary leader and an outstanding diplomat.
His wisdom, forbearance and unwavering commitment
to multilateralism contributed to maintaining stability
in the modern nuclear order. We are especially grateful
for his firm personal position regarding the Agency’s
safeguards implementation in Ukraine, which proved
that the IAEA platform will never be used to legitimize
Russia’s occupation of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol.
At the same time, Ukraine welcomes the decision of
the IAEA Board of Governors to appoint Rafael Grossi
as new IAEA Director General. We believe that this
important mission will benefit from his empathy and
energy. We would also like to commend acting Director
General Cornel Feruta for the excellent guidance,
competence and leadership he has demonstrated during
the transition period.
Ukraine recognizes the Agency’s leading role
in the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We confirm
our support for the activities of the Agency aimed
at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the
safeguards system and welcome the Agency’s efforts to
prevent the diversion of nuclear energy from peaceful
to military purposes.
We are now facing the sixth year of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, which has significantly
undermined international efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
Russian invasion and occupation of parts of the
18/30

11/11/2019

territory of Ukraine, including Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, have led to the rapid transformation of the
peninsula into a huge military base, threatening security
and stability in the entire Black Sea region and beyond.
Despite the continued military aggression by a nuclearweapon State, Ukraine remains fully committed to its
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons in general and the Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement in particular. The aggressor
should clearly understand that none of the international
organizations, where the rule of law prevails, will ever
be impudently used to recognize any alteration in the
status of Crimea.
We recognize the considerable progress in the
overall approach to safeguards implementation, which
has moved from a system focused on verifying declared
nuclear material and drawing relevant conclusions on
safeguards to one that assesses the consistency of all
information regarding a State’s nuclear programme
and draws conclusions on safeguards for the State as
a whole. We fully support the IAEA’s independence
in that regard. Ukraine is clear in its position that
the Agency should remain the one and only authority
to draw relevant conclusions, which should be based
on information that is collected from a wide range of
sources, processed and assessed using only technically
credible data.
We welcome the fact that the 2018 annual report
of the IAEA (A/74/287) fully complies with the norms
of international law, the Statute of the IAEA and
respective safeguards agreements.
To this date, there is no single IAEA document that
recognizes the Russian occupation of Crimea in any
way. The IAEA’s position has been made very clear on
many occasions, and this meeting is no exception. The
IAEA continues to implement safeguards in Ukraine in
accordance with Ukraine’s Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement and the Additional Protocol thereto.
Consequently, all facilities and nuclear material in
Crimea remain covered by those instruments, as clearly
stated in the annual report, of which we take note
today, as well as in all previous reports issued since
the start of the Russian aggression against Ukraine in
February 2014. Having said that, Ukraine expresses its
support for the current draft resolution on the report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (A/74/L.10),
introduced by the delegation of Sweden, and informs
the Assembly of its intention to co-sponsor it.
19-36086

11/11/2019

A/74/PV.30

Mr. Koba (Indonesia): My delegation thanks the
acting Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for the Agency’s comprehensive
annual report for 2018 (A/74/287), and for his statement,
which contains additional information on the main
developments in the activities of the Agency in 2019.
Indonesia takes note of the developments and significant
activities of the Agency during the reporting period.

of the IAEA safeguards standards, among others,
through the Asia-Pacific Safeguards Network. As its
current Chair, Indonesia hosted the tenth anniversary
of that important platform in October with the aim of
strengthening safeguards capabilities in the region. We
convey our appreciation to the Agency for providing
legislative assistance during the ongoing process of
revising Indonesia’s nuclear energy law.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Indonesia, allow me to extend our deepest condolences
on the passing of Director General, Yukiya Amano, in
July. His admirable dedication and exemplary devotion
to Atoms for Peace and Development will always be
remembered by Indonesia.

Indonesia also supports the Agency in strengthening
its valuable contribution to the fulfilment of the
Sustainable Development Goals, including through
the technical cooperation programme. In that regard,
we are working closely with the Agency, not only
as a beneficiary but also as a provider of technical
cooperation for other members.

We also congratulate Ambassador Rafael Mariano
Grossi of Argentina for his appointment as the
Director General of the Agency. He may rest assured
of our continued cooperation with the IAEA under his
leadership, which we hope will enhance the Agency’s
work to promote the peaceful use of nuclear technology
for development and prosperity.
Indonesia welcomes the Agency’s continuous
efforts to provide the necessary support to member
States. We encourage the Secretariat to pursue its
programme of work in a balanced manner with a view
to meeting the evolving needs of member States and
to ensure that the programme facilitates the benefits
of nuclear science and technology for the purpose
of socioeconomic development. Indonesia believes
that nuclear security efforts must be pursued in a
comprehensive manner. Measures to strengthen nuclear
security must neither hamper international cooperation
in the field of peaceful nuclear activities nor undermine
the established priorities of the Agency’s technical
cooperation programme.
We recognize and support the Agency’s continuing
work to assist member States in their efforts to
strengthen their nuclear security. Indonesia appreciates
the handheld detection equipment provided by the
Agency to Indonesia, which will reinforce our national
detection and response capability during major public
events to be held in Indonesia. As a State party to the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, Indonesia is committed
to maintaining a high level of safety by establishing
fundamental safety principles in the operation of our
research reactors.
On nuclear safeguards, Indonesia reaffirms its
commitment to further strengthen implementation

Indonesia has signed a practical arrangement with
the IAEA, further strengthening cooperation between
Indonesia and the Agency on enhancing technical
cooperation among developing countries and SouthSouth cooperation. In addition, we have been appointed
as a collaborating centre for plant mutation breeding
and have become one of the contributors to the IAEA
Peaceful Uses Initiative. We are also committed to
providing technical capacity-building to other countries
under the nuclear energy capacity-building project to
commence next year.
The application of nuclear technology to agriculture
plays an important role as an innovation to achieve
national food security, particularly in meeting rice and
soybean demand, by establishing three agro-techno
parks and one science techno park. We are collaborating
with the IAEA, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization.
In the area of health, Indonesia has been
collaborating with the Agency on cancer therapy
and radiopharmaceuticals. Since 2010, the Agency
has sent integrated missions of the Programme of
Action for Cancer Therapy to Indonesia to improve
diagnosis and treatment for cancer sufferers through
nuclear technology. We have also successfully produced
radiopharmaceuticals for bone pain, the palliation
of cancer patients and the diagnosis and therapy of
neuroblastoma, which have been downstreamed to endusers through the collaboration of national stakeholders
in the pharmaceutical industry. Indonesia sees the merits
of providing education on nuclear science and technology
to younger generations. We have collaborated with the

19-3608619/30

A/74/PV.30

IAEA in conducting a self-assessment of our country’s
nuclear knowledge-management programme and its
implementation. We look forward to opportunities to
further strengthen cooperation with the Agency in 2020
and beyond.
Finally, it is my delegation’s view that the purpose
of today’s discussion regarding the draft resolution
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency”, as contained in document A/74/L.10, under
agenda item 88, is to provide States Members of the
United Nations with an opportunity to recognize
the activities that the Agency has undertaken during
the reporting year, as well as to lend their support
to its continued work. Among other things, the draft
resolution takes note of the decisions and resolutions
adopted by the General Conference of the IAEA at its
sixty-third regular session, held from 16 to 20 September
in Vienna. Indonesia believes that all IAEA member
States would agree, without exception, that the IAEA
plays an indispensable role in assisting and promoting
peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology. In
that respect, we hope that the draft resolution will be
adopted by consensus.
Mr. Lozinskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): This year the international community suffered
a heavy loss with the untimely death of Mr. Yukiya
Amano, the late Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The contribution he
made to strengthening international peace and security
and promoting the peaceful use of nuclear technology is
difficult to overestimate. We are grateful to Mr. Cornel
Feruta, the Acting Director General of the IAEA, for his
successful and professional stewardship of the Agency
during the difficult transitional period. We would also
like to congratulate Mr. Rafael Grossi, the Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the International
Organizations in Vienna, on his election as Director
General of the IAEA. We hope that his experience and
professionalism will enable him to become a unifying
figure for the Agency’s member States and ensure
that the IAEA continues to work as efficiently as
possible towards the implementation of the goals and
functions set forth in the Statute of the Agency. The
Russian Federation is ready to help with this in every
possible way.
The IAEA is a unique international organization,
both in terms of promoting and developing the peaceful
use of nuclear energy and in monitoring the compliance
of States with their non-proliferation obligations. The
20/30

11/11/2019

Agency’s work is extremely significant to creating an
enabling environment, fostering the formation of a
reliable infrastructure and ensuring States’ unhindered
access to the benefits of the peaceful use of atomic
energy. That work deserves the full support of the
United Nations. The Russian Federation intends to
further increase its potential in the field of nuclear
energy and to actively assist in developing this sector
in other countries.
The international credibility of the IAEA safeguards
system is a fundamental condition for maintaining and
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Any
modifications to its approaches to verification should
help to increase their effectiveness and efficiency. At
the same time, when changes are made, it is important to
ensure that the Agency’s monitoring mechanism remains
objective, depoliticized, technically justifiable, clearly
understandable to its member States and based on the
safeguards agreements concluded between the IAEA
and the States. An unbiased and objective approach
to nuclear verification is a key element in maintaining
the legitimacy of the IAEA safeguards system and
the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a whole. The
Agency’s professional and impartial approach to
conducting checks in Iran is key to the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to
ensuring international trust in the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. Correcting the
balance that has been lost in the nuclear deal is a task
we all share.
The Russian Federation actively participates as a
financial donor to the Agency’s activities, including by
providing voluntary contributions to the International
Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel
Cycles, the Technical Cooperation Fund and the Nuclear
Security Fund. We fully support the IAEA’s efforts
in the field of technical cooperation and in providing
appropriate assistance to developing countries. The
Russian Federation is ready to provide the Agency
and all partner countries with comprehensive support
in developing the necessary elements of nuclear
energy infrastructure, including the regulation of
nuclear and radiation safety. The IAEA plays a central
role in fostering international cooperation on the
Nuclear Security Fund, as the most representative and
technically competent organization in that field. We
believe that States themselves should be responsible
for ensuring the application of the Nuclear Security
Fund within their national territories and defining the
19-36086

11/11/2019

optimal parameters for their corresponding national
systems and mechanisms.
We believe it important to ensure the widest possible
participation of States in the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Russia has signed and
ratified those international treaties, and we urge States
that have not yet done so to expedite their internal
procedures with a view to acceding to those vital
international instruments. We stress how important it is
that IAEA member States treat the Agency with respect.
It is important to refrain from artificially inserting
issues that are outside the scope of its Statute into the
agenda of the Agency’s decision-making bodies and its
activities in general.
The Russian Federation commends the work of
the Agency in the reporting period and reaffirms its
fundamental support for draft resolution A/74/L.10, on
the report of the Agency, of which it is a sponsor. We are
confident that the Agency’s efforts will continue and
increase further in the interests of developing peaceful
nuclear energy and nuclear technologies all over the
world, while also improving and strengthening the
nuclear non-proliferation regime. With regard to some
of the remarks made by the representative of Ukraine,
our unwavering position on those issues is expressed in
the relevant IAEA document, INFCIRC/876, and I have
nothing further to add to it.
Ms. Sánchez Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the presentation of the 2018 annual
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/74/287) and draft resolution A/74/L.10.
As expressed by other delegations, we mourn the
passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, who performed his
duties in an exemplary manner at the helm of the IAEA
for 10 years and maintained a close friendship with
Cuba. We congratulate Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi on
his election as the new Director General of the IAEA at
the latest meeting of the Board of Governors.
Cuba recognizes and supports the important work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and its
contribution to peace and sustainable development. The
implementation of the IAEA safeguards verification
system is essential to the implementation of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including
by verifying the peaceful nature of nuclear energy
programmes. The IAEA also guarantees the promotion

A/74/PV.30

of the development and use of nuclear energy and its
applications for peaceful purposes to the benefit of
humankind, particularly in priority areas such as health
care, food security, environmental protection and water
resource management.
Cuba attaches great importance to the development
of nuclear applications, the technical cooperation of
the IAEA and the transfer of technology to developing
countries. It is essential that the Agency prioritize and
redouble its efforts aimed at increasing the resources of
the IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as its main
focus. As part of that technical cooperation, in May
Cuba hosted the twentieth meeting of the Technical
Coordination Body of the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
will hold the presidency of that important regional
agreement for the next two years. In that regard, we
have taken on an important commitment to continuing
to work to strengthen existing cooperation ties, create
new partnerships and work for the development of
nuclear applications with peaceful means in the region.
We will continue to support the inalienable right of all
States to develop the research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, without any form
of discrimination or conditions. Cuba therefore rejects
and demands the immediate abolition of all limitations
and restrictions on exports to developing countries of
materials, equipment and technologies for peaceful
nuclear activities.
The IAEA is the framework for the adoption of
international nuclear-security standards, which should
be the result of transparent and inclusive multilateral
negotiations, with the participation of all States. We
reiterate that the effective management of nuclear
security does not allow for the exclusion of or selective
participation of certain States.
The entry into force of the amended Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and
Nuclear Facilities should strengthen protection of
nuclear facilities and materials, thereby facilitating
cooperation among States parties to prevent and
combat crimes involving the use of radioactive and
nuclear materials and ratifying the peaceful use of
nuclear energy. The possibility of a terrorist attack with
nuclear materials cannot be eliminated by applying
a selective approach that limits itself to horizontal
proliferation and disregards vertical proliferation and

19-3608621/30

A/74/PV.30

disarmament. We reiterate that nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing and that
the only guarantee against the use of nuclear weapons
is their total elimination in an irreversible, transparent
and verified manner.
In expressing our support for a world free of nuclear
weapons, we stress the importance of the establishment
of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. We support the
convening, next November, of the conference on the
establishment of such a zone. It is regrettable that the
United States does not support this initiative. We reject
the United State Government’s decision to withdraw
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to
reimpose unilateral sanctions on Iran. It is unjustified,
contrary to international law, in violation of the rules of
coexistence among States and — by distancing us from
the objective of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East — could have serious consequences
for stability and security.
Ms. Estrada Girón (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Cornel Feruta,
acting Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his briefing on the report
on the activities carried out by the Agency in 2018 (see
A/74/287).
Guatemala shares the sentiment expressed in the
posthumous tribute to Director General Yukiya Amano
and recognizes his legacy in the progress made during
his 10 years of wise leadership, especially in the field of
peaceful uses of technology and nuclear energy.
My country recognizes the sovereign right to make
use of nuclear technologies for exclusively peaceful
purposes, as established in article IV of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
also renew our commitment to working towards general
and complete disarmament as the only guarantee for
achieving international peace, security and stability.
In the current climate, it has become increasingly
necessary to seek collective efforts to continue to
promote the exclusively peaceful uses of nuclear science
and technology and to safeguard our future generations
from annihilation from the use of nuclear weapons.
My country is aware of the benefits of nuclear
technology for the peoples of the world — not only for
generating electricity, but also in such various areas
as health, agriculture, food security, environment and
research, among others. Guatemala therefore stresses
22/30

11/11/2019

the shared benefit of reciprocal cooperation between
the IAEA and developing countries, as well as that of
regional projects in which both parties stand to gain
from the mutual exchange of knowledge, techniques,
experiences and resources — with a positive and direct
impact on both populations.
I note that in Guatemala, the most prevalent use of
ionizing-radiation technology is in the field of medicine
and is directly linked to the provision of basic health
services for the Guatemalan population. One of my
country’s main priorities is to ensure that people receive
safe and appropriate services based on the peaceful use
of nuclear technologies through training in radiation
protection and safety. In this regard, we would like to
stress the importance of the content of the document
entitled “Supporting an integrated approach to cancer
control” on the Agency’s Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy.
Cancer-control actions are essential if we are to
have a strategic guide for our continuing efforts to
develop a unified approach within the Agency to combat
cancer and to satisfy the growing expectation that
oncological care will be accessible to our populations.
In this regard, my delegation reiterates that it is critical
for countries to join forces with the IAEA to ensure
that the use of nuclear energy goes towards improving
health coverage and quality, ensuring food production
and supply, and preventing and more effectively
reducing the negative impact of climate change, as
well as providing better care after natural disasters and
tackling other high-priority items in order to contribute
to real and sustainable development.
Guatemala renews its commitment to respecting
disarmament regulations, including the NPT, and
recognizes the IAEA’s critical role in preventing
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and weapons
technology through the safeguards system. My country
actively promotes the universality of the NPT and
compliance with its provisions. We reiterate that all
States parties have committed to clearly showing their
compliance with the letter and spirit of the Treaty. We
urge all States parties to ensure that the celebration
of the fiftieth anniversary of its entry into force be
accompanied by concrete progress.
We are convinced that the only effective guarantee
that humankind will not again find itself in danger
is the total prohibition and elimination of nuclear
weapons. That is why Guatemala signed the Treaty
19-36086

11/11/2019

on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and promotes
its early entry into force — in order to achieve a more
peaceful and secure world for all.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of
the IAEA in promoting its vision for atoms for peace
and development, and we reaffirm our commitment to
continuing to work and supporting the activities of the
Agency. We also take this opportunity to extend our
congratulations to Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi
on his appointment as the new Director General of the
IAEA and wish him every success at the helm.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the acting Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for the Agency’s annual report
(see A/74/287).

A/74/PV.30

Recalling the statutory mandate of the IAEA to
assist Member States in research on, and the practical
application of, nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
it must be ensured that the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme remains firm and sustainable
through sufficient, assured and predictable financial
and human resources.
Regarding the IAEA’s role as the sole competent
authority responsible for the verification of the
fulfilment of safeguards obligations, we stress that, in
conducting such functions, it is essential for the Agency
to avoid double standards, politicization and a selective
approach. In short, all related functions of the IAEA
must be legally sound, politically wise, methodologically
professional, impartial, independent and in strict
observance of the principle of confidentiality.

In the modern era, nuclear energy has had an
essential role in the development of our society.
Every effort must therefore be made to ensure the
full realization of the inalienable right of any State to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. This effort includes full respect for the
inherent right of each State to develop a full national
nuclear-fuel cycle for peaceful purposes, as well as the
right to participate in the fullest possible exchange of
equipment, materials and scientific and technological
information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. To
this end, the developed States parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) are
under a strict legal obligation to cooperate in further
developing the applications of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, especially in developing countries,
which is an obligation that must be upheld.

At a time when certain countries do not miss
any opportunity to systematically abuse institutions
such as the Security Council and the IAEA to further
their national interests, only strict adherence to the
aforementioned principles can prevent the erosion of
the credibility of an important organization such as
the IAEA.

A dangerous trend in that regard is the attempt
by a certain group of countries to monopolize nuclear
science, know-how and technology, as well as research
and development in that field. This is seriously
alarming. All developing countries must be vigilant
about the negative consequences of the trend and be
united and resolute in resisting it.

The JCPOA has established certain time-bound
limitations on Iran’s nuclear programme in return
for the lifting of sanctions and promotion of normal
economic and trade relations with Iran. Accordingly,
the JCPOA participants must support implementation of
the Plan and refrain from any action that undermines it,
including any policy that directly and adversely affects
the normalization of trade and economic relations
with Iran.

Related restrictions imposed on developing
countries seriously impede the full and effective
realization of their inherent right to the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy. By any measure, such restrictions
are unjustifiable and in gross violation of applicable
international law. Their imposition must therefore
be stopped.

As stated by the IAEA time and again, Iran is
subject to the most robust nuclear verification regime
and all its nuclear activities are conducted under the
supervision of the Agency. Iran will continue to act in
full conformity with its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and its
safeguards agreement and will remain committed
to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
inasmuch as all other participants also fulfil all their
related commitments in a complete and timely manner.

But, in practice, the United States withdrawal
from the JCPOA and the imposition of sanctions
unfortunately rendered the JCPOA almost completely
ineffective with respect to Iran’s benefits, thereby
putting the JCPOA at serious risk, as no agreement

19-3608623/30

A/74/PV.30

can survive when there is an extreme imbalance in the
benefits received by the parties.
Such a United States policy was a material breach of
its obligations under the JCPOA and Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015). In addition, the United States
continues to systematically violate its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law by brazenly forcing other States either to violate
resolution 2231 (2015) or face punishment. That
irresponsible conduct by a permanent member of the
Security Council is unprecedented in the history of
the Council.
Nevertheless, within a year of the United States
withdrawal, Iran’s only reaction was to give more
opportunity to the remaining JCPOA participants, at
their request, to compensate for the consequences of
the United States withdrawal. However, Iran’s goodwill
and maximum restraint yielded no concrete result.
To date, Iran has paid a heavy price as a result of the
United States full-scale economic war and its so-called
maximum pressure policy and has done much more
than its fair share to preserve the JCPOA. Therefore,
Iran alone cannot, and will not, shoulder all the burden
any longer to preserve the JCPOA.
Consequently, to bring a balance to the JCPOA, Iran
decided to limit the implementation of its commitments,
in full conformity with paragraphs 26 and 36 of the
JCPOA, according to which, in case of a reintroduction
or reimposition of the sanctions, Iran will have the right
to cease performing its commitments under the JCPOA
in whole or in part. That is the minimum measure that
Iran could adopt a year after the United States withdrew
from the JCPOA.
If timely, adequate, serious and practical measures
are not taken by other JCPOA participants, in exercising
its right under paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA, Iran
will be forced to further limit the implementation of its
commitments every 60 days.
All measures taken by Iran are reversible, thereby
providing the opportunity for the remaining JCPOA
participants either to take serious practical steps to
preserve the Plan or, along with the United States, to
accept full responsibility for any possible consequences.
Finally, with respect to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU), if the EU
is so serious about preserving the JCPOA, it must use
the current opportunity by taking adequate practical
24/30

11/11/2019

measures to enable Iran to benefit therefrom. Likewise,
regarding the concern raised by the EU about a location
in Iran, I would like to make it clear that all our nuclear
activities are in full conformity with our obligations
under Iran’s safeguards agreement. Iran continues to
cooperate with the IAEA in answering the questions put
to it. While interaction between the Agency and Iran is
ongoing, any conclusion by other parties is inconsistent
with the Agency’s findings and therefore unacceptable.
Instead of expressing concern over this issue, as
well as ignoring the unprecedented cooperation of Iran
with the Agency on all issues, the EU must break its
deadly silence over the threat of the clandestine nuclear
programme and nuclear weapons of Israel, which
remains the only State in the Middle East not party
to the NPT. Otherwise, the EU cannot argue that its
concerns about other issues in the region are genuine
and that its related positions enjoy consistency.
With regard to incidents regarding an IAEA
inspector, I should explain that during the routine
checking procedure, upon the entrance of IAEA
inspectors to an Iranian nuclear facility, detectors
detected a range of explosive materials containing
nitrates. All Iran’s related measures were conducted in
accordance with the relevant agreement on privileges
and immunities and the established practice, as well
as in the presence and with the consent of the Agency.
In a note verbale sent to all Missions in Vienna, Iran’s
Permanent Mission to the United Nations Office at
Vienna explained the incident in detail. Interested
delegations can approach the Iranian delegation to
receive a copy of that note verbale.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes the adoption by consensus of draft resolution
A/74/L.10 on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) (see A/74/287), which was
facilitated by Sweden. As a strong partner of the
IAEA, the Philippines is pleased to have co-sponsored
A/74/L.10. The draft resolution is consistent with the
partnership between the Philippines and the IAEA,
which has contributed to addressing outstanding issues
on nuclear safety, security and safeguards.
The Philippines has actively supported the IAEA
by bringing together national and international experts
in the nuclear field to share ideas and expertise on
nuclear applications for food and agriculture, health
and medicine, industry and the environment. Likewise,
the Philippines strongly supports the efforts of the
19-36086

11/11/2019

Agency for gender equality and balanced geographic
representation at all levels of the organization. The
Philippines encourages the IAEA to maintain balance
between the promotional and non-promotional aspects
of its work, in line with its Statute. The Philippines
believes that a balanced approach across the six major
programmes will serve to strengthen the Agency
and help raise its relevance to the citizens of all its
member States.
The relevance of the IAEA becomes all the more
pronounced given the increased importance of also
dealing with nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
issues from a technical and scientific perspective. We
are pleased that resolutions have been adopted on the
implementation of the safeguards agreement between
the Agency and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and on the application of IAEA
safeguards in the Middle East. We recognize the
challenges that the Agency faces, including the steady
increase in the amount of nuclear material in circulation,
the number of nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards
and continuing pressure on the Agency’s budget.
The Philippines takes this opportunity to
acknowledge the distinguished and remarkable
leadership
of
the
late
Director
General,
Mr. Yukiya Amano, of Japan, in maintaining highquality programmes and delivering concrete results
for member States. We pay tribute to Director General
Amano for his contributions, particularly the “Atoms
for peace and development” initiative, which he
actively promoted during his incumbency. He guided
the Secretariat in its mandate to provide necessary
assistance to member States towards the attainment
of their development goals through the application of
nuclear science and technology.
Director General Amano made several high-level
visits to the Philippines during his tenure. His last visit
to the Philippines was undertaken in February 2018,
in support of several projects implemented under the
partnership between the Philippines and the IAEA.
The Philippines extends its gratitude to the IAEA for
delivering in October the final report on its mission to
the Philippines to review the infrastructure development
for a nuclear-power programme.
The Philippine delegation also appreciates the
work of acting Director General Cornel Feruta and
congratulates Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi of

A/74/PV.30

Argentina on his appointment as Director General of
the Agency. The Philippines shall continue its close
relationship with the IAEA, and we look forward to fully
supporting the leadership of Director General Grossi.
Ms. Tiwet (Malaysia): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to pay tribute to the late Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Yukiya Amano. We thank him for his tireless
efforts, commitment and dedication to the work of the
Agency in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy
for the benefit of humankind. We would also like to
congratulate Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi on his
appointment as the new Director General.
Malaysia believes in the balanced and effective
implementation of the three pillars of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, namely,
nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In this regard, the role
of the IAEA is of vital importance to promoting the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology. We
recognize the Agency as the sole competent authority
mandated to verify the compliance of States with their
safeguards obligations.
Malaysia welcomes the draft resolution A/74/L.10
on the report of the IAEA for 2018 (see A/74/287). We
recognize the Agency’s significant activities in various
areas as highlighted in the report, including, inter alia,
nuclear technology, nuclear sciences and applications,
nuclear safety and security, nuclear verification and the
management of technical cooperation for development.
The draft resolution reaffirms the importance of
supporting the Agency in its role of development and
application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes,
which is in line with Malaysia’s long-standing principled
position of continuing support of the Agency. As a
member of the IAEA since 1969, Malaysia continues to
benefit from its extensive participation in the technical
assistance and cooperation programme with the
Agency. Cooperation between Malaysia and the IAEA
in various fields has been fruitful and encouraging.
Malaysia reiterates its commitment to building further
cooperation with the IAEA and interested partners in
areas of mutual benefit.
Malaysia remains fully committed to supporting and
working with the IAEA, as well as other IAEA member
States, to advance the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and technology. Malaysia hopes that the IAEA will
continue to play its important role of facilitating access

19-3608625/30

A/74/PV.30

to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and technology for
States while ensuring that the highest level of nuclear
safety, security and safeguards are observed.
Once again, as one of the draft resolution’s
sponsors, Malaysia reaffirms its support for A/74/L.10.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I would also like
to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the
acting Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Cornel Feruta, for his
detailed briefing on the Agency’s report (see A/74/287)
and for providing valuable updates on the IAEA’s 2019
activities. We congratulate Ambassador Rafael Mariano
Grossi on his election as the next Director General of
the IAEA and we look forward to working with him.
South Africa joins the entire membership of the
IAEA in championing the goals of the “Atoms for
peace and development” initiative, which is one of the
important legacies left by the late Director General,
Mr. Yukiya Amano. In our view, the “Atoms for peace and
development” initiative is an embodiment of the IAEA’s
role and practical contribution to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
South Africa therefore fully supports the priorities
and work of the IAEA, including the progress achieved
by the Agency during the reporting period. South Africa
has always maintained that the Agency’s work in the
field of technical cooperation through nuclear science,
technology and applications in such areas as food and
agriculture, food safety and food security, human
health, water resource management and animal health
contributes immensely to assisting Member States in
achieving socioeconomic development, including in
attaining the Sustainable Development Goals. This is
especially true for the African continent.
South Africa is a beneficiary of the Agency’s
Technical Cooperation Programme, not least in cancer
control and in strengthening the clinical management
of neurological and cardiovascular diseases. The IAEA
has supported South Africa in such notable ways as the
further strengthening of our ability to diagnose and
control transboundary and zoonotic diseases, as well
as in developing the sterile-insect technique to help
control malaria.
Through the Agency’s strong support for our
national project on assessing the sterile-insect technique
for malaria mosquitoes in a South African setting,
my country will be inaugurating the first African
26/30

11/11/2019

mosquito-vector mass-rearing facility at our National
Institute for Communicable Diseases in early 2020. In
that context, South Africa reiterates its support, shared
by many States members of the IAEA, for continuing
to assist developing countries, particularly in Africa,
with a view to enhancing the benefits that could be
derived from the peaceful uses of nuclear science and
technology for socioeconomic development.
Furthermore, South Africa wishes to reiterate the
central role played by the Agency in implementing
its safeguards verification system, which continues to
play an essential role in the global non-proliferation
regime by verifying the peaceful nature of civil nuclear
programmes throughout the world, thereby engendering
confidence in nuclear energy and technology. As the
only country to have voluntarily dismantled its own
home-grown nuclear-weapons programme, carried
out with the assistance and guidance of the IAEA,
South Africa is a living example of the IAEA’s central
role in international peace and security. In addition
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, South Africa
therefore believes that nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing
processes, and making progress on all the pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
therefore essential to realizing the Agency’s objectives
and purpose.
In addition to its two statutory activities, the
IAEA also supports Member States in the crucial
areas of nuclear safety and security through, inter
alia, the development of guidelines and capacitybuilding initiatives. These activities are primarily
the responsibility of Member States, but the IAEA
has played a crucial role in developing international
standards and good practices, which further enhances
our faith in the use of all the benefits that nuclear energy
and technology can bring.
In conclusion, my delegation co-sponsored and
supported draft resolution A/74/L.10 submitted by
Sweden in its capacity as the Chair of the Board of
Governors for the term 2019-2020. The draft resolution
reaffirms, inter alia, the indispensable role of the
Agency in encouraging and assisting the development
and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful
uses, including in the area of technology transfer to
developing countries and in nuclear safety, verification
and security. We appreciate Sweden’s role in facilitating
the draft resolution.
19-36086

11/11/2019

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh joins others in
thanking the acting Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for briefing us on the
Agency’s 2018 report (see A/74/287). We look forward
to the Agency’s sustained efforts aimed at achieving
the objectives enshrined in its Statute.
We mourn the passing of the late Director General
of the Agency, Mr. Yukiya Amano, and we congratulate
Ambassador Rafael Mariano Grossi on his election as
the new Director General of the IAEA.
Bangladesh values its partnership with the IAEA,
which is premised on our conviction in the Agency’s
pivotal role in enhancing global nuclear safety, security
and safeguards and in promoting the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. Bangladesh has been
efficiently using nuclear techniques for peaceful
purposes for quite some time. However, our initiatives
for nuclear-power generation are fairly recent.
Bangladesh considers nuclear energy as a safe,
environmentally friendly and economically viable
source of power generation to meet the increasing
demand for electricity, thereby unlocking our
development potential through enhanced productivity
and sustained growth. Our aim is to generate at least
4,000 megawatts of electricity from nuclear sources by
the year 2030, which will represent 10 per cent of our
total targeted electricity generation by that time.
We recognize that the right to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy comes with certain responsibilities in
ensuring nuclear safety and security. The IAEA has
a unique role in this regard. On the one hand, it has
the central role of ensuring nuclear safety and security
globally. On the other hand, with the mandate set forth
in the “Atoms for peace and development” initiative,
the Agency is helping Member States to build capacity
through its Technical Cooperation Programme.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina envisions
transforming Bangladesh into a middle-income
country by 2021 and a developed country by 2041. In
our journey forward, we greatly value our partnership
with the IAEA. We concluded the IAEA Safeguards
Agreement in 1982 and its Additional Protocol in
2001. Last year, we signed our country-programme
framework for 2018 to 2023 with the Agency, which
focuses on food and agriculture, water, soil and the
environment, health, nuclear power, nuclear and
radiation safety and security, nuclear knowledge
development and industrial applications, to name but a

A/74/PV.30

few. Our technical cooperation projects on improving
food security, stress-tolerant crop varieties and cancer
management have proven immensely beneficial.
Indeed, the IAEA has long been our main partner in
promoting the safe and secure application of nuclear
science and technology for peaceful purposes by way
of technical cooperation programmes, including the
Regional Cooperative Agreement (RCA).
We have received sustained cooperation in the
development of capacities for the application of
nuclear science and techniques in such sectors as, inter
alia, nuclear infrastructure and research, livestock,
agriculture, industry and water management. In
addition, Bangladesh has benefited from the IAEA’s
RCA framework, which continues to promote regional
capabilities and expertise in different thematic areas,
including research reactors and radioactive-waste
management, nuclear safety and radiation protection.
We hope that such support provided by the IAEA will
continue in future in response to the evolving needs and
demands on the ground.
Bangladesh wishes to further enhance its
engagement with the IAEA in the coming days with a
view to collectively enhancing global nuclear security
and safety and promoting the application of nuclear
science and technologies for peaceful purposes. We
consider these objectives to be of the utmost importance
in realizing a number of relevant Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly by the developing and
least developed countries.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 88.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/74/L.10, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/74/L.10: Albania, Algeria,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Dominican

19-3608627/30

A/74/PV.30

11/11/2019

Republic, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Seychelles,
Singapore, South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates
and the United Kingdom.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/74/L.10?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/8).

A/74/L.10

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote after the vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation has joined the consensus on
resolution 74/8, which we have just adopted, because
we believe it is important that the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) work in accordance with its
statute. Everyone here, particularly Mr. Feruta, Acting
Director General, knows that non-proliferation is one of
the fundamental pillars and priorities of my country’s
foreign policy in letter and in spirit. We were among the
first to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), in 1968, ahead of many
European Union member States that today claim that
they are concerned about the non-proliferation regime,
while some of those States and another that seeks
membership in the EU, all of which are members of
NATO, have nuclear weapons on their territories, in
flagrant violation of articles I and II of the NPT.
My country signed a Safeguards Agreement with
the Agency in 1992. In 2003, Syria submitted a draft
resolution to the Security Council on the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction. The credibility of
our country with respect to non-proliferation cannot
therefore be questioned, particularly given the fact
that the draft resolution was in line with the purposes
and principles of the IAEA. But the United States of
28/30

America objected to the draft resolution and threatened
to use the veto.
The IAEA and the Security Council have not
condemned Israel’s flagrant attack on my country in
2007 or, indeed, Israel’s lack of cooperation with the
Agency and its refusal to allow its inspectors to reveal
and investigate the possible radioactive effects of the
use of weapons and materials by Israel in destroying and
contaminating the Deir ez-Zor installation. Nor have
they condemned Israel’s continued lack of cooperation
with regard to its development of nuclear military
capabilities outside any international safeguards regime
or its disregard of all calls to make the Middle East a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, which is the only factor
undermining the credibility of the non-proliferation
regime and the NPT, threatening the stability and safety
of the peoples and States of the region.
All these are very serious issues that are well
documented and well known to the Agency. We had
expected the Acting Director General of the IAEA to
raise those clear and well-documented issues in his
introduction of the report of the Agency (see A/74/287),
rather than repeating vague and meaningless language
such as “very likely” when speaking about the Israeli
aggression against Deir ez-Zor.
The obligations of Member States under the Statute
of the Agency would have required the United States
to report to the Agency information in its possession
before the installation was destroyed by Israeli forces,
not eight months later. The same applies to Israel, which
not only stopped short of providing information to the
Agency — correct or otherwise — but also conducted an
aggravated military aggression against the sovereignty
of Syrian territories by overflying the neighbouring
country of Turkey. That was not addressed by the
IAEA in accordance with its mandate and the Agency
failed to take necessary measures, under its terms of
reference and responsibilities, with respect to Israel’s
non-compliance with its international commitments.
All of us recall what was contained in the memoir
of the former Director General of the Agency,
Mr. El Baradei, entitled The Age of Deception: Nuclear
Diplomacy in Treacherous Times. I quote from pages
228 and 229 of the memoir.
(spoke in English)
“One of the strangest and most striking
examples of nuclear hypocrisy, multilateral and
19-36086

11/11/2019

multifaceted, must surely be Israel’s bombing of
the Deir ez-Zor installation in Syria in September
2007, and the aftermath of that attack. Speculation
began almost immediately that the site housed a
nuclear facility. Syria denied the accusations. Israel
and the United States remained officially silent,
although American officials talked anonymously
on the subject to the media. I spoke out strongly,
noting that any country with information indicating
that the bombed facility was nuclear was under a
legal obligation to report it to the IAEA. But no one
came forward with such a report. For the six weeks
following the bombing — the most crucial period
in terms of our seeing inside the facility — we were
unable to obtain any high resolution imagery from
commercial satellites.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Most of the Agency’s conclusions concerning the
Deir ez-Zor installation were based on satellite imagery
provided by the United States Central Intelligence
Agency. That really calls into question the credibility
of the information provided to the Agency, particularly
given that it was provided by a State with a hostile
agenda against my country, Syria, as Member States
may recall, and considering the related precedents set
by the catastrophic and misleading Iraqi file, which led
to the invasion and destruction of its infrastructure and
the spread of terrorism throughout the region.
Syria has positively and constructively cooperated
with the Agency on the status of the Deir ez-Zor
installation, which was attacked by Israeli warplanes
from Turkish airspace. Following that attack, my country
allowed Agency inspectors to visit the installation in
June 2008, granting them free access to its perimeter
so that they could collect environmental samples. Syria
also answered all requests for information. Syria showed
maximum flexibility and seriousness in addressing all
pending issues and, in 2011, reached an agreement with
the Agency on an action plan designed to resolve the
issues that remained outstanding. Regrettably, some
States — the United States in particular — used a
political blackmail scheme subsequently revealed by the
WikiLeaks documents to apply pressure to ensure that
the action plan was never implemented. Accordingly,
we believe that the United States — and not Syria — is
responsible for the failure to implement the action plan.
The Agency’s annual reports on safeguards
implementation, the most recent of which is the 2018

A/74/PV.30

report, have shown Syria’s full commitment to meeting
its obligations under the safeguards regime and the
NPT. Moreover, Syria has satisfied all inspection
requests in a timely manner, most recently in March.
Israel’s admission of its responsibility for the attack
on Syria after a decade of lies and prevarication clearly
shows that the Agency must immediately initiate the
process of dispatching an inspection team to Israel. Any
discussion on the issue is useless until the aggressor
entity cooperates with the Agency.
It is shameful that the European Union (EU)
observer, in his statement to the General Assembly,
criticizes certain States and lodges accusations against
them. The observer’s statement confirms that the EU
is playing the role of devil’s advocate. Not once did
he criticize the Israeli entity, which in fact represents
the real and perhaps only danger in our region and
the world, owing to its possession of huge arsenals of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
as well as their means of delivery, which could enable
Israel to reach targets outside our region — all of
this without any international control whatsoever.
However, it is quite obvious why the EU has not made
accusations against Israel for possessing nuclear
weapons: certain States of the EU have provided Israel
with nuclear reactors, heavy water, nuclear technology
and submarines capable of launching nuclear weapons
and other means of delivery.
Indeed, the EU should be the last to raise the
issue of non-proliferation, especially since four of its
member States and one other State — a State that in
fact seeks to join the EU — have nuclear weapons
stationed on their territories, in grave violation of the
NPT. In this context, we call on the IAEA to shoulder
its responsibilities and investigate the presence of
nuclear weapons in non-nuclear European States and
submit a report on those five States’ potential violation
of the NPT as soon as possible. Moreover, many EU
member States are in violation of their obligations
under the NPT and other conventions related to the
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in
view of their cooperation with Israel in efforts aimed at
bolstering its military capacities, especially its military
nuclear programme and its other programmes related
to other weapons of mass destruction. These European
countries also provide Israel with expertise, material
and technology and assist Israel in making, possessing
and developing nuclear weapons.

19-3608629/30

A/74/PV.30

The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 88?

30/30

11/11/2019

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

19-36086
