UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1062
15 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 15 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, I have
the honour to convey the attached report on the international security presence
in Kosovo covering the period from 30 August to 27 September 1999.
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-30006 (E)

151099

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1062
English
Page 2

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations

1.
Over the reporting period (30 August-27 September), KFOR troops continued
their deployment into the theatre. As of 27 September, there were 49,412 troops
in place. Sixteen member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) have now completed their deployments.
2.
Austria, Lithuania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, Sweden,
Switzerland, and Ukraine all completed their deployments over the reporting
period. Russian deployment into the town of Orahovac continues to be hampered
by ongoing demonstrations and roadblocks set up around the town by various
groups of ethnic Albanians. Efforts to resolve the problems are continuing.
Security
3.
The reporting period was characterized by a slight decrease in acts of
aggression against KFOR personnel, although there was an increase in tension and
violence during the last week of September. There are no indications of these
incidents being linked to a campaign against KFOR. Ethnic tension persists, and
attacks by ethnic Albanians against ethnic minorities continue, especially
against Serbs and their property. Developments in the last days of the
reporting period indicate that the tension in areas such as Kosovo Polje,
Mitrovica and Orahovac could escalate and spread easily. Over the period, there
were an estimated 112 civilian casualties in Kosovo. Five people were detained
on suspicion of murder. Residual caches of weapons are still being found
throughout the area of operations.
4.
KFOR continues to work closely with the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS), and recently launched a mine-awareness training programme in
conjunction with the United Nations Mines Action Coordination Centre (UNMACC)
and other demining organizations. Emphasis is currently being placed on
eradicating the threat from cluster bomb units (CBUs) and on clearing bordercrossing sites. In this context, KFOR Multinational Brigades (MNBs) have
reconnoitred all known CBU locations and have marked the bomblets for disposal
by explosive ordnance disposal teams. The aim is to mark all areas and clear as
many as possible before the onset of the first snow. KFOR continues to work
closely with UNMAS to conduct expedient clearance of those areas that impact on
immediate operations. KFOR has cleared 547 schools, and expects to complete
school clearance activities by mid-October. As at 18 September, 4,462
anti-personnel mines, 2,331 anti-tank mines and 3,800 bomblets had been cleared.
Residual caches of weapons are still being found throughout the area of
operations.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
Overall, by K+90 (19 September), the Kosovo Liberation Army (UÇK) was
assessed as being in compliance with the 21 June Undertaking signed by the UÇK
leadership and the Commander of KFOR. During the course of its
demilitarization, UÇK handed in approximately 10,000 weapons, mostly old and in
/...

S/1999/1062
English
Page 3

poor condition. UÇK officially ceased to exist on 20 September. At the same
time, the Principles for the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) were agreed upon.
The KPC will be a multi-ethnic civil emergency service agency, with no law
enforcement role, under the authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who has appointed Mr. Çeku as its head.
The Commander of KFOR will assist in the tasks the KPC must achieve, will
provide day-to-day operational direction to the KPC, and, concurrently, will
continue to take a robust line in monitoring compliance and, in particular, will
ensure no unauthorized access to weapons.
6.
While the senior leadership of UÇK appeared content with the agreement and
transition to the KPC, it is likely that some UÇK structures persist. There
have been incidents of former UÇK personnel not wearing the newly issued KPC
uniform, or still wearing UÇK badges. KFOR will focus on monitoring compliance
with the Principles and on supervising the provision of assistance to develop
the KPC.
7.
Over the reporting period, Serb security forces continued to comply with
the terms of the Military Technical Agreement and remain cooperative in their
dealings with KFOR, despite occasional encounters between KFOR and Serb elements
on the boundary between Kosovo and the rest of Serbia. Seasonal military
training by the Serb forces continues.
Cooperation with international organizations
8.
KFOR continues to provide humanitarian assistance throughout Kosovo on a
daily basis and upon request, focusing on transportation, the distribution of
food, medical support, the re-establishment of support services and the
protection and escorting of refugees and internally displaced persons.
9.
With the police force of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
currently numbering only 1,483 policemen, civil administration in the area of
public safety remains principally a KFOR responsibility. Responsibility for
police functions in Pristina was transferred from KFOR to UNMIK at the end of
August, and more than 560 policemen are deployed there. However, KFOR still
conducts security patrols in all major urban areas and in the countryside in
order to deter crime and instill a sense of personal safety in civilians.
Approximately half of KFOR’s total available manpower is directly committed to
current protection tasks. KFOR provides daily support to the Kosovo Police
School, which conducted its first class on 7 September.
10. KFOR continues to provide security and protection on the border-crossing
points into Kosovo and conducts random searches of vehicles, including to
prevent the illegal traffic of weapons and military equipment. KFOR also
provides security for the transportation of customs duties collected at those
border-crossing points manned by UNMIK border police. Currently, six KFOR
battalions are primarily involved in border security operations and this
responsibility will remain with KFOR, until UNMIK assumes responsibility for
border control.

/...

S/1999/1062
English
Page 4

11. KFOR continues to support UNMIK at all levels of the civil administration
in Kosovo, and is represented at the Kosovo Transitional Council, which met
three times in September, and the joint civil commissions.
12. With respect to infrastructure, KFOR troops are still involved in such
tasks as sanitation, securing water supplies and power plant operations. Rail
transportation is operated and maintained by KFOR.
Return of refugees and internally displaced persons
13. More than 85 per cent of some 900,000 refugees in regional and third
countries have now returned to Kosovo. This flow decreased appreciably in
September, when only approximately 22,500 refugees returned home, the majority
of them from third countries. Serbs in Kosovo remain isolated and dependent on
the aid provided by KFOR and humanitarian organizations in food delivery and
medical care. According to latest estimates from the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and KFOR brigades, there are approximately 97,000 Serbs still in
Kosovo.
Outlook
14. As noted above, the security situation in Kosovo improved in the early part
of the reporting period. However, attacks against ethnic minorities, especially
Serbs, and their property, remain a major security concern. There is also the
danger that tension could escalate and spread from areas such as Orahovac and
Kosovo Polje. KFOR will continue to work in close cooperation with UNMIK to
address these and other issues in order to maintain peace and stability in
Kosovo.

-----
