S/PV.7478

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7478th meeting

Monday, 29 June 2015, 3.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Adnin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Stehelin
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-20078 (E)
*1520078*

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

whether they meet the requirements of Article 17
[of the Rome Statute, which gives preference to
national courts unless States in question cannot or
will not prosecute]. The final determination of this
issue, however, is for the judges of the ICC alone”.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: We are meeting once again as
I present my Office’s twenty-first report on Darfur,
Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Today’s briefing also takes place over six years
after the issuance of the first warrant of arrest against
Mr. Omer Al-Bashir. To those who choose to forget
the events that have brought us here, and in particular
those who have chosen to deliberately distort facts by
alleging that the International Criminal Court (ICC)
imposed itself on the Sudan, I would like to briefly
recall some crucial facts.
Lest we forget, on 29 October 2009, the African
Union (AU) endorsed the report and recommendations
of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur,
led by the former President of South Africa, Mr
Thabo Mbeki. This comprehensive 125-page report,
entitled “Darfur – the quest for peace, justice and
reconciliation”, recommended a range of steps the
Sudanese Government ought to take to advance these
objectives. They included the creation of a hybrid court
composed of Sudanese and non-Sudanese judges and
other officials to investigate and prosecute serious
crimes committed in Darfur in violation of international
law, as well as broad reforms to the country’s criminal
justice system. In particular, the Mbeki Panel opined,
“should Sudan make genuine efforts to address
the crimes in Darfur, the judges of the ICC would
be required to evaluate those steps to consider

2/18

29/06/2015

The role of the International Criminal Court in
efforts to end the atrocities committed in Darfur and to
hold those most responsible accountable, is crucial and
has a well-known history. Indeed, it is a role equally
well recognized by the African Unon at the genesis of
the exercise of the Court’s jurisdiction vis-à-vis Darfur,
Sudan. Notably, the Mbeki Panel went on to say:
“Whilst the ICC action might be a catalyst for acts
of accountability in Sudan, Darfurians deserve
attention not because of the threat of international
action, but principally because they have a right to
justice, in their own country, on account of what
they have suffered”.
The question we need to ask ourselves today is
whether the people of Darfur, Sudan, who continue to
endure the suffering widely recognized by the Mbeki
Panel and the African Union, among others, will ever
receive the justice they deserve? Will their plight finally
be answered through independent and impartial justice,
or will their cries continue to face silent inaction?
In my last briefing on Darfur (see S/PV.7337), I
stated that given the Council’s failure to act decisively
on numerous acts of defiance of its resolution 1593
(2005) by the Government of the Sudan and given the
limited resources at my disposal, I was left with no
choice but to limit active investigations. My message
was addressed to the Council to encourage the exercise
of its powers to ensure justice for the long-suffering
victims of atrocity crimes in the Sudan. It was a clarion
call to the Council that it is long overdue to heed the
cries of the victims of rape, sexual abuse, torture, mass
displacement and other kinds of inhumane suffering
that Darfurians continue to endure.
As always, detractors and their spin doctors have
deliberately distorted the call for Security Council
action as a victory for Mr. Al-Bashir and other suspects
in the Darfur situation. Let me be clear. My Office’s
determination to bring independent and impartial
justice to the people of the Sudan remains unshaken.
The efforts of detractors and naysayers only serve to
strengthen our resolve and spur us to double our efforts
in that regard. Mr. Al-Bashir’s rapid departure from
South Africa proves that the warrants of arrest against

15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7478

him are as valid as they were when issued. They remain
in full force and effect, and my Office is committed to
ensure that they are executed.

Court. The longer such persons remain at large, the
greater the risk that further atrocities will be committed,
contributing to instability and insecurity.

While Mr. Al-Bashir may have escaped the law in
South Africa through an unanticipated and premature
departure from the twenty-fourth African Union
Summit, the swift judicial action of South African
courts we have witnessed is a shining precedent that
must be emulated in other States. More generally,
the High Court’s ruling on South Africa has also
underlined a growing recognition by domestic courts of
States’ obligations to uphold their commitments under
international law and, in this case, the Rome Statute.

The deteriorating security situation in Darfur
continues to be a matter of great concern, not only for
my Office, but for the broader international community
and, undoubtedly, for the Council. Innocent civilians
continue to bear the brunt of insecurity and instability,
notably as a result of what appears to be an ongoing
Government campaign to target them. The frequency
and brutality of the targeting of civilians, particularly
women, are especially troubling. The people alleged
to be most responsible for those ongoing atrocities are
the same people against whom warrants of arrest have
already been issued. Needless to say, arresting them
and bringing them to face justice is the only way to
stop those crimes.

As the Court’s own presiding Judge of the Pre-Trial
Chamber made clear on Saturday, 13 June, there
existed no ambiguity or uncertainty with respect
to the obligation of the Republic of South Africa to
immediately arrest and surrender Mr. Omer Al-Bashir
to the Court and that the competent authorities of the
Republic of South Africa were already aware of that
obligation. Mr. Al-Bashir’s hasty retreats in Kenya,
Nigeria and now South Africa are also largely due to
the vigilance and tireless efforts of civil society. The
courage and commitment of civil society are to be
commended. More importantly, such selfless efforts
must humble us and remind us of the spirit of 1998,
when the hopes and aspirations of humanity combined
in a rare historical moment to create the International
Criminal Court with the promise “never again”.
The International Justice Project, with the ICC at
its nucleus, demands sustained and robust support if it
is to succeed and propel us forward towards a more just
and peaceful world. We must not allow that virtuous
undertaking of humanity to be chipped away or
ultimately sacrificed at the altar of political expediency.
It is past time for the Council and States to join forces
with the Court and civil society in devising concrete
and effective strategies for the arrest of accused
persons wanted by the Court and to give the ICC the
full support it requires and to which it is entitled in
order to implement the Rome Statute as intended.
My Office has encouraged States parties to find
innovative ways to support those among them that are
most likely to receive visits from wanted individuals
to be proactive and to make practical plans for the safe
and effective arrest of persons against whom warrants
of arrest have been issued by the Court. I encourage
States parties to plan ahead for the arrest in a targeted
and efficient manner of each individual wanted by the

In that context, I must emphasize that my Office’s
investigations into the alleged crimes committed
in Darfur are continuing, albeit not at the pace or
intensity we would have liked. The fact remains that
my Office has finite resources and a heavy caseload
and is therefore struggling to commit to full, active
investigations of the ongoing crimes in Darfur. That
however, should not in any way be misconstrued or
interpreted to mean that investigations have been closed
or that we have abandoned the victims of mass atrocities
in Darfur — in fact, far from it. A team of lawyers and
investigators dedicated to the Darfur investigations in
my Office continues to carry out its work, albeit with a
limited capacity given resource constraints, the lack of
access to the Sudan and inadequate support and followup from the Council. My Darfur team’s activities have
had to be limited to monitoring and documenting
incidents as they occur and to conducting witness
interviews where possible and necessary. I urge anyone
with reliable information and potential evidence of
ongoing crimes in Darfur to contact my Office and to
proactively support the ongoing investigation.
On 26 June, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC found
that the Government of the Sudan is in non-compliance
for its failure to arrest and surrender Abdel Raheem
Muhammad Hussein to the ICC. That is in addition
to the 9 March finding of the same Pre-Trial Chamber
that the Sudan has failed to cooperate with the ICC by
not arresting and surrendering Mr. Omar Al-Bashir.
The Judges have communicated those findings to the
Council for action. The latest judicial findings bring
the number of such non-compliance communications

15-200783/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

29/06/2015

to the Council to 10. I urge the Council to give urgent
attention to those communications.

The President: I thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing.

Following an independent assessment of whether to
open an investigation pursuant to a Security Council
referral, if the decision by the Court is affirmative,
then the Rome Statute legal framework foresees a clear
role for the Council in the case of the non-compliance
of States. It is imperative for the Council to recognize
its crucial role vis-à-vis those States found to be
non-compliant by the Court and to assume its
responsibilities to advance the objectives of the Rome
Statute. Therefore, I reiterate the call on the Council
to ensure the Sudan’s compliance with resolution 1593
(2005) and equally call on States parties to the Rome
Statute to promote cooperation and effect the arrest of
individuals wanted by the ICC in the Darfur situation.

I now give the floor to the members of the Council.

Similarly, I urge ICC States parties to take the lead
in assessing how best individuals for whom warrants
have been issued by the Court can be arrested and
surrendered to the ICC. That dialogue is past due
and my Office encourages it to be given the urgency
it deserves. As the Judges of the Court have put it, if
there is no follow-up action on the part of the Security
Council, any referral by the Council to the ICC under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations would
never achieve its ultimate goal; namely, to put an end to
impunity. Accordingly, any such referral would become
futile.
My Office welcomes the ongoing dialogue with
States parties to the Rome Statute, through the caucus
of States parties in the Council. The caucus is an
important step towards building institutional memory
on justice issues within the Council and ensuring
that justice remains an integral part of the Council’s
discussions. I encourage the leadership of the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC and
their offices to continue to consider how interaction
between the caucus and the Assembly of States Parties
may strengthen the justice community’s interactions at
the United Nations.
In conclusion, let me restate that there is more that
we can and must do to achieve peace and justice in
Darfur. I will continue to do my part in the exercise
of my independent and impartial mandate. The support
of partners, including civil society from the Sudan and
elsewhere, States Parties in general and the United
Nations remains crucial for my work. It must be stressed
that the Council also has a vital role to play and must
do its part.
4/18

Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing. The climate of violence and
impunity continues in Darfur. That is why we believe
that the Council should adopt a more active stance with
regard to follow-up of that situation in the context of
the ICC.
Chile condemns the serious crimes described in the
report of the Prosecutor of the ICC, which continue to
be investigated. Those include aerial bombardments;
attacks on civilians; sexual and gender-based violence;
attacks on human rights activists, members of civil
society and community leaders; and the kidnapping
of and attacks against those providing humanitarian
assistance and those involved in peacekeeping
operations.
The referral of this information to the Court and the
periodic reports to the Council are not sufficient. We
urge the Council to strengthen its channels for dialogue
with the Court and with the Prosecutor to enable them
to respond to the requests made of them. We reiterate
that the success of the investigations and proceedings
of the ICC require the cooperation of States in their
capacity as States parties to the Rome Statute and in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which are the documents that underpin
resolution 1593 (2005). Unfortunately, in the case of
Darfur, the Prosecutor has repeatedly indicated to the
Council that the Sudan has failed to cooperate. Chile
reiterates its call on all States involved to cooperate
with the Court to implement its rulings.
Equally worrisome is the fact that, as the
Prosecutor has indicated, grave violations continue
to be committed within the area of competence of the
Court, in violation of the Rome Statute. It is essential
that efforts be redoubled to achieve a system in which
the rule of law and human rights are respected, while
allowing for full compliance with the obligation to
cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor in order to
put an end to all cases of impunity.
The Council has addressed the humanitarian
situation in Darfur on many occasions. We call for the
implementation of the relevant resolutions that followed
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation to
15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Court and highlighted the need for a cessation of
violence against civilians, in particular women and
children. We reiterate our call for all of those resolutions
be fully implemented.
We would like to conclude by reaffirming the value
of the work of the Court, in particular the work of
Prosecutor Bensouda.
Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Prosecutor for presenting her
twenty-first report.
On 31 March 2005, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1593 (2005), which noted that the situation
in the Sudan constituted a threat to international peace
and security and referred the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). In the resolution,
the Council took note of the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur
(S/2005/60), which had established the serious and
systematic nature of the crimes in Darfur.
In its 2005 debates, the Council recalled that the
referral had been presented as a way to prevent new
atrocities by fighting against impunity and ensuring
stability in the Sudan, which was a precondition for its
development. It is useful, first of all, to return to the
origins of those debates, and in some way to the spirit
that must guide the interpretation and implementation of
the resolution. Indeed, the Council remains responsible
for the resolutions it adopts and compliance with them
by the parties concerned.
Ten years later, it is clear that the same chain of
cause and effect identified in 2005 is still feeding the
cycle of violence. As highlighted in the report of the
Prosecutor, the situation in Darfur is not improving
and has even deteriorated, the intensity of the violence
having reached one of the most alarming levels recorded
in this conflict. France is deeply concerned about
the intensification of fighting between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and rebel groups in the Jebel Marra
and Northern Darfur, in particular the aerial bombing
campaign, which indiscriminately targets civilians.
Civilians continue to be the primary victims of
a form of collective punishment, as evidenced by the
approximately 121,000 people displaced in the Jebel
Marra since January. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular sexual
violence, are continuing with complete impunity. In
this context, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

S/PV.7478

Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is prevented from
to carrying out its mandate due to the attacks and
restrictions on access to which it is subject.
At the same time, the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court have yet to be executed.
Five individuals accused of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and, in one case, genocide continue to
evade the Court’s jurisdiction. Most of them continue
to occupy the highest offices in the Sudanese State
apparatus. How is it not clear that this impunity
encourages further and renewed abuses?
While 2015 could, in humanitarian terms, be even
worse than 2014, in which 430,000 people were newly
displaced, the solutions are well known to the Council.
They include, first, the conclusion and implementation
of a political solution involving the Government and
rebel groups; secondly, effective protection of civilians
and UNAMID’s exercise of its mandate; and thirdly,
unimpeded humanitarian access to civilian populations
and displaced persons.
Finally, identifying the persons responsible for
crimes and an effective fight against impunity remain
essential. We welcome the commitment of the Office of
the Prosecutor during the period covered by the report.
The Office obtained from the Pre-Trial Chamber two
decisions of non-cooperation against the Sudan, in the
Al-Bashir case on 9 March 2015, and in the Hussein
case on 26 June 2015, bringing the total to 10. We recall
the importance of States’ duty to cooperate, without
which the prosecution of the most serious crimes by
the ICC will remain dead letter. As recalled by the
Prosecutor, the primary responsibility lies with the
Sudan as the State with the territorial jurisdiction to
execute the arrest warrants and cooperate with the
Court as required by resolution 1593 (2005). However,
the Sudan not only refuses to cooperate at all with the
Court, but also takes no action to allowing victims
access to independent and impartial justice.
Under these circumstances, in order to ensure
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005) and consistency
with the conditions of its adoption in 2005, the arrest
warrants be carried out. The Council must respond
to cases of non-cooperation with the Court, and the
Assembly of States Parties must remain mobilized.
In this regard, France welcomes the efforts by its
President, Mr. Sidiki Kaba. At the same time, contacts
with the persons subject to arrest warrants by the Court
must be limited to those deemed essential, in line with
the Secretary-General’s policy. France calls on the

15-200785/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations as a whole to continue to implement
that guidance.
Civilian populations were at the core of the
Security Council’s approach in 2005 when resolution
1593 (2005) was adopted. They must remain so today to
bolster the Council in its struggle against impunity and
its support for UNAMID. The Hybrid Mission, which
brings together the United Nations and African Union,
is making every effort to fulfil its mandate in conditions
rendered particularly difficult by the obstacles it
systematically encounters. Some of the interested
parties would wish above all for the Mission to be
purely and simply withdrawn, with no consideration for
the actual situation on the ground. Any such approach
would be counterproductive, since its only effect would
be to make civilians even more vulnerable to the spiral
of violence, which could further destabilize the Sudan
and the region and usher in a dangerous cycle.
UNAMID must pursue clear objectives and develop
long-term planning giving it a strategic view of its
mission. Improving the situation of civilian populations
must remain its lodestar; it must also continue to
support the search for a political solution, the only kind
that will work in the long term. The Council has just
renewed the mandate of UNAMID, which all of us must
now unequivocally support in the accomplishment of
its mission. We owe that to the people of Darfur.
It is not without a sense of failure that we are
obliged to make these observations some 10 years after
the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). Let that date,
however, remind us of the continuing relevance of the
Security Council’s intentions and vision in 2005. Now
more than ever, it behoves us to put into practical effect
our decision and cooperation with the Court, to which
that resolution has fundamentally and indissolubly
linked us in the essential common objective of fighting
impunity.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing to update the Council on the
referral of the situation in Darfur. My delegation
commends the Office of the Prosecutor for its sustained
efforts to fulfil the mandate given to the Court by the
Security Council a decade ago. We agree with the
assessment contained in the Prosecutor’s twenty-first
report and regret the persistence of major impediments
to bringing those responsible for crimes in Darfur to
account.

6/18

29/06/2015

The sad reality of today’s meeting, like that of the
previous ones, is that we need to reflect on yet another
six months that have added to the suffering of the
people of Darfur. As the latest reports clearly indicate,
the ongoing security and humanitarian crisis in Darfur
continues to be marked by widespread violence,
impunity and displacement. Civilians continue to be
targeted by both Government and armed militias, and to
suffer from indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks,
including on ethnic grounds. Raids on villages and
camps of internally displaced persons camps dominate
the daily life of innocent people, including women and
children. The humanitarian situation is dire, while the
delivery of humanitarian assistance continues to be
hindered. Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers
are subject to constant attacks throughout Darfur.
Widespread sexual and gender-based violence has
become a horrible feature of Darfur’s conflict — and
the list goes on, as detailed in the Prosecutor’s report.
Earlier this year, in its resolution 2200 (2015), the
Security Council expressed its deep concern regarding
the increased violence and insecurity in Darfur in recent
months. It emphasized the imperative for all armed
actors to refrain from acts of violence against civilians.
Similar concerns were also voiced at the recent briefing
and consultations on Darfur. As the Prosecutor advises
in her report, numerous trends in Darfur may amount
to crimes under the Rome Statute, and while we concur
that the Prosecutor’s Office needs to think strategically
and prioritize its workload, we urge it to continue to
closely monitor various crimes allegedly committed in
Darfur.
There is no doubt that the situation in Darfur is
complex and multifaceted, but one thing is clear. Attacks
against civilians there are largely possible because
of the prevailing climate of impunity, and because
violence breeds more violence. That cannot continue,
and all perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law must be brought to
justice. The Government of the Sudan should do more
to end attacks against civilians, ensure accountability
and bring justice for the victims.
One message from the Prosecutor has also been
clear and consistent at this and previous meetings. It
is of the utmost importance that the Government of the
Sudan and other parties meet their obligation under
resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the Court,
including in the execution of those arrest warrants
issued by the Court that remain outstanding. The

15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Court’s latest decision against the Republic of the
Sudan for non-compliance is a serious reminder that
the Security Council needs to follow up on its referral.
The Council has a special commitment with regard to
the situation in Darfur, and needs to act vigorously to
ensure that its own resolution is fully implemented.
The report of the Prosecutor, however, reminds us
that a lack of cooperation persists on the part not only
of the Government of the Sudan but also of other States.
The lack of cooperation undermines international
efforts to fight impunity, although there are some
encouraging responses from national judiciaries. We
therefore urge all States to cooperate fully with the
Court in its investigations and prosecutions in Darfur.
We also take note of the Prosecutor’s suggestion that
this is not a challenge only for those States parties to
the Rome Statute that the suspects may visit.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania’s
full support for and cooperation with the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
public discussion of Darfur in recent weeks and months
has centred on three terms: hibernation, exit strategy
and non-cooperation. In each case, however, there is
a deeper story to tell, and with respect to all three the
discussion would benefit from a renewed focus on
those men, women and children in Darfur who have
suffered greatly from the fighting and violence. That
is especially noteworthy now, since the violence and
suffering are approaching levels that have not been
seen since 2004.
In December 2014, the Prosecutor announced that
she would hibernate investigative activities in Darfur.
We welcome her clarification that this does not mean
the end of her work on the situation in Darfur, but we
were and are alarmed that the Sudan’s non-cooperation
has pushed her to such a point, and we must highlight,
in response to those who see this as in some way a
victory over the International Criminal Court, that,
as the Prosecutor also emphasizes in her report, arrest
warrants remain outstanding and prosecutors are
continuing to work on the cases as much as possible.
We think it is serious cause for concern and an affront
to the victims of atrocities in Darfur that the individuals
subject to outstanding arrest warrants related to the
Darfur situation remain at large.

S/PV.7478

We have also heard considerable discussion of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) exit strategy at a time when
we need a greater focus on conditions inside Darfur,
where the situation is deadly and deteriorating. The
reported events of the past year have been alarming.
Aerial bombardments, the number of which the
Prosecutor described as having significantly increased,
kill children and destroy hospitals and humanitarian
facilities; sexual violence is wielded against women
and girls with impunity, including, reportedly, in
Thabit, where an investigation into alleged mass rapes
remains incomplete, stymied by the Sudan’s systematic
denial of independent access to UNAMID personnel.
Villages have been burned and communities’ very
means of survival are destroyed. Increased fighting
among the armed groups and intercommunal violence
have driven the displacement of over 573,000 people
since the beginning of 2014.
The need for UNAMID, and the need for it to have
full and unfettered access to conduct its work, are more
acute than ever across all of Darfur, including in the
light of the Prosecutor’s decision to hibernate her new
investigative work. It is important for UNAMID not
just to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
work, but also to continue to document the ongoing
violations and abuses. That is reiterated in the latest
communiqué of the African Union Peace and Security
Council of 22 June.
Finally, with regard to the issue of non-cooperation,
while members of the international community do
not see eye to eye on many aspects of the Darfur
crisis, we believe that there is abundant common
ground among the members of the Council on the
fact that States Members of the United Nations have
obligations under the Charter to accept and carry out
the Security Council’s decisions. The Government of
the Sudan continues to disregard the Council’s decision
in resolution 1593 (2005) that it must cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the
Court and the Prosecutor. Surely we can agree that the
Council has an interest in ensuring compliance with its
own decisions. We continue to urge the international
community to ensure compliance by the Sudan with its
international obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
The Council must also continue to focus on the need
for accountability in Darfur, because it was us who sent
peacekeepers into harm’s way, and we owe them our
support. Attacks on peacekeepers in Darfur have killed

15-200787/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

citizens of Nigeria, Mali, Senegal, Tanzania and Rwanda,
among others. Often lost in the debates about President
Al-Bashir is the fact that one of the areas of focus of
the International Criminal Court’s investigations has
been the 2007 attack on the brave soldiers who served
in the African Union’s peacekeeping mission there.
In the absence of any national proceedings in Darfur
to investigate and provide accountability for those
crimes, we must be able to come together and express
support for efforts to prosecute deliberate attacks on
peacekeepers — attacks that very much continue to
this day, as described in the Prosecutor’s report. For
example, on 26 April, the Government of the Sudan
denied a flight request for the emergency medical
evacuation of an Ethiopian peacekeeper, injured while
performing his duties in Mukjar, Western Darfur.
The evacuation flight clearance was denied and the
peacekeeper died hours later.
Finally, in the light of recent events, I would like to
reiterate that the United States opposes invitations to
and facilitation of travel by those subject to outstanding
International Criminal Court arrest warrants related
to the situation in Darfur, and we are not alone in
stressing the continued need for accountability. Voices
from South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya have been clear
and unequivocal. It was a South African organization
that approached its own courts to seek enforcement of
the ICC arrest warrant. It was Nigerian activists who
discouraged a prolonged stay in their country, and it
was a Kenyan court that ruled that the Government
there must arrest Al-Bashir should he ever set foot
there.
All that said, the discussion of hibernation, exit
strategy and non-cooperation too often loses sight of the
men, women and children who have been suffering from
the ongoing conflict and violence in Darfur. It is their
plight that makes the need for accountability so acute,
and we must not turn our backs on them. The United
States will continue to work with the Security Council
and other partners in the international community to
promote an end to the Sudan’s many conflicts, and a
just and sustainable peace.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China listened carefully to Prosecutor Bensouda’s
briefing. The major problems in Darfur recently have
been the slow progress of the political process, the
refusal of some rebel groups to join the peace process
and the continuing use of violence to undermine the
region’s peace and stability. We welcome and support

8/18

29/06/2015

the efforts of the Sudanese Government and the
relevant rebel groups to push for implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, and we hope that
all the parties concerned will adhere to the principle of
political settlement, join with and actively promote the
Document’s implementation and seek a comprehensive
political settlement of the question of Darfur. We hope
that countries that have influence with the rebels will
play a constructive role in that regard. The international
community should also help to create favourable
external conditions for a political settlement of the
question of Darfur.
China’s position on the involvement of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in the issue remains
unchanged. We also believe that the concerns of the
African Union and the countries concerned about the
ICC’s involvement should be given full attention.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for
her briefing, and to convey Spain’s congratulations to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) on its work,
particularly regarding the Sudan.
In reading the Prosecutor’s report, I get a clear sense
of the level of frustration there. We are marking the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
and in that context I find the failures that have occurred
to be striking. On 31 March 2005, the Security Council
addressed this situation by adopting that resolution,
but today we find ourselves in a situation in which the
message we must convey is extremely important. We
must send a message to those responsible for violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that impunity cannot be allowed to continue.
The report we heard today is the Prosecutor’s
twenty-first, and it tells us that there have been
nine communications of the Court concerning
non-coopeation, none of which have been responded to,
and six outstanding arrest warrant. This information
is most unsatisfactory, and represents 10 years of
ongoing defiance on the part of the principal accused
and the authorities of the Sudan. The Prosecutor’s
report for the most recent six-month period describes
very discouraging results. There have been some 500
reported incidents, leading to 1,200 violent deaths,
more than half of them civilian; increases in the
numbers of indiscriminate aerial bombardments; a rise
in the number of diplaced persons and cases of sexual
violence. Arbitrary detentions and attacks on human
rights defenders and humanitarian personnel, as well as
15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, have continued.
I should note that the report mentions a climate
of impunity. While that refers to a specific situation,
it is unfortunate that we can say that the description
can be extended to the whole of Darfur. This situation
is unacceptable, particularly in the light of recent
developments in international penal law, which has
given us the International Criminal Court, the most
sophisticated instrument in history for ending impunity.
In the Sudan, the Court has carried out its work to the
extent that its resources allow. It must have the support
it needs to enable it to complete that work. In its
9 March decision on its finding of non-cooperation, the
Court’s Pre-Trial Chamber was very clear. If there is no
follow-up from the Security Council, there can be no
accountability for the crimes that have been committed.
Our objective is to put an end to impunity, and without
the necessary support, the ICC cannot fulfil that part
of its mandate under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.
As Ms. Bensouda noted on Friday, 26 June, the
Pre-Trial Chamber issued another ruling finding
non-cooperation by the Sudan in the case of Abdel
Raheem Muhammad Hussein, launched on 1 March
2012. As the Chamber noted, Hussein, who was the
Minister of Defence at the time the warrant for his
arrest was issued, continues to hold public office and
positions of important in the country. In its ruling,
the Chamber requested that the President of the Court
refer the situation to the Security Council. That would
be a new opportunity for the Council to respond to the
situation.
With regard to the events of 13 and 14 June in
South Africa last month, we echo the comments of the
spokesperson of the European Union. We must never
forget the vital importance of State cooperation with
the International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, I reiterate my Government’s
gratitude to the Prosecutor and the Court. They deserve
our full recognition for their tireless work in Darfur and
numerous other areas in the world in fighting impunity
and finding justice for victims.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. We thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing on
the current judicial activities of the Court and on the

S/PV.7478

situation in Darfur, as contained in her twenty-first
report submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
We take note of the report’s contents, describing
persistent violations of human rights and the dire
humanitarian situation in Darfur, with allegations of
crimes that amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, on which the international community
must take a clear stance. We strongly urge the parties
involved in the conflict to put an end to the hostilities
by engaging in meaningful political dialogue conducive
to negotiations for a just, global and lasting peace in
Darfur and the Sudan as a whole.
Resolution 1593 (2005) emphasizes the need to
promote healing and reconciliation, and encourages
the creation of institutions involved in all sectors
of Sudanese society in order to strengthen, with
the support of the African Union and international
community, efforts to restore long-lasting peace in
Darfur; hence, the international community’s stringent
call to assist the Sudanese people in solving their
differences through dialogue.
The ICC report expresses the position taken on the
specific case of the failure of Ethiopia and South Africa
to arrest the Sudanese President, which is primarily
based on the African Union’s decision to call on the
African member States to retain their rights, taking into
account the importance of preserving and safeguarding
the dignity, sovereignty and integrity of the African
continent. The request of the African Union to the
Security Council to defer the proceedings initiated
against President Omar Al-Bashir of Sudan, has been
neither heard nor acted upon by the Security Council.
The refusal of the Security Council to act on the
African Union’s request forced the African Union to
reserve its cooperation with the International Criminal
Court with respect to immunities for the arrest and
surrender of President Omar Al-Bashir of Sudan. In
this connection, we appeal to the Security Council
to consider the requests of the African Union for a
more constructive relationship between the African
Union and the ICC. Angola will uphold the position
of the African Union on this issue, while advocating
for dialogue and negotiations as the only way to solve
political disputes in Darfur, the Sudan and elsewhere.
Finally, we call on all the Sudanese parties — in
particular, those involved in the conflict in Darfur — to

15-200789/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

make sacrifices and concessions and to negotiate, in good
faith, a peace settlement establishing accountability,
justice and lasting peace in Darfur.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Prosecutor for her report and briefing.
We are deeply concerned about the situation in
Darfur. As the report clearly illustrates, the past six
months have seen an increase in violence against
civilians, including a significant increase in aerial
bombardments and rape on a scale never previously
seen in Darfur. Oftentimes, that violence is committed
by the Sudanese armed forces and associated militia,
and the most vulnerable — women, children and
internally displaced persons — are targeted.
Today, we not only mark 10 years since the Council
heard the findings of the Commission of Inquiry and
its International Criminal Court (ICC) referral, but
we also mark another sobering illustration of that
crisis. Today, we have the highest number of internally
displaced persons from Darfur that we have seen in the
past decade — 2.55 million. Today’s discussion brings
the Council face to face with the fact that one of its key
decisions — the Darfur referral to the Court — is being
flouted not only by the indictees, but also by States that
have Rome Statute commitments. There has also been
criticism of the referral by some other African Members
of the Organization. This outcome — whatever its
causes — is very bad for the Council, for the Court
and for peace and justice. The Council, the Court and
the African Union, along with their members, need to
reflect very deeply about the longer-term implications
of the divide between the Court and key African States
that were once among the Court’s strongest and earliest
supporters. That is also a crucial issue for the Assembly
of States Parties, which should look, beyond Darfur, at
the state of these relationships.
For the Council, we need to reflect on the fact that
the Darfur referral has led to a chain of events, with
some aspects predictable and some not, resulting in the
Court’s authority being reduced both within Africa and
also more broadly. As a country that is a party to the
Court’s Statute and committed to upholding the rule of
law, New Zealand finds that situation very troubling.
We consider that the Council needs to reflect carefully
before using its referral power. While referring a
situation to the Court may satisfy an immediate
objective, if there is no genuine commitment on the
part of the Council to support the implementation of

10/18

29/06/2015

that referral, the longer-term consequences could be
very negative. The Prosecutor just made a similar point.
The status quo presents challenges for the
effectiveness and credibility of both the Council and
the Court. The existence of these challenges does not
diminish the gravity of the crimes or the need for
accountability, nor does it justify inaction. We need
to work in a careful and considered way to overcome
those challenges, including in the context of referrals.
That will not be an easy or a short process, but we
believe that it needs to be done. In the case of the Darfur
referral, the Sudan’s non-compliance with the Council’s
referral to the ICC is, as we know, not an isolated
incident. There is a range of Council interventions in
Darfur, and, in fact across the Sudan, and Khartoum’s
non-compliance or, at best, sporadic acquiescence, is a
systemic challenge to them all.
In relation to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), that was
highlighted in the peace operations review, which refers
to UNAMID as a Mission that is a mere shadow of its
original purpose because parties undermine its presence
through restrictions on its ability to operate. While
we hope that this morning’s renewal of the UNAMID
mandate will allow the establishment of a new and
more cooperative relationship between UNAMID and
the Government of the Sudan, the past 10 years have
been a sad history of studied non-cooperation by the
Government. The same story can be seen even more
patently in relation to sanctions, which have since the
outset been heavily frustrated by the Sudan.
The backdrop to all of those challenges is an
extremely serious humanitarian crisis, including, as
we have heard, record numbers of internally displaced
persons and widespread human rights violations. After
10 years of the Council failing to make in-roads with
the Government of the Sudan or de-escalating the crisis
in Darfur, it is the relationship with Khartoum that
we should focus on. The Council needs to think hard
about how it can change the paradigm with Khartoum,
and Khartoum needs equally to think deeply about the
relationship it wants with the international community,
starting with the Council.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda
of the International Criminal Court for her briefing this
afternoon. I would also like to thank the Prosecutor
for presenting her twenty-first report to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We take note of the briefing by the International
Criminal Court’s Prosecutor and reiterate the importance
of the principles that underlie the establishment of
the Court. Those principles are extremely important
to the pursuit of international justice and to holding
accountable those who are responsible for international
crimes and war crimes. Moreover, the Court plays an
essential role in putting an end to impunity, with a view
to preventing conflict or its reoccurrence. The Court
also promotes key principles in that regard, including
peaceful coexistence, the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the promotion of the rule of law.
Jordan is concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Darfur, as mentioned in the
report, including violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and the persistent
attacks on civilians and the staff of humanitarian
organizations, as well as United Nations Blue Helmets.
Jordan reiterates the importance of cooperation
with the International Criminal Court, to ensure
the implementation of the Court’s mandate and the
Council’s resolutions.
As a matter of utmost importance, it must be
underscored that the situation in Darfur cannot be
resolved in the absence of a sustainable development
agenda that will respond to the fundamental needs
of the local communities and assist them in meeting
their socioeconomic challenges, as well as a road map
leading to the return of those that have been displaced.
To conclude, justice and development in Darfur
are essential and must be achieved first in order to
establish a lasting peace, which can be done only with
the involvement of all stakeholders.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have taken note of the twenty-first report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), on the investigation of the situation in Darfur.
We thank Ms. Bensouda for her comments on the 2009
report of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
(S/2009/599, annex I).
The military, political and humanitarian situations
in Darfur remain difficult. The root cause of the violence
and a rise in the number of internally displaced persons
is the refusal of the armed opposition to participate
in the Doha peace process or inter-tribal talks. We
welcome the Government of the Sudan’s active efforts
to reconcile warring tribes. The escalation of inter-tribal
clashes, driven by the competition for resources, is due

S/PV.7478

in large part to the economic difficulties facing Darfur
and the Sudan as a whole. That is why improving the
situation will depend to a great extent on the timely
implementation of the pledges made in 2013 in Doha
concerning the allocation of billions of aid dollars to
address the needs of the people of Darfur, the writingoff of foreign debt and the lifting of sanctions levied
by the United States in circumvention of the Council.
The resulting humanitarian problem also requires the
normalization of the military and political situation in
the region.
We call for swift action on the part of the Darfur
rebels to join in the peace process, based on the Security
Council-approved Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
In that context, it is high time for the Security Council
to consider levying targeted sanctions against the
leaders of the so-called intractable Darfur rebels, who
unfortunately enjoy support from the outside.
The ongoing violence in Darfur has led to the
suffering of civilians and increased numbers of
internally displaced persons, which is of course a cause
for concern. We therefore call on the Court to objectively
and impartially assess the situation. The ability of the
ICC to impartially investigate the actions of all parties
to the conflict is of key importance to strengthening the
Court’s credibility. We also call on the Court to act with
a view to striking a balance between serving justice and
achieving lasting peace and stability.
The talks are all of equal importance. The search
for solutions requires a comprehensive and balanced
approach. We take note of the Prosecutor’s observations
regarding States’ cooperation with the International
Criminal Court in the framework of the Darfur dossier.
The situation again demonstrates the importance of
States’ support in ensuring the Court’s successful
functioning.
Regarding the topic raised by the Prosecutor — the
Sudan’s participation in the African Union (AU) Summit
in Johannesburg — we recall that, in addition to the
obligation to cooperate with the ICC, the Statute states
that parties to the Statute are bound by obligations
arising from international legal norms governing the
immunity of high-level officials, particularly Heads of
States, of States that, like the Sudan, are not party to
the Rome Statute. In that regard, we are sympathetic
to the concerns raised with increasing frequency about
a number of aspects of the Court’s activities regarding
certain African States, as well as the African Union as
a whole.

15-2007811/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Regarding the appeals made through so-called
follow-up actions on the part of the Council in the
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court,
our position has been expressed many times and is well
known. The case of the alleged massive sexual violence
in Thabit has been closed. As is well known, it began
through rumours launched by Radio Dabanga against
Khartoum that were consequently spread by certain
human rights activists, based on interviews that were
usually carried out by telephone.
We recommend that colleagues look into the
results of the Government of the Sudan’s independent
and detailed investigation, which has convincingly
refuted those unbridled speculations. The Thabit affair
represents an information war. It was an attempt by
certain players to scale up pressure on the Sudan. It
is very unfortunate that some forces are attempting to
involve the Council, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the ICC in such a risky
business.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing. The
situation in Darfur remains of concern, despite regional
and international efforts to end the war through dialogue
and national reconciliation.
Fighting between Government forces and the
many armed groups continues, particularly in northern
Darfur and Jebel Marra, although its intensity and
frequency have somewhat decreased. That is further
compounded by sporadic, yet deadly, clashes between
the various tribes in eastern, southern and northern
Darfur. Civilians caught between multiple fire-fights
find themselves in extremely difficult security and
humanitarian situations. Civilian victims number in
the hundreds, including over 121,000 persons who have
been internally displaced since December’s briefing
(see S/PV.7337). We strongly condemn that situation
and all forms of violence perpetrated against civilians,
particularly women and children. Attacks targeting
the peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and humanitarian workers
are inadmissible. The perpetrators of such attacks must
be identified and brought to justice.
In the context of war, insecurity and instability, it
would be difficult, even impossible, to create conditions
conducive to genuine justice in order to prosecute the
alleged perpetrators of the crimes committed in Darfur.
That is why we reiterate the appeal made by the African
12/18

29/06/2015

Union to work concurrently on the dual tracks of peace
and justice. That is the only way to give justice a chance
to succeed on all fronts. It is also why it is necessary
to support and promote the inter-Sudanese dialogue
process taking place under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, towards a lasting
political solution to the crisis in Darfur.
Furthermore, we welcome the liberation in early
April of the civil society members who had been
imprisoned. We launch a heartfelt appeal to all Sudanese
stakeholders to prioritize dialogue and national
reconciliation. Chad reiterates that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Darfur. The international
community must make every effort to ensure that the
armed movements and the Government return to the
negotiating table on the basis of national reconciliation
and the integration of justice into the peace process in
order to combat impunity.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and for her
briefing today.
The situation in Darfur remains a serious concern
with an increase in violence and insecurity over the
reporting period. The number of people affected by the
conflict continues to grow with 2 million now displaced
in the long term and more than twice that number
in need of humanitarian assistance. This, combined
with reported attacks on humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers, reinforces the need for all sides to reach
a political solution and allow immediate unfettered
humanitarian access.
It also, as the Council has discussed today in
the context of the mandate renewal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), emphasizes the need for a strong
international response. The Prosecutor’s report
highlights many of the issues. The United Kingdom
is especially troubled by the increase in the level of
violent deaths by civilians and the significant increase
in reported aerial bombardments. As the report also
highlights, the legal immunity of the Government of
the Sudan’s rapid support forces is a particular concern.
The report also picks up on ongoing sexual and
gender-based violence. It is particularly disappointing
that despite ongoing calls to allow UNAMID unfettered
access to investigate the reported mass rape at Thabit,
this still has not happened. The United Kingdom
continues to call on all parties to refrain from violence

15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

against civilians and to end the abuses and violations of
both human rights and international humanitarian law.
We welcome the recommendations of the United Nations
Special Rapporteur for Violence against Women and
the United Nations independent expert for the human
rights situation in the Sudan that those responsible for
human rights violations and abuses should be brought
to account.
Against this backdrop, we regret that the Prosecutor
is unable to carry out the full investigation due to lack
of cooperation by the Government of the Sudan and
that the tenth anniversary of Darfur being referred to
the Prosecutor has passed and no arrests have been
made. This reflects the fact that the Government of the
Sudan has persistently failed to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005). In doing so, it obstructs
the pursuit of justice for the victims of crimes carried
out in Darfur. We renew our call on the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
The United Kingdom is also disappointed that
President Al-Bashir continues to travel with impunity
with specific regard to his travel to the African Union
summit in June. As the ICC’s decision makes clear
and as noted in the report of the Prosecutor, there
is no ambiguity or uncertainty with respect to the
obligation of States parties to the Rome Statute to
arrest and surrender him to the Court. We were also
disappointed that Abdel Rahim Hussein and Ahmed
Haroun accompanied President Al-Bashir on trips
overseas during the reporting period, and we note the
26 June decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber finding
non-compliance by the Republic of the Sudan through
failure to arrest Abdel Rahim Hussein.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the ICC
as a Court working to deliver justice to victims, many
of them African, of appalling crimes by holding
perpetrators to account and putting an end to impunity.
African States played a central role in the creation of
the Court. African support and expertise continue to
be vital to enable the Court to deliver its mandate of
delivering justice for victims and tackling impunity. We
call on all ICC States parties to meet their obligations
under the Rome Statute and on the Government of the
Sudan to meet its obligations under resolution 1593
(2005). We call on the Council to take effective followup action in relation to non-cooperation with the Court.
Having referred the situation in Darfur to the Court, we
must support it in fulfilling that mandate.

S/PV.7478

Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for underlining the salient dimensions of the judicial
activities undertaken by her Office. We are encouraged
by its continued monitoring and reporting on trends
that could potentially constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute. Such preventive initiatives in our view will
serve as deterrents against impunity and send a clear
message that violators will be held accountable for their
actions.
Nigeria is concerned about the increased violence
and insecurity in Darfur, which has contributed
significantly to the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons in that part of the country. It is
disconcerting that since the Prosecutor’s last report
(see S/PV.7337) in December 2014, there have been 500
incidents of alleged crimes resulting in approximately
1,200 violent deaths. We believe that this is attributable
to the escalation of the armed conflict. We expect that
the deployment of troops by the Government of the
Sudan to act as a buffer between the southern Rizeigat
and Ma’alia tribes in Darfur will ease tensions between
the two communities. Mediation efforts should however
be intensified and must seek to address the root causes
of the conflict for sustainable peace.
While preferring suggestions designed to achieve
lasting peace in Darfur, Nigeria condemns the sexual
crimes against women, attacks against the peacekeepers
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the alleged abductions of humanitarian
aid workers. We call on armed actors to refrain from all
acts of violence against civilians and to cease all forms
of violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law. In the same vein, we
believe that safe and unhindered access must be granted
to humanitarian agencies and personnel to facilitate the
timely delivery of assistance to those in need.
On recent judicial activities, we see merit in an
engagement between the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the African Union. We believe that robust
dialogue could bridge understanding gaps between
their differing perspectives. In this connection, it is
our view that the President of the Assembly of States
parties to the ICC could play a key role in facilitating
understanding between the ICC and the African Union.
In closing, we reiterate our call on the parties to
the conflict in Darfur to resolve their differences in the
most peaceful manner in order to preserve the lives of
innocent civilians. Experience shows that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Darfur. A return

15-2007813/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to normalcy and a resumption of economic activities
will be in the interest of the people, for development
can only thrive where peace prevails.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the presentation of the twentyfirst report on the investigation on the situation in the
Sudan, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and
for the work carried out by that judicial body in the
fight against impunity and the promotion of justice for
the victims of the crimes established in article 5 of the
Rome Statute.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
party to the International Criminal Court since its
establishment in 2002, defends the strengthening of its
institutions and the effectiveness of its operations. We
therefore encourage the universalization of the Court in
order to strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international levels. In this regard, cooperation is an
essential aspect in achieving the Court’s objectives. We
call for the consolidation of the dialogue between the
Court and the African Union.
Venezuela supports the efforts of the Prosecutor
to ensure that justice and accountability are respected
and that the authorities can promote the establishment
of a comprehensive and effective justice system. For
our country, the ongoing efforts of a number of actors
to politicize the work of the International Criminal
Court are of great concern. They have affected the
principles that govern the Court, which include
autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity. Failure to comply with these principles
weakens the institutional framework of the Court when
justice is applied selectively, to the detriment of the
spirit and purpose of the Rome Statute.
The issuance of the warrant of arrest by the
International Criminal Court against President Omar
Al-Bashir violates customary international law, which
guarantees jurisdictional immunity to Heads of State
in the exercise of their functions. This situation should
be addressed in accordance with the national laws of
the Republic of the Sudan. In that regard, Venezuela
shares the position of the African Union, as stated by
the representatives of Angola, Chad and Nigeria at this
meeting.
In addition, with regard to the issue under
discussion, we cannot overestate the negative impact

14/18

29/06/2015

of the execution of this illegitimate measure on the
Sudanese peace process. In that regard, the African
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement,
among others, have expressed their profound concern
with regard to the arrest warrant, which they believe
seriously undermines ongoing efforts to facilitate a
timely solution of the conflict in Darfur and to promote
a lasting peace and reconciliation in the Sudan, and
could give rise to greater destabilization and have longterm and comprehensive consequences for the country
and the region.
Nevertheless, in an effort to achieve greater
harmony among opposing positions, we urge the
competent regional authorities to immediately arrest
those individuals who do not enjoy jurisdictional
immunity as Heads of State. We also encourage the
Office of the Prosecutor to pursue its investigations into
those responsible for alleged crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide whose arrest warrants have
been issued by the International Criminal Court in the
case in question and referred by the Security Council
through resolution 1593 (2005). That would promote
dialogue in the search for negotiated political solutions
to the conflict in favour of peace, development and
justice in that country.
We note that the African Union fulfils a fundamental
role as a facilitator of political peace processes in
the continent, in particular in the Sudan. We believe
that cooperation between the Security Council, the
International Criminal Court and the regional and
subregional organizations of Africa must be founded
on mutual respect and strict adherence to international
law.
My country is aware that the Sudanese political
situation is complex and that significant challenges
remain on the ground. Nevertheless, we reaffirm our
full support for a negotiated solution to the situation
in Darfur, through an inclusive and direct political
dialogue among the parties to the conflict, without
preconditions, that would lead to lasting stability in the
country. In that regard, we believe that the development
of an environment conducive to sincere, honest and
genuine dialogue is essential. We therefore reiterate
our call for an immediate end to hostilities. To that end,
we believe that the implementation of the provisions
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, contained
in the Constitution of the Sudan, must be accelerated
because it provides a framework that could serve as a

15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

basis for negotiations among the parties to the conflict,
complemented by a national dialogue to be convened by
the Government.
We call on the parties to immediately cease
hostilities. In that regard, we support the mediation
efforts of the international community — particularly
the countries of the region and regional organizations,
such as the African Union, whose role, through the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
Sudan and South Sudan, led by President Thabo Mbeki,
as well as the Joint Chief Mediator — as fundamental
steps that will help end the onoing conflict in that
brotherly African country.
Finally, Venezuela reaffirms that the achievement
of peace and stability in Sudan require cooperation
between all stakeholders, including the African Union
and subregional organizations, bearing in mind the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for presenting the twentyfirst report to the Council, pursuant to paragraph 8
of resolution 1593 (2005), outlining the judicial and
prosecutorial activities of the Court.
We are deeply concerned at the security situation
in Darfur, as reflected by the escalation in fighting
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the armed
groups, the intercommunal conflicts and incidents of
banditry and criminality. The proliferation of small
arms has further contributed to the destabilization
of the region. The humanitarian situation in Darfur,
according to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is also a matter
of concern. The escalation in conflict has resulted in an
increase of 130,000 new internally displaced persons,
especially in the Jebel Marra area. We call on the
parties to immediately cease all attacks on civilians and
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel. We wish to
remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian law.
We also believe that the perpetrators of such crimes
must be held accountable.
We are also concerned that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to face restrictions on movement, denials of
access and attacks against its personnel. We call on the

S/PV.7478

Government of the Sudan to expeditiously investigate
and deal with the numerous reported status-of-forces
violations. In light of those challenges, we commend
UNAMID for its steadfastness and resoluteness in
striving to achieve its strategic objectives. It is in
recognition of UNAMID’s important role in and
contribution to the Darfur peace process that Malaysia
supported the adoption of resolution 2228 (2015),
renewing UNAMID’s mandate for a further year.
We also commend the convening of the Joint
Working Group to deliberate on UNAMID’s exit
strategy. We are supportive of basing UNAMID’s
phased and gradual exit against a set of benchmarks, as
laid out in annex 1 of the Secretary-General’s report of
15 April 2014 (S/2014/279).
We are convinced that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Darfur. We strongly condemn
any action aimed at the forced overthrow of the
Government of the Sudan. In that regard, we urge the
parties to the conflict to continue to be guided by the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur framework. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to relaunch
direct negotiations with the parties to the conflict,
and further encourage the parties to return to the
negotiating table and to engage constructively. As
regards the inter-communal and inter-tribal conflicts,
we encourage the Government of the Sudan to look into
and effectively address the root causes of the disputes.
We acknowledge and highly commend the efforts of
the Government of Chad in successfully mediating the
signing of a peace agreement between the Government
of the Sudan with a breakaway faction of the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi, in a parallel initiative
to the Doha Document and the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel on Sudan and
South Sudan. We believe that efforts such as those will
contribute significantly to the peace process in Darfur.
Malaysia is of the view that the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan to demonstrate compliance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and its
commitment to holding those responsible for violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law accountable will contribute positively
towards building trust and confidence.
I now resume my function as president of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

15-2007815/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Hassan (Sudan): Before begining my prepared
statement, I would first like to draw the attention of
the Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda to her statement on
the departure of my President from South Africa.
Her statement was nonsensical and preposterous.
His Excellency only left South Africa after he had
completed his pre-planned schedule, and not for the
reason she mentioned. Once again, I would like to draw
the attention of the Prosecutor to the fact that she is
talking about the elected President of a State, which
constitutes an attack on the authority of the Sudan
under the guise of international legitimacy. We reject
this attack. It underlines the fact that such allegations
by the Office of the Prosecutor indicate that it has
become an open enemy of the Sudan and the people
of the Sudan. Those statements, which runn counter
to all political and moral decorum, reveal the motives
behind the actions of the Office of the Prosecutor. The
people of Darfur on whose behalf the Prosecutor speaks
are those who elected His Excellency President Omar
Al-Bashir. The Secretary-General’s report on Darfur
(S/2015/378) clearly states that when elections were
held in the five states of Darfur, no security incident
was recorded. The ICC Prosecutor has spoken falsely
on behalf of Darfurians.
I shall now return to my prepared statement. I
would like to state for the record that our participation
here today in no way indicates that we wish to add any
substance to the ICC’s actions or to deal with the Court
at all directly or indirectly. That is because the Sudan,
as the Council knows, is not a party to the Rome Statute
and is therefore not at all concerned with the Court’s
proceedings. In addition to the fact that the Court
has no competence in the Sudan, we have our own
independent, impartial and objective judiciary, with
a renowned historic heritage, that is able to dispense
justice. We are delivering this statement to the Security
Council under the umbrella of the United Nations. We
must correct significant misleading and erroneous
information that inaccurately reflects the situation in
Darfur, as well as the statements and reports made by
United Nations bodies, including the latest one just
mentioned.
The reports presented before the Council, as well as
the Prosecutor’s prejudicial briefing, are part and parcel
of the Court’s blatant politicization. In its briefings,
the Office of the Prosecutor has presented completely
incorrect information from unknown sources. What
is worse, the Prosecutor presents details against the
Government of the Sudan by padding her briefings with
16/18

29/06/2015

many embellishmens concerning the humanitarian
situation, so-called violations of human rights and other
such designations that properly belong to the mandates
of other United Nations bodies. In one instance, her
briefing quoted negative aspects selectively culled from
the Secretary-General’s reports on Darfur. On other
occasions, her briefings have cited negative paragraphs
with unverifiable information, such as reports of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), as well as information derived from the
mass media and non-governmental organizations.
This also raises the question of whether it is
possible for the Office of the Prosecutor to assume
competencies that properly pertain to other bodies of
the Organization. Its approach politicized the situation
and fabricated justifications in order to refer the case
of Darfur to the ICC. But that referral was based on
erroneous premises in the first place. An International
Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, established pursuant
to resolution 1564 (2004), conducted investigations and
presented reports that refuted the charge of genocide
in Darfur or any acts mentioned by the Prosecutor.
Nevertheless, the Security Council referred the case
to the ICC based on that lopsided, self-contradictory
report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). This in itself
represents a blatant contradiction, because the report
contains a paragraph that excludes States not party
to the Rome Statute from accountability under such a
resolution. The same report was cited in the context of
Darfur. What kind of justice is based on exclusion and
politicization? In the light of the characterization of the
Darfur conflict as a threat to international peace and
security, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, that remains an inappropriate, invalid
approach.
The Council was fully aware that the roots of
conflict in Darfur were not purely political grievances;
they concerned development and certain dimensions
exacerbated by natural causes, such as drought and
desertification, which affected most of the African
coast. Those factors made it necessary for the State
to assume its constitutional responsibilities to extend
its authority, security and law. The Government of the
Sudan has been willing and able to seek full justice,
particularly with regard to any crimes that have taken
place in Darfur, which is why the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur contains a lengthy chapter on justice,
accountability, settlement and reconciliation. The
Sudan is also signatory to a convention enshrining
those principles, so I wonder why the Prosecutor talks
15-20078

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

about such matters as if we had no measures related to
them.
As we reported to the Council in November 2014
(see S/PV.7337), the Sudan appointed a Prosecutor
General for Darfur Crimes. Since the Doha Document
has been approved as an official document of the
Council, I refer to paragraph 295, which stipulates that
“immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of
their official status or functions shall not obstruct
the speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they
prevent the combating of impunity”.
The Document paves the way for justice — real justice
and not the false justice we are hearing about. The
Document contains clear commitments to justice and
reconciliation as the two basic elements for achieving
peace in Darfur.
Any attempt to detract from the status of the
Sudanese judiciary is only a political ploy to invent
reasons or justifications to target the Sudan through the
ICC. For example, the sentences issued by the Darfur
Court have in some cases included capital punishment;
indeed, the special Darfur Court, established by virtue
of the Doha Document, has issued capital punishment
sentences in selected cases. Therefore, in the light
of the Document’s clear references to immunities,
nobody, including a Prosecutor, can impugn or attack
the professionalism, independence and competence of
the Sudanese judiciary and its ability to achieve justice
in accordance with our national laws, international
criminal law and humanitarian law. In this connection,
I reiterate our previous statements to the effect that
justice should be achieved through the Sudanese
judiciary and that the ICC has no role or competence
unless the national judiciary is unwilling or unable to
achieve justice. Therefore, there is no need to apply any
ICC mandate.
We would therefore like to talk about the unsound
approach espoused by the Office of the Prosecutor
in trying to bypass the role of the national African
judiciary organs in dealing with African cases. This
unsound approach has caused Africans to raise their
voices to reject the ICC approach and the frequent
decisions the ICC has taken against Africans, and to
call for African cases to be kept within the remit of the
African judiciary. I would like to refer to the resolutions
adopted by Addis Ababa and Johannesburg.

S/PV.7478

On this occasion, it is noteworthy that the report
of the Prosecutor has primarily criticized the States
visited by the President of the Republic. We would like
to state that the attempts of the Prosecutor’s Office to
criticize those States constitute brazen interference
in their sovereignty and a blatant challenge to the
will of major regional organizations, which reject the
proceedings of the ICC on Darfur. Statements have
been issued by the African Union, at the level of Heads
of State or Government, and at the ministerial level that
reject the proceedings of the ICC on Darfur. On more
than one occasion, such statements — including the
resolutions adopted by the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement — have called for that dossier
to be closed once and for all, as it is based on exclusively
political considerations. Those organizations represent
two-thirds of the international community. Other
credible organizations whose decisions carry weight
understand that the ICC has become a device to target
African leaders and not others.
We would like to state here before the Council that
all States Members of the Organization, all peace-loving
States, be they States parties to the Rome Statute or not,
should continue to welcome and receive His Excellency
the President of the Republic of the Sudan. It is enough
for him that history will record that he managed to put
an end to one of the longest conflicts in Africa — that
with South Sudan — by signing the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which guaranteed self-determination
to the State of South Sudan. History will also show that
the Sudan was the first to recognize that a leader who
makes such sacrifices for peace deserves to be received,
welcomed and venerated, and not attacked on all sides.
All international forums should receive him, as is his
due, and welcome him. Any blame or criticism leveled
by the Office of the Prosecutor against the States
receiving the President is biaised and null and void. The
confusion fostered by the Office of the Prosecutor since
December 2014 proves that anything built on invalid
premises will remain invalid.
The ambiguous connection between the ICC and
the Security Council remains an unresolved question.
Efforts to establish a relationship between a judicial
entity and a political entity are beset by misgivings,
obstacles and legal challenges with regard to the
independence of the judiciary and the importance of
its distancing itself from the influence of political
authorities. That is exacerbated by the absence of a

15-2007817/18

S/PV.7478

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

framework governing the relationship between the two
organs and the referrals from the Council to the Court.
With regard to the statements made by the
representatives of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States to the efect that the situation in Darfur
has deteriorated since 2014, I wonder, is the Darfur
they are talking about the Darfur we know, or another
Darfur, outside the Sudan? Eighty per cent of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur has been implemented, as
mentioned by Mr. Al-Tijani Al-Sisi, who is a citizen of
Darfur. Could this be another of the ploys that continue
to arise in the Council to bring pressure to bear on the
citizens of Darfur? This should not happen.
As for the United States, which calls on us to abide
by the decisions of the ICC, I remind the representative
of that country of the statement made by Condoleezza
Rice, Secretary of State and former representative of
the United States in the Council, on page 188 of her
book, in which she states that President Bush objected
strongly to the ICC for a number of reasons, including
the fact that the Prosecutor was unable to hold any
Government responsible. For the United States, it was
a matter of sovereignty and the Court’s authority was
being exaggerated, as if it were a national Government.
These are the words of one of the highest officials of the
United States, and now they are calling on us to abide
by the decisions of the ICC.
Sovereignty is sovereignty. We too are a sovereign
State, and we are not party to the Rome Statute and will
not be a party to it. Therefore, we do not abide by its
proceedings or rulings.
With respect to the absence of frameworks
governing the relationship between the two organs in
terms of referrals from the Council to the Court and the
contradiction between the obligations emanating from
international treaties and instruments, regional and
international conventions and the Rome Statute, I recall
the provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of

18/18

29/06/2015

Treaties with regard to the immunities of Heads of State
or Government and that a State not party to a convention
is not concerned with it. The Sudan, as I stated, is not
a party to the Rome Statute and consequently need not
abide by its rulings.
I further recall the concerns and reservations
that have been raised concerning the competencies
of the Prosecutor since 1998. Entire books have been
published on the limitless authority of the Prosecutor.
That is what we are suffering from now. The stance
taken by States since that time has been that the
relationship between the Court and the Council, given
the competencies conferred by the Rome Statute on the
Prosecutor, would lead the Court into politicization
and confusion, since it applies its competencies only to
African countries. This has led to a loss of confidence
in its integrity, as embodied in the resolutions of major
regional organizations, foremost among which is the
African Union.
In conclusion, I appeal to the Council to not
consider the false information garnered from unknown
sources that has been presented by the Prosecutor.
Council members should instead consider the important
fact, noted by a number of States, that the current
priorities in Darfur are reconstruction, recovery and
development. Many people have returned to their lands
and are seeking to go about their normal daily activities.
They are not waiting for the reports of the Prosecutor
or anyone else, but are trying to achieve resolution
and reconciliation. They are looking to the Security
Council, which is not playing its role, to put pressure
on the rebel groups that reject the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. I have a question for the Prosecutor.
Where are those rebel movements in her report? She
makes no mention of the matter. Why?
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

15-20078
