UiVITEDNAT..ON,Y

TWE.IVTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 15 MARCH 1973
PANAMA

CITY

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 695) . . , . . . + . , . . . . , , . , . , . . . . , . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

Page

1

. , , , . . , , . , , . ,. . . , . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principlesofthecharter
,.....,.,.....,.
. .............. .....

1

S/P? *I 695

SIXTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FIFTH

Palace, Panama City, on Thursday,

President: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama)
later: General Omar TORRIJOS (Panama).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l695)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 ir.m.
Adoption of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
provisional agenda for this meeting was drawn up in
accordance with the decision adopted by the Security
Council in resolution 325 (1973). If I hear no objection, I
shall consider the agenda adopted.

MEETING
15 March 1973, at 10 a.m.

guished representatives of the sister republics of Latin
America; to the Chairman of the Latin American Group of
the United Nations; to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States; to the observersof States
from other regions and of other international organs; and
also to the world press, which has co-operated so greatly
with this small country in order to place us on the map of
world dignity.
5. I come to speak to you now on behalf of a people that
does not feed on hatred and whose simple hearts have led
us to forgive and forget offences and to guide our future
toward the achievement of our own identity, For he who is
right need not resort to insults. Marti himself said it: “The
peoples, the nations and the persons who can overlook
offences do so because they have very good memories.”
6. Panama is a very important part of the history of
mankind. When your ships sail through the canal, when
they go through this obligatory passage that links the
Atlantic with the Pacific, those ships are sailing through 50
miles of our not so peaceful history. Therefore, as far aswe
are concerned we feel it only appropriate to put before you
the way we think and the way we view the scourges that
threaten to destroy‘ peaceful world coexistence.

3. General TORRIJOS (interpretation from Spanish):
With the frankness that is a feature of the noble people of
Panama, my country expressesits appreciation to you for
coming here to represent the States members of the
Security Council. I am sure that the sister republics of the
Latin American region also regard your presence as an
honour since they sensethe positive impact that our ability
to be heard in this great world forum will have. ’

7. Panama understands full well the struggle of peoples
that are suffering the humiliation of colonialism, of other
peoples that, like us, are suffering restrictions and subjection, of the peoples that refuse to accept the rule of the
strong over the weak as a way of life, of those countries
that are ready to make whatever sacrifice is necessary in
order not to be subjected to the more powerful, of those
men that do not allow political power to be exercised by a
foreign Government over the territory of their birth, of
those generations that are struggling and will continue to
struggle to root out from their country the presence of
foreign troops placed there without the consent of the
occupied nation,’ of those indigenous inhabitants that do
not accept being looked at as inferior specimens or animals,
of those who struggle to exploit their own resources for
their own benefit and not to underwrite the economy of an
overpowering country, of those countries that refuse to be
exporters of cheap labour, of those massesof people that
pay with their blood to do away with the want, injustice
and inequality to which powerful forces, national or foreign,
have subjected them, because oligarchy knows of no
nationality. In a word, colonialism is the prison cell of the
free man.

4. We also extend our welcome to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Mr. Kurt Waldheim; to the distin-

8. In the soul of all Panamanians these situations that I
have described come together because in one way or

The agenda was adopted.
Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I have
the honour to request the Chief of Protocol to escort into
this hall the head of the Government of Panama, General
Omar Torrijos, who will address the Council on behalf of
the National Government.

follow its own channels. Anyone who stands in its way is
thus creating the hostility that leads to upheavals. If we are
not allowed to carry out peaceful changes, we are then
forcing our peoples to favour violent changes.

another we have lived through them in the course of our
republican history.
9. From this high rostrum, Panama states that we cannot
accept the economic subjection of one country by another
or political, economic or cultural penetration, since that is
nothing more than neo-colonialism. That is only a veiled
and disguised colonialism which appears in our people in the
form of economic assistance with conditions, assistance
that is aimed not at the development of our country but at
control over our people. And we have suffered from all
these scourges. Panama is very sensitive to all these
conditions that have hindered our development, as it is to
the struggle that is being carried out by other peoples to
root out these evils.

14. The struggle being fought by the peoples of the third
world to obtain their true political and economic independence constitutes the worthiest example that we can leave
as a heritage to succeeding g-nerations
15. The stand adopted by the peoples of Africa, who are
bearing their poverty with dignity, but without resignation
and without subjection, is an example that should be taught
in the schoolrooms of our adolescents.
16. Blockades and pressures should be more shameful for
those who commit them than for those who suffer them.
Every hour of isolation suffered by the sister republic of
Cuba spells 60 minutes of hemispheric shame,

10. The cemeteries of rebellious struggles are tilled with
the bodies of Panamanians who now stand as a cross
because they fought for the right of their country to decide
for itself its own direction and norms of conduct without
foreign interference and the right of peoples to choose
freely their friends or their enemies. For no people of the
world can be denied the right to exploit and utilize its own
resources and no one can be denied the right to create his
own manner of life. No one should be placed under
pressure when he wishes to draw his own international
political line and to exercise the inalienable right of all
peoples to communicate freely with those peoples they
choose, to ensure respect for the sacred principle that each
country should be able to select the method of government
it wishes and provide for its own development. Let us then
be left to seek our own prescription to cure our own ills,

17. We want to urge the United Nations not to stand by as
a mere spectator or to be satisfied with the role of a
fireman before the drama of mankind. Let the United
Nations take a more active role in the solution of the true
problems besetting our peoples. As this Organization
becomes valid and acts in these fields, so we, the smaller
nations, can guarantee to our peoples that they will live in
lasting peace. Our problems are joint problems; our desires
are the same. The cross of a patriot in a cemetery of any
country in the world is the same, It is no different from the
crosses that in our own country have resulted from the
struggle for our true independence.

11. I am always amazed when I see a certain group of
nations that is shocked because peoples claim the right to
exploit their own natural resources, the wealth of their
own seas, of their ports, of their soil, of their subsoil,
of their labour and of their geographical position in
order to benefit their nationals and not to do them harm,
and struggle so that their non-renewable resources will not
be used to subsidize the economies of the rich nations and
because they wish the wealth of their own soil to bear the
nationality of the country that possesses it. That is ,an
inherent right of all nations, as the right of Panama to
exploit its geographical position for the benefit of its own
development is inherent,

18. Panama cannot accept as rules of international law
considerations of so-called vital interests or national security, for we know the humiliation that we have suffered
during 70 years of republican life and we fully share and
endorse the thought of Amlicar Cabral, the great leader of
independence of Africa, when he said:

12. After 150 years in which this continent has been
independent, many of these situations still exist in this
sector of Latin America. Nationalization is a redundant
expression. When I read in the newspapers that Chile has
nationalized its copper, I ask: was that copper not Chilean
to begin with? When I read in the pressthat Peru, with this
new generation of officers that is leading the Government,
has decided to national&e its oil, I ask: was that oil not
Peruvian to begin with? That is why the nationalization of
those resources is, as I said, a redundant expression, since
those resources carry the nationality of the nation that
possessesthem.

The thoughts of that great man, now that great martyr, are
perfectly valid for the problems that are besetting my own
country.

“Solidarity without equality is charity, and charity has
never contributed to the progress of nations or human
beings. Security without equality is only authoritarian
paternalism, protectionism, pure and simple colonialism,
and this must conflict with the feelings for liberation of
both nations and peoples.”

19. If Benito JuLrez was able to say, “Respect for
another’s right is peace”, why are we not respected, why
are we provoked, why are we subjugated, why is the
inoffensive, happy, peace-loving people of Panama not left
in peace?
20, In the specific case of my own country, a country
which 70 years ago opened its arms for the benefit df the
merchant fleet of the world and which today opens its
heart to this historic meeting, it becomes extremely
difficult to understand how a country whose hallmark has
been not to be colonialist insists on maintaining a colony in
the very heart of my country. Surely for that people this

13. The awakening of Latin America must not be hampered; it must be assisted in order to encourage peace. A
new awareness is gaining ground among Latin Americans,
and there can be peace only if this awarenessis allowed to
2

must be a shame, since they were a colony and they knew
how degrading it wasto be so, and they struggled heroically
to achieve their freedom. I say to the representatives of the
United States that it is more noble to redress an injustice
than to perpetuate an error. From the world which is
relpresented here today, we ask for moral support in this
struggle engaged in by the weak. This struggle can triumph
only when it is assisted by the conscience of the world and
our people is already reaching the limit of its patience.
21.. Our people would ask the members of the Security
Council and distinguished guests to consider the following
questions and give us an answer to them. Is it just to refuse
respect for a flag that has never been used to lead the way
into aggression? Can it be moral to deny a country its
natural advantages that are inherent and inalienable simply
because the claim to them comes from a weak nation? In
what modern legal dictionary is there set forth the concept
of perpetuity as the basis for negotiation?
2:2. Finally, as a very special message I have been asked to
deliver to you from the people of Panama, 1 would say to
y1ou, and through you to the world conscience, that you
must alI bear clearly in mind that we have never been, are
not and never shall be an associated State, a colony or a
protectorate, nor do we wish to add one more star to the
flag of the United States.
23. As PRESIDENT
Secretary-General.

I now am pleased to call on the

24. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At the outset I should
like to express my warm and sincere thanks-and, I am sure,
the thanks of all members of this Council-to the Government of Panama for its generous hospitality. We owe
particular gratitude ‘to you, Mr. President, and to Ambassador Boyd, for all that you have done to assist us.
25. This series of meetings, following that held in Addis
Ababa last year, is a further indication of a genera1
recognition of the fact that occasional meetings of the
%curity Council away from Headquarters have great value.
It is important that the Council should understand particular problems by direct contact with the regions concerned;
and in this respect I have no doubt whatsoever that the
meetings in Addis Ababa were a notable success,Each region
has its own specific problems, and I would not wish to
make any close comparison between Africa and Latin
America, but in both we can seehow the many problemspolitical, economic and social-in many developing countries can be resolved by regional co-operation and by active
involvement in the United Nations.

26. I should like to remind the Council that it was in this
city, in 1826, that the first attempt at regional co-operation
in this area was made, The contribution of Latin America
to the development of international law is very substantial,
and places us all in the debt of Latin America.
27. Regional co-operation has been fostered by the United
Nations since the earliest days. In fact, even in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is the primary responsibility of the Security
Council, regional action is not precluded. In that respect,
the Charter of the United Nations provides for regional
arrangements as long as they are consistent with the
purposes and principles of the Charter. The Organization of
American States (OAS) has rendered valuable assistance in
the settlement of regional disputes by peaceful means. The
records of the Security Council-which is kept informed by
the OAS under Article 54 of the Charter-bear eloquent
witness to these efforts made by the United Nations on
behalf of all Latin American &ates.
28. In the economic field this co.operation is fostered
through the work of the regional Economic Commissions,
the specialized agencies, the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank. Such co-operation is of
value not only to the regions themselves, but to the wider
objectives of the United Nations. And it is in the United
Nations itself, and in no other body, that this experience can
be brought together and utilized for the value of all mankind.

29. It is right that the Security Council should be made
aware of the particular problems and potentialities of Latin
America. We all have very much in our minds the tragic
disaster which had recently befallen the people of Nicaragua, and the sympathetic and practical immediate response of the international community to that catastrophe.
This response, and these meetings of the Council here in
Panama, should clearly demonstrate to the peoples of Latin
America the deep concern and involvement of the United
Nations in the establishment of a peaceful and prosperous
future for them.
30. In this process, the United Nations is very willing to
do all in its power to make a major contribution. I am
confident that the Security Council, at these meetings, will
provide a new impetus to the regional political co-operation
and goodwill which are essential to the fulfilment of the
aspirations of the Governments and the peoples of Latin
America.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
