A /67/PV.55

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Ofﬁcial Records

Sixty-seventh session

55

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 13 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kamau (Kenya),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
ReportoftheSecretary-General(А/67/492)
Draftresolutions(А/67/L.32andA/67/L.37)
(a)Strengtheningofthecoordinationofemergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
ReportsoftheSecretary-General(А/67/89,
А/67/361,А/67/363andА/67/367)
Draftresolution(А/67/L.39)
(b)AssistancetothePalestinianpeople
ReportoftheSecretary-General(А/67/84)
Draftresolution(A/67/L.38)
(c) Specialeconomicassistancetoindividual
countries or regions
Mrs. Davidovich (Israel): The State of Israel has
a long-standing tradition of providing humanitarian
assistance to nations in need, and 2012 has been no
exception.
Following the severe flooding in Fiji in January,
the Israeli Government donated funds to support the

work of the Red Cross in providing assistance to the
flood victims. A month later, when a fire engulfed the
Comayagua prison in Honduras, leaving more than 300
inmates dead, Israel donated medical supplies to treat
those who had been injured in the fire. In the wake of the
devastating explosions in Brazzaville, Congo, in March,
Israel sent medical equipment for the treatment of burns
through our Agency for International Development
Cooperation, MASHAV, in partnership with Magen
David Adom South Africa. In response to the most
recent food crisis to emerge across the Sahel region,
Israel has remained engaged in supporting the work
of the World Food Programme by donating $200,000
to help the millions of people facing the combined
threat of drought, high food prices, displacement and
chronic poverty. Finally, the Israeli non-governmental
organization IsraAID is working in both Haiti and
Japan to assist with the ongoing rebuilding efforts in
those countries. It has also mounted a multifaceted
campaign to deliver aid to Hurricane Sandy’s victims
in New York. Its efforts are focused on two fronts:
immediate on-site assistance and long-term aid for
those most affected.
Israel’s humanitarian assistance is guided by a
comprehensive approach. We believe that preparedness
must stand at the core of disaster response. The most
valuable lesson we can learn in the wake of disasters is
that investing in disaster risk reduction is critical. The
costs of responding to disaster significantly outweigh
the costs of preventing their impact through risk
reduction.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-64810 (E)

*1264810*

A/67/PV.55

As a small but densely populated country, Israel
is always looking to find new and innovative ways
to reduce the risk of disasters. Addressing urban
risk through public investment is an issue that Israel
takes very seriously. In 2005, the Israeli Government
initiated a nationwide programme called Tama 38,
which offers tax and planning incentives to the private
sector to reinforce buildings that do not comply with the
earthquake-resistance provisions of the Israeli building
code, which was standardized in 1980. The plan also
grants renovation permits to Israeli homeowners living
in pre-1980 buildings.
Israel strongly believes that the impact of natural
disasters can be substantially reduced if people are
well informed through a culture of disaster prevention
and resilience promoted by their Governments. In
that spirit, Israel has given great priority to publicawareness campaigns while holding national emergency
drills every year. These nationwide drills emphasize
coordination among Government agencies, emergency
and medical response units, local municipalities and the
media. This year’s exercise, held in October, focused
specifically on nationwide coordination in the event of
an earthquake.
For decades, MASHAV has been working to
strengthen countries’ capacities to cope with disaster
impacts by conducting courses on emergency and
disaster medicine around the world. The courses train
doctors, nurses, medical technicians and administrators
to deal with mass-casualty events. MASHAV offers
theoretical training and organizes practical simulation
exercises relevant to the disaster scenarios that
particular countries or regions are likely to face.
In the past few years, Israel’s cooperation with the
United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
Team (UNDAC), has increased considerably. Israel
is a member of UNDAC, and we are proud that the
emergency response roster includes four Israeli
experts. Our cooperation continued to grow this year,
following UNDAC’s participation in our national
security exercise, which simulated an earthquake and
the coordination of international assistance. Building
resilient communities demands preparation at all levels.
Coordination among the public, private and non-profit
sectors, as well as at the national and international
levels, is key.
Israel recognizes that coordination is vital to
ensuring the most effective response to disasters.
Yet the exploitation of humanitarian aid by certain
2

non-State actors as a tool for conflict remains a problem.
As such, Israel emphasizes the crucial importance of
coordinating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
through legitimate and recognized channels.
Israel believes that humanitarian assistance is a
vital aspect of the work of the United Nations in which
each agency performs according to its mandate. We will
continue to support its efforts and offer humanitarian
assistance wherever and whenever it is needed.
Before I conclude, I would like note that it is most
unfortunate that the present debate has been used by
certain delegations to attack my country with unfounded
accusations. I do not intend to waste the Assembly’s time
by refuting every baseless claim uttered in this Hall,
but would like to place my delegation’s disappointment
on record.
Mr. Dos Santos (Brazil): Brazil welcomes
the reports of the Secretary-General contained in
documents A/67/89 and A/67/363, entitled, respectively,
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”
and “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”. We commend in particular the focus
on the need to deepen partnerships for humanitarian
response among the United Nations system, Member
States and other relevant actors.
Humanitarian assistance as it pertains to food
security and disaster risk reduction is closely related to
sustainable development. In that regard, we welcome the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future
we want” (resolution 66/288, annex). By ensuring a
mutually supportive relationship between humanitarian
cooperation and sustainable development, we can
achieve the two-fold objective of increasing resilience
and providing a smoother transition from relief to
recovery to development.
The global food crisis continues to require
our careful attention, as it has not abated. Recent
fluctuations in prices of food crops represent an added
challenge. Durable and sustainable solutions are still
to be adequately implemented. In that regard, we
especially commend the Secretary-General’s initiative
to launch the Zero Hunger Challenge, which seeks to
guarantee 100 per cent access to food for all, ensure
sustainable food systems, double productivity and
reduce food waste.

12-64810

A/67/PV.55

Now more than ever, it is imperative that the
humanitarian community seek out and embrace
new and cost-effective ways of mobilizing muchneeded resources. We believe that it is of the utmost
importance that Member States support humanitarian
cooperation initiatives that allow access to food
for people undergoing severe food insecurity, with
the involvement of the beneficiary country and in
partnership with international organizations, such as
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme.

reduce the suffering of those affected by humanitarian
emergencies. In that regard, I would like to recall the
Dialogue on Humanitarian Partnership — an initiative
launched by Sweden and Brazil with the participation
and support of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) — that brought
together 19 Member States, representing a wide range
of interested countries, to consider key humanitarian
issues. Our aim is to strengthen the United Nations
capacity to address contemporary humanitarian
challenges.

For the Brazilian Government, guaranteeing
the right to adequate food is part of a three-pronged
strategy consisting of access to food programmes,
conditional cash transfer policies and incentives for
family farming. Several initiatives that reflect that
approach, such as the local procurement of food aid and
cash-for-work schemes, are already being implemented.

In the same vein, we very much welcome the dialogue
and cooperation between OCHA and developing
countries, which must be involved in discussions
concerning humanitarian assistance and can provide
specific expertise in responding to emergencies.
That will certainly contribute to ensuring that United
Nations humanitarian assistance is underpinned by the
political support of the wider membership.

On the issue of financing, we note with concern
the potential impacts of the economic and financial
crisis on the provision of United Nations humanitarian
assistance. Brazil, as a developing country, is doing
its part. In the past few years, we have significantly
increased our contributions, both in cash and in kind.
As announced at the pledging session of the Highlevel Conference on the Central Emergency Response
Fund held this week, we have also been steadily
increasing our contributions to the Fund. Recently,
we donated $1.2 million to fund UNICEF activities
in Niger, Mauritania, Mali, Somalia and Haiti, among
other countries. This year, Brazil has also made a
contribution of $7.5 million to the core programmes
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering areas
such as health, education and food security.
By twinning operations with partners and United
Nations agencies, Brazil has also been able to channel
more than 160,000 tons of food aid to countries such
as the Central African Republic, Chad, Cuba, Ethiopia,
Haiti, Madagascar, Mozambique, Somalia, the Sudan
and Zimbabwe. We call on donor countries to maintain
and increase their level of financial support in order to
enable the continued delivery of relief.
We believe that strengthening partnerships among
all Member States and humanitarian actors will
increase ownership and contribute to the effectiveness
of United Nations humanitarian assistance. Brazil
strongly believes that all countries can contribute in
different ways to our collective efforts to save lives and
12-64810

Mr. Rachmianto (Indonesia): First of all, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his reports
on the progress of humanitarian activities around the
world and for the recommendations contained therein.
The continuing impact of multiple crises and the
rising occurrence of natural disasters have made the
world population, from developed and developing
countries alike, vulnerable and put them at constant risk.
We welcome the significant progress made to date by
all humanitarian actors and stakeholders in improving
and strengthening coordination for emergency
humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian actors should
continue to improve their performance and to ensure
accountability to the people, Member States and
donors, including by increasing their effectiveness and
transparency.
To further increase response effectiveness,
humanitarian decision-making must be based on
reliable data. We need to further improve the quality
and reliability of data, facilitate appropriate channels
for the exchange of information, and develop commonly
acceptable standards for such exchange. We also need
to improve capacities to collect, analyse and report
disaggregated data in order to ensure the most effective
use of resources and to maximize benefits for the
affected population.
As the access and protection of humanitarian
personnel continue to be matters of topical importance,
we need to sustain and improve dialogue and mobilize

3

A/67/PV.55

the support of all stakeholders in order to ensure safe
and unhindered access by humanitarian personnel. We
also need to ensure that the delivery of supplies and
equipment is conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of international and national law.
As incidents of gender-based violence and violence
against children in humanitarian emergencies still occur
at an alarming rate, we must continue to mainstream
the gender perspective into humanitarian assistance
in order to ensure that the specific needs of women,
girls, boys and men in humanitarian emergencies are
comprehensively addressed.
Indonesia would like to join others in calling for the
strengthening of the capacity of humanitarian actors
and their response systems with regard to humanitarian
crises caused by natural disaster, including those
related to the impact of climate change. We reaffirm
the utmost importance of implementing the Hyogo
Framework for Action and the need to include disaster
risk reduction and preparedness in the framework of
the post-2015 development agenda. In that regard,
investment in disaster risk reduction and preparedness
should be further increased and funding resources
strengthened. In view of that, Indonesia is a sponsor
of and fully supports draft resolution A/67/L.39, on the
strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations.
My delegation is delighted to once again join the
consensus on draft resolution A/67/L.38, on assistance
to the Palestinian people, which inherently underscores
the commitment of States to providing assistance
to the Palestinian people. The sustained support of
international donors, working in collaboration with
the two parties, Israel and Palestine, is essential in
order to improve Palestinian economic and social
infrastructures and meet the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people.
However, Indonesia remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people, in particular in the Gaza Strip, especially after
the destruction caused by the disproportionate use of
force by the occupying Power, which has caused death
and despair to the people in that area. The situation
in the West Bank also gives cause for concern, as the
numerous checkpoints and the route of the security
fence are severely hindering efforts to maintain a viable
economy, especially with regard to agriculture.

4

Nevertheless, Indonesia remains convinced of the
viability of two States living side by side in peace within
the framework of a comprehensive regional settlement
under the terms of various resolutions, the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land
for peace. To achieve that, however, demands that the
parties sit at the negotiating table to hammer out an
agreement, which, unfortunately, is where we continue
to be stopped. The reports are categorically clear that
forward movement is hampered by Israel’s policy on
settlements, particularly highlighted by Israel’s plans
to build more than 3,000 new settler homes, which
constitutes a sign of bad faith and an obvious obstacle
to the peace process.
On 29 November, the international community
voted resoundingly in favour of endorsing the request
of Palestine to become a non-member observer State
(resolution 67/19). Although some 24 years ago the
Assembly had acknowledged it as a State through its
resolution 43/177, by according observer State status to
the State of Palestine we are signaling the primacy of
diplomacy and our rejection of violence. We are making
a strong statement on the need for mutual respect among
nations.
The Secretary-General has reiterated that peace and
Palestinian statehood are long overdue. Indonesia agrees
and would like to amplify that affirmation, because we
fully believe that direct and meaningful negotiations
are the main avenue towards a comprehensive, fair and
lasting solution that fulfils the aspirations of Israelis
and Palestinians, including an end to occupation and
conflict and a just and agreed solution to the plight of
Palestinian refugees. We again call on Israel to cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to avoid contravening its obligations under
the road map to freeze all settlement construction,
including natural growth.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
commend Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos for
her prominent leadership in coordinating the delivery
of emergency humanitarian assistance by humanitarian
agencies, as well as for the dedication she has shown
by visiting wherever the humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations was required. I would also like to
express the appreciation of my Government for the
tireless efforts of all United Nations staff engaged in
emergency humanitarian assistance.
Indeed, in 2012 we have been confronted with many
humanitarian crises all over the world, including in the
12-64810

A/67/PV.55

Sahel region, Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan, Haiti,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and Myanmar, to name but
a few. Our challenge is to ensure that the United Nations
continues to improve its response to humanitarian crises,
including by strengthening its response capacities and
humanitarian coordination and the accountability of
all stakeholders, and by recognizing the importance of
reinforcing its emergency administrative procedures,
as rightly addressed in draft resolution A/67/L.39, to be
adopted today.
Japan fully supports the continuous improvement in
the United Nations system of humanitarian assistance
through the Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s
Transformative Agenda. For our part, we have made
contributions to various humanitarian emergencies and
to individual United Nations humanitarian agencies.
One of the most important common themes of the
draft resolutions before us today is the strengthening of
partnerships between the United Nations humanitarian
system and the growing number of humanitarian actors
outside the United Nations. Japan highly appreciates the
continued efforts of Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos, Assistant Secretary-General Catherine Bragg
and all the staff of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs towards that end, including
direct outreach to the capitals of particular countries.
The importance of various partnerships was
highlighted at the World Ministerial Conference on
Disaster Reduction in Tohoku, held in Japan on 3 and
4 July. Conference participants agreed on the critical
importance of operational coordination in response
to disasters through broad-based partnerships among
various stakeholders that transcend sectoral divides.
Such partnerships include, inter alia, local Governments,
the business community and non-governmental
organizations.
Japan is also making efforts to build various
partnerships in the Asia-Pacific region, especially in
the field of disaster management. For example, in order
to strengthen the Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in Jakarta, Japan
is providing communication equipment, dispatching a
disaster-management expert and experts in information
and communications technology, and supporting
the creation of emergency reserve stocks against
natural disasters. Through various additional efforts,
Japan is supporting the establishment of the disastermanagement network for the ASEAN region.

Strengthening resilience is another common theme
of this year’s draft resolutions. In efforts to establish
more resilient communities, closer cooperation between
national stakeholders and humanitarian and development
actors is important. In that regard, we support the strong
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Amos on the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee’s Transformative
Agenda, and we look forward to positive developments
on disaster preparedness through that framework.
To conclude, let me reiterate Japan’s commitment to
enhancing the resilience of nations and communities in
facing disasters. At the World Ministerial Conference
on Disaster Reduction in Tohoku, Prime Minister Noda
expressed Japan’s determination to lead international
efforts towards disaster risk reduction, as well as its
commitment to providing $3 billion to that end over
three years, starting in 2013.
Japan welcomes the draft resolution on the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction adopted
this month by the Second Committee (A/C.2/67/L.16),
in which it was decided to convene the Third World
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in Japan in
early 2015. Let me assure the General Assembly that
Japan will spare no effort towards the success of that
conference.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I have the honour
to deliver a few remarks on behalf of the Governments of
India and Sweden as a contribution to the debate under
agenda item 70 (a), “Strengthening of the coordination
of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations”. Our joint statement should be viewed
as a reflection of our common recognition of the need to
strengthen the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance by the United Nations.
At the outset, India and Sweden would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the documentation presented
under this item and for highlighting the need to build
stronger humanitarian partnerships. Enhanced dialogue
and stronger partnership at the global, regional, national
and local levels are not ends in themselves; rather,
they bring together relevant stakeholders, leading to
improved communication and collaboration that in turn
contribute to a more effective humanitarian response.
Indeed, our joint statement symbolizes a common
belief in strengthened humanitarian partnerships and
dialogue.
India and Sweden reaffirm that humanitarian
principles and international humanitarian law provide

12-648105

A/67/PV.55

the basis for humanitarian assistance. In that regard,
I would like to underline that India and Sweden are
committed to preserving the respect for and adherence
to the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence reflected in the annex to resolution
46/182. We must at all times respect the primary
role of the affected State in providing protection and
humanitarian assistance, with due respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of
States.
Affected populations are at the centre of all
humanitarian action. We encourage the international
community and the United Nations to continue to
enhance their accountability to and work closely with
affected people in order to create an inclusive process
and to bring out a sense of ownership. Lessons learned
from recent disasters confirm the need for closer
consultations and collaboration with beneficiaries.
We welcome the efforts under way to develop internal
accountability mechanisms within the United Nations
system.
In addition to the acute humanitarian crises,
of which there are unfortunately too many around
the globe, India and Sweden commend the United
Nations for its efforts to build resilience and disaster
risk and reduction preparedness, as we believe that
prevention is better than cure. The Sahel is an example
of the coordinated engagement of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Development Programme in order to be more
strategic and to minimize the gap between humanitarian
relief and long-term development. India and Sweden are
also concerned about the many humanitarian crises that
receive little international attention yet pose significant
threats to affected populations.
In order for the United Nations system and
the international community to carry out their
responsibilities in conflict areas, safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel is of critical
importance. We are concerned that there continue to be
security incidents involving the deliberate targeting of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, hindering
them in their indispensable efforts to assist those in
need.
Delivery on the ground saves lives, and
coordination makes delivery more effective, especially
at a time when new humanitarian actors are emerging.
India and Sweden deeply value the coordinating
capacities of the United Nations system through the
6

Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and encourage
all actors to continue enhancing their support of the
Office. As strong supporters of the Central Emergency
Relief Fund (CERF), India and Sweden welcome its
continued achievements in providing a timely and
predictable response to humanitarian emergencies. We
are encouraged by the confidence reposed in CERF
demonstrated by a commitment of $384 million in
pledges made by Member States at the high-level CERF
meeting on Tuesday, 11 December.
Before closing, India and Sweden would like
to thank the Secretary-General for bringing to our
attention the issue of data collection in the report.
Indeed, there is the need to improve the decision-making
process with a view towards taking better informed
decisions in times of humanitarian emergencies. The
gathering of data is crucial to enhance this element in
order to improve our collective efforts to help those in
need. The number of people around the globe in need
of humanitarian assistance is not shrinking. On the
contrary, it is unfortunately on the rise. We recognize
the challenges ahead, and we are confident that we will
be able to tackle these challenges through enhanced
cooperation and by fostering a broad consensus among
Member States.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile welcomes the introduction of
draft resolution A/67/L.39 on the strengthening of
the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, prepared by the
representatives of Sweden and India. My delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General’s report on the issue
(A/67/89) and agrees with the recommendations made
therein. In particular, we recognize the need for inclusive
humanitarian assistance with strengthened relations at
the local, regional, national and international levels.
Our country also considers it essential to promote and
enhance resilience and to build support systems for
data-based humanitarian decision-making in order to
consolidate partnerships for effective humanitarian
response.
In various forums of the multilateral system,
Chile has emphasized the importance of a coordinated
humanitarian response by the international community,
as represented by the United Nations system, with the
support of the affected communities and States. In that
regard, the leadership of Under-Secretary-General and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos and the

12-64810

A/67/PV.55

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) team has been critical, and we thank them for
their efforts.
We reiterate our commitment to the various
regional and subregional bodies that play an important
role in humanitarian emergencies. They must act
in a coordinated and cooperative manner and avoid
duplication of efforts as they promote comprehensive
recovery.
The draft resolution before us includes new elements
that are worth highlighting. Chile welcomes the fact
that the policy agreed upon in the recent humanitarian
segment of the Economic and Social Council
recognizes the endeavours of OCHA to strengthen
the creation of alliances among the various sectors,
especially regional organizations and the private sector,
in addressing emergencies. Chile’s recent experience
following the earthquake and tsunami of 2010 made it
clear to our authorities that such alliances need to be
further explored, especially with respect to prevention,
mitigation and reconstruction. We also believe it
important to involve civil society in such processes.
My delegation wishes to underscore the fact
that the draft resolution includes a condemnation by
Member States of the threat of violent attack on medical
personnel and facilities. The safety of humanitarian
staff is fundamental in any situation. We consider
it important to move forward in accordance with the
provisions of international humanitarian law. It also
deem it vital that the draft text refers to the need for
States to consider the needs of persons with disabilities
in the design and implementation of disaster risk
reduction, humanitarian and recovery programming,
and post-humanitarian emergency reconstruction — all
of which also represents an opportunity to move towards
the creation of an inclusive society.
The negative impact of the current economic
and financial crisis has had repercussions on the
funding of the international response to humanitarian
emergencies. In that regard, it is important to appeal
to the main contributors to the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF), whose contributions should
be additional to current commitments to humanitarian
programming and should not be to the detriment of
resources made available for international cooperation
for development. In that regard, and given the need to
enhance the effective use of resources, we also welcome
the draft resolution’s emphasis on the importance of the

accountability of humanitarian actors at all the stages
of humanitarian assistance.
We reiterate that the United Nations system and its
many entities are the main provider and coordinator of
emergency relief and contribute to recovery throughout
the world by supporting the activities of Governments
and aid organizations. My delegation believes that
humanitarian assistance should prioritize human
security, human rights and the promotion of and respect
for the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. It should also ensure the swift and
unhindered access of humanitarian personnel and aid
to affected communities.
I conclude by reiterating my delegation’s belief that
it is urgent to further enhance coordination among the
various humanitarian actors and in the long term to
create conditions conducive to transition from disaster
relief to development. We believe that development
will not only make it possible to eradicate poverty and
hunger, but will also enhance the ability of States to
ensure a stable environment and lasting peace.
Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
noted in the Secretary-General’s report (A/67/89),
we have made progress in improving the efficiency,
transparency, delivery and accountability of
humanitarian assistance. But there remains much room
for improvement. According to estimates, this year
at least 51 million people will require some type of
humanitarian assistance and we, as the international
community, must protect our populations and improve
our response to their needs.
Access continues to pose a significant problem for
humanitarian operations on the ground. Moreover, the
changing nature of new crises caused by human rights
violations, political instability and armed conflicts
confronts us with new challenges to humanitarian
response and to the safety of emergency personnel.
Meeting those challenges in a constructive way will
require sustained dialogue and the commitment of all
parties to distinguish humanitarian matters from actions
motivated by political or security considerations.
As Costa Rica has pointed out on other occasions,
while we must prevent abuses of the concept of timely
and unhindered access, we must also recognize its
importance to the effectiveness of humanitarian relief
on the ground. In our view, political considerations
must not be allowed to take precedence over the
lives and well-being of people urgently in need of

12-648107

A/67/PV.55

humanitarian assistance in the field. Even here in the
General Assembly, we can do a great deal by engaging
in dialogue and seeking language we can agree on in
order to take on the issue as it deserves.
Regrettably, humanitarian assistance workers,
especially those recruited locally, fell victim to
violence at a much higher rate in the first half of 2012
than in 2011, according to the Secretary-General’s
report (A/67/492). It is particularly worrying that most
victims have been the targets of extremist acts. Such
attacks, intentionally directed against workers who
dedicate their lives to helping others, are unacceptable.
We must condemn them in the strongest possible terms,
even as we continue working to improve security for
United Nations compounds. As the Secretary-General
points out in that regard, the support and acceptance of
host Governments, local authorities and the population
remain the first line of defence.
Another significant challenge we face, given
climate change and the increased frequency of natural
disasters, is the need for a more integrated response and
for tighter cooperation among all agencies, especially
humanitarian and development entities. Recent
experience in the Horn of Africa and in the path of
Hurricane Sandy through the Caribbean, as well as other
disasters in our region, show the importance of support
when emergencies strike; however, it must strike a
balance between short-term needs and the promotion
of community resilience and long-term development
processes. The correct approach involves programmes
for prevention, preparedness, rescue, recovery and
development, and, as the Secretary-General points out
in his report in A/67/363, it should focus on building the
resilience of the most vulnerable groups, in particular
children, women and disabled people. That is the only
way to prevent crises from recurring or becoming
endemic.
We clearly recognize the primary responsibility of
national Governments in building resilience. Still, as
the most environmentally vulnerable region of Latin
America and the Caribbean, Central America calls
for an increase in investment at all levels in disaster
risk reduction, in the conservation and protection of
ecological balance, and in safeguarding the sustainable
development of our peoples.
The Secretary-General’s report on strengthening
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
(A/67/89) calls attention to two additional challenges.
One is the need for decisions to be based on up-to8

date and trustworthy data that is readily available
to emergency responders; the other is the need to
strengthen cooperation among various responders, in
particular new stakeholders. The Secretary-General’s
suggestions in this and other matters should form the
basis for shaping our humanitarian responses.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Let me begin by
offering New Zealand’s sympathy to the families
and colleagues of the United Nations humanitarian
personnel who have lost their lives or been injured in
the course of their duties this year. We applaud the
dedication of all United Nations staff who work in
dangerous and difficult circumstances in support of
those who are in need of humanitarian assistance.
Over the past year, progress overall has been made
in addressing the challenges facing the humanitarian
community. However, the need for us all to work
together to help those caught up in humanitarian
situations remains as urgent as ever. Indeed, right
now, more than 60 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance globally. The economic cost
of disasters continues to increase, even though the
actual number of disasters fell in 2012. The impact of
climate change and the increased frequency of natural
disasters highlight the need for closer coordination and
collaboration among those working in the humanitarian,
development, political and security spheres.
New Zealand recognizes that, as a cost-cutting
strategy, disaster risk reduction provides the best value
for money in reducing the impact of humanitarian
crises, with $1 invested in prevention estimated to
save up to $7 in future humanitarian response. That is
a good investment. We also recognize the importance
of implementing the Hyogo Framework for Action
2005-2015, and in particular of strengthening the
effectiveness of national and local preparedness and
building the resilience of nations and communities in
line with the Framework.
Like others, New Zealand is committed to the
core humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence. We believe that as
partnerships are formed with new actors we must be
vigilant in adhering to those principles. They are
essential to ensuring timely, secure and unimpeded
access to the people who need humanitarian assistance
the most. In that respect, New Zealand strongly holds
to the view that inclusiveness should apply not only to
humanitarian assistance and development actors but
also to those affected by emergencies. The General
12-64810

A/67/PV.55

Assembly recently adopted resolutions acknowledging
that we must give appropriate consideration to gender,
age and disability as part of joint needs assessments
and effective humanitarian response.
We also believe that, in addition to the United
Nations system, we as Member States must address
gender-based violence in humanitarian emergencies,
and we must ensure that measures are in place to
investigate such incidents and that, where required,
appropriate prosecutions are undertaken.
New Zealand joins others in expressing support
for the efforts of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
through the Transformative Agenda to strengthen
coordination, leadership and accountability. We
commend Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and
her staff for their impressive efforts to promote a more
efficient, faster and better coordinated humanitarian
response, and we particularly commend her leadership
of and improvements to the Central Emergency
Response Fund. She has taken up a great task, and we
support her in that.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): We congratulate the
Member States already using best practices to monitor
disaster risk management and implement disasterresponse plans that preserve, first and foremost,
the lives of populations, the livelihoods of those
countries and particular sectors such as food and food
security, agriculture and infrastructure. They are to be
commended for identifying the need to strategically
respond in the areas of food, water, sanitation, shelter,
recovery, health and education.
Member States have recognized the importance of
coordination at all levels — local, national, regional
and global. Only through collaboration can we achieve
effective disaster risk management, which is of the
utmost importance if the quality of life of those persons
affected by disasters is to be protected and improved.
In that context, climate change as a driver of disaster is
pertinent. More and more effective responses to climate
change events are needed in adaptation, mitigation,
financing and other means of implementation. That
is particularly true for small island developing States.
Such responses can reduce climate disasters in the first
instance, allowing societies to keep more resources at
home to respond to other disasters and, more broadly,
to pursue sustainable development.
There is not a single Government that is capable
of managing a twenty-first century disaster on its
12-64810

own. Therefore, international programmes, such as
the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, are
turning the momentum garnered into a durable and
sustainable effort to share responsibilities in reducing
risks and reinforcing resilience in our communities.
That must continue to come from all involved
sectors and all stakeholders, including Governments,
non-governmental organizations and civil society,
international agencies and organizations, academic
and technical institutions, and the private sector. Such
broad stakeholder collaboration must continue, and all
Member States must partake fully in the development
and continuation of the process.
Transparency in reporting is also paramount, for we
need sharper indicators for progress that will provide
the ability to measure achievements we make and
enlighten us on what we have already accomplished. In
my own region, we have initiated the Caribbean Hazard
Mitigation Capacity Building Programme (CHAMP).
It is a three-year project funded by the Canadian
International Development Agency, implemented by
the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency
and executed by the Organization of American States.
It is intended to mitigate and manage disasters.
CHAMP seeks to enhance regional capacity to reduce
vulnerability to the effects of natural hazards. That will
be done through the development of national hazardmitigation policies and implementation programmes,
the promotion of the wider use of hazard information
in development decisions and the strengthening of safe
building practices, training and certification. CHAMP
activities will be carried out in the four pilot States of
Belize, the British Virgin Islands, Saint Lucia and my
own country, Grenada. We look forward to building
resilience, including national capacity-building, and
Grenada again expresses its thanks to Canada for the
programme. We invite other partners to the project.
Grenada wishes to thank all our partners who
supported us through our last major disaster in
2004-2005, when we lost 204 per cent of our national
gross domestic product. We assure the Assembly that
amid a global economic and financial crisis, climate
change destruction and other challenges, our people’s
resilience continues to grow.
We urge continuing support for the pursuit of
policies and practices of gender equality and women’s
leadership in all humanitarian work. Grenada expresses
its full solidarity with the people of Palestine still in
need of humanitarian relief, and we congratulate the

9

A/67/PV.55

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East on its work.
The outstanding leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos is making an effective Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs even
more so. We congratulate her on her leadership and her
achievements. We look forward to increased capacitybuilding and partnership for managing national,
regional and global disasters. We thank all United
Nations workers who are engaged in the Organization’s
great humanitarian work.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 45/6 of 16 October 1990, I now call
on the observer of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Mr. Füllemann (International Committee of
the Red Cross): The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) is pleased to address the General
Assembly on the important subject of humanitarian
coordination.
The global context in which humanitarian action
takes place has evolved significantly over the years
and will continue to do so as it faces new challenges in
the years ahead. The scope of the label “humanitarian”
has expanded, and today the word refers to everything
from emergency relief to disaster preparedness, early
recovery, capacity-building, judicial action, restoring
the rule of law and institutional reconstruction.
Increasingly, humanitarian action is moving beyond
immediate response and placing more emphasis on the
causes and consequences of crises, as demonstrated
by current initiatives to enhance the resilience of
vulnerable populations. The way in which we work is
also changing, thanks in part to new technologies that
enable a greater scope of action and shape the way in
which humanitarian actors engage with vulnerable
populations. The ICRC has always striven to adapt
continuously to the changing realities confronting
it, while scrupulously adhering to its fundamental
principles. It will continue to do so in the future.
Partnership is a key aspect of the ICRC’s activity.
The organization works with a wide variety of
partners, as demonstrated by the support it provides to
Government and public programmes, public facilities,
including hospitals and places of detention, and public
services. Many of its activities involve joint action with
various components of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement, reflecting the ICRC’s belief

10

that strong partnerships at the local level are vital to
acquiring a thorough understanding of the situation on
the ground and the needs of various communities.
In all, the ICRC has active partnerships with 107
national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies. Those
partnerships take different forms; some are primarily
operational and concentrate on emergency response,
while others focus on capacity-building in specific areas
such as conflict preparedness. Examples of the first type
of partnership can be found in the close cooperation
forged during major operations this past year with the
national societies of Syria, Mali, Afghanistan, Somalia,
the Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to cite just a few.
An important related topic is coordination with
various actors involved in contexts where humanitarian
action takes place. The growing number and diversity
of those actors are making it ever harder to ensure a
consistent, coordinated and effective humanitarian
response, and thus to meet the needs of the people
affected. It is of paramount importance that such
diversity does not lead to any confusion that would
ultimately harm the people we have a duty to help.
The ICRC is committed to reaching out and
engaging with everyone involved in the provision of
humanitarian aid on the ground. It strives to do this
in a spirit of aid effectiveness and pragmatism in
terms of coordination. A successful approach must be
action-oriented and reflect reality in the field. This was
reaffirmed during the meeting of all the Movement’s
components prior to the International Conference of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011.
The ICRC’s determination to work closely with
and learn from our partners and with newly emerging
actors cannot, however, be allowed to conflict with our
adherence to core principles. These principles constitute
the framework within which any interaction between
our organization and others must occur. The ICRC’s
humanitarian work is exclusively civilian in nature
and guided solely by humanitarian considerations. It is
founded primarily on the principles of humanity and
impartiality and is carried out according to the most
urgent needs and without discrimination. The principles
of neutrality and independence are also key elements
of the ICRC approach, helping the organization to gain
access to people in need and to carry out assistance and
protection activities.

12-64810

A/67/PV.55

The ICRC strives for constant dialogue with the
authorities and with all the parties concerned. It is
completely transparent about this. However, while
taking into consideration the positions and concerns of
all parties, we nevertheless formulate and implement
our policies independently. Neutrality means that the
ICRC focuses on its exclusively humanitarian mission
and is careful to abstain from any action or statement
that could be interpreted as siding with one party or
the other, or perceived as a political stance. The ICRC
operational experience has demonstrated repeatedly
that in order to ensure access and acceptance, the goals
of humanitarian action in response to armed conflicts
and other situations of violence should remain distinct
from goals of a military or political nature.
Of fundamental concern to the ICRC today are the
threats affecting the delivery of health care and the
safety of those who deliver it. Violence against healthcare workers, facilities and beneficiaries is one of the
most serious yet neglected humanitarian concerns
today. Such violence is impeding access to health care
in many countries. The shelling of hospitals, attacks
on ambulances and the fact that wounded people
can remain in agony for hours in vehicles held up at
checkpoints all demonstrate a blatant disrespect for
the neutral status of health-care facilities, transport
and personnel. This disrespect is being shown in many
countries throughout the world.
In response to this reality, in 2011 the ICRC
launched a four-year initiative entitled “Health Care in
Danger”. The idea is to work together with States and
other stakeholders to take practical steps to improve
security for and guarantee access to health care in
armed conflicts and other emergencies.
This issue was raised at the thirty-first International
Conference, held in Geneva in 2011. The Conference
brought together the various components of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement, as well as States.
It adopted a far-reaching resolution on health care in
danger, which demanded an effective response from
States, national societies and the health-care community
at large. The ICRC welcomes the substantial discussions
among States on the protection of medical personnel
and medical units in the framework of the negotiation
of draft resolution A/67/L.39, entitled “Strengthening
of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations”. The Health Care in
Danger initiative being a dynamic process, the ICRC
trusts that, during upcoming sessions of the General

12-64810

Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, this
critical topic will enjoy the States’ continuous interest
and support.
Another challenge for the ICRC lies in the growing
gap between the need for protection and assistance
in today’s most acute crises and what seems to be
diminishing access by humanitarian organizations to
vulnerable groups of people. The ICRC is involved in
various initiatives to narrow this gap. For example, last
year States joined the Red Cross and Red Crescent at
the International Conference in adopting a four-year
action plan for the implementation of international
humanitarian law. The action plan read, in part, as
follows:
“Components of the Movement must be able
to deliver humanitarian assistance at all times in
conformity with the fundamental principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.
States will respect the adherence by all components
of the Movement to these fundamental principles ...
The ICRC and the host national society concerned
will establish and maintain a constructive dialogue
with all parties to armed conflicts in order to
obtain access to victims and the necessary security
guarantees for its staff. States respect the need for
such dialogue and reaffirm the unique position and
contribution of the ICRC and national societies in
this regard.”
Looking ahead, the ICRC shares the goal of
bolstering the effectiveness and efficiency of the work
carried out by all international, regional, national and
local entities engaged in humanitarian action. Anyone
involved in such action should naturally aspire to
accommodate and facilitate wider efforts aimed at
reducing vulnerability and promoting sustainable
recovery and development. However, wider action is
not always feasible. Any action must always be realistic
when weighed against the circumstances, the needs and
the capacity for effective action.
The ICRC seeks to meet the needs and lessen the
vulnerability of people affected by crisis, regardless of
the scale. It keeps those people firmly at the forefront
of its work, striving to strengthen their resilience and
to facilitate their involvement in identifying both the
needs and the action required to meet those needs.
We welcome initiatives to bolster the accountability
of humanitarian agencies towards their beneficiaries.
They complement the accountability of humanitarian

11

A/67/PV.55

organizations vis-à-vis the authorities of the States on
whose territories they work.
Lastly, in the complex and highly unpredictable
environment in which it works, the ICRC will
continue to hone its ability to carry out assistanceand protection-based activities that are strictly
humanitarian in nature. Those efforts will focus on
the speed and quality of its operational response,
promoting suitable laws and regulations, and
monitoring their implementation. The ICRC will also
continue its contribution to improving coordination to
the extent allowed by the imperatives of its fundamental
principles, adherence to which sustains its access and
operational capacity.
It is only by respecting the principles of
humanitarian action and engaging in dialogue with all
concerned that the best response to urgent needs can
be found and that a lasting improvement in people’s
welfare can be achieved.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now call on the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC) is grateful for the opportunity to participate in
this debate.
Last week, Typhoon Bopha struck the southern
Philippines and left behind devastated communities
and widespread destruction. More than 700 people
have been confirmed dead and more than 900 reported
missing. As the scale of the devastation continues to
emerge, it is estimated that the typhoon has affected
the lives of over 5 million people, wrecked over 70,000
houses and left more than 400,000 people seeking
shelter in temporary evacuation centres. In some areas,
entire villages have been devastated, with the entire
livelihoods of their communities lost.
On 5 December, the IFRC launched an emergency
appeal to support the Philippine Red Cross in its efforts
to roll out a massive relief operation. The Chairman of
the Philippine Red Cross, Richard Gordon, said:
“We will need the support of our partners, locally
and abroad, to help alleviate the suffering of these
families and to help them recover their lives with
dignity”.

12

It is expected that the results of the ongoing assessments
will lead to an increased need for international support
to enable the Government of the Philippines and the
Philippine Red Cross, among other actors, to respond
to the immense needs.
Last month, we witnessed first-hand the devastating
impact of superstorm Sandy. Millions of people were
directly affected by Hurricane Sandy as it tore through
the Caribbean and the United States. Many communities
are still facing the challenge of a long recovery. In
Cuba, the storm is estimated to have directly affected
1 million people and indirectly affected 3 million
people. In Haiti, the rain continued after Sandy, thus
compounding the impact and increasing the threat
of cholera. It is estimated that in Jamaica, more than
200,000 families have been affected by the storm. Food
insecurity is also a major concern, as many of those
countries have experienced a catastrophic loss of food
crops and livelihoods, and also face the potential risk of
the spread of waterborne diseases.
Furthermore, the monetary impact is huge. One
estimate put the material cost of Sandy at around
$170 billion in the United States alone, making
Sandy one of the most economically devastating
climate-related disasters.
It is evident that the impacts of climate change
and vulnerability to natural disasters are challenges
that affect all States, rich and poor, small islands and
large countries, and thus require serious and concerted
efforts to tackle the related environmental challenges
and their humanitarian impact, especially on the most
vulnerable.
In paragraph 2 of his report (A/67/363), the
Secretary-General reminds us that:
“Humanitarian needs around the world are
rising in part owing to the increased frequency
and severity of natural disasters and the growing
number of vulnerable people”.
Last week, on closing day of the eighteenth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in
Doha, the IFRC Vice-President reminded Governments
of their collective responsibility to better protect those
at risk from the potentially devastating impact of
climate change. He said:
“We witness every day the worsening impact of
climate change on the lives and livelihoods of

12-64810

A/67/PV.55

millions of vulnerable people. The humanitarian
impact of a changing climate is not a future threat.
It is a daily reality”.
Now that the Doha meeting has ended, we must still
translate that collective responsibility into the concrete
measures, commitments and resources needed now to
help national Governments help their people adapt.
Humanitarian agencies are already seeing increased
food insecurity, public-health threats, migration and
displacement, and other related consequences. While
humanitarian organizations will continue to respond
to extreme-weather and climate-related events, we can
also help to reduce the impacts through disaster risk
reduction and disaster preparedness systems.
We recognize that the primary responsibility
to protect citizens in disaster situations lies with the
national authorities. We believe that national authorities
should invest adequately in building resilience and
promote programmes that strengthen resilience at all
levels. We believe also that Governments have a duty
to request international assistance when the scale of
the disaster and the needs of the affected people exceed
the capacities of their national authorities. At the same
time, we reiterate the call of the Secretary-General for
Member States
“to provide timely, flexible, predictable and
multi-year funding for programming that supports
community resilience, including preparedness,
early action and early recovery” (A/67/363, para. 52).
On our part, we are committed to continuing
to support our Red Cross and Red Crescent national
societies to build the capacities of their tens of
millions of members, volunteers and members of the
communities they serve.
Collectively, we need to work together to ensure
that disaster risk reduction and preparedness is given
due attention and resources, including throughout the
discussion in the year ahead related to the post-2015
development framework.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 47/4, of 16 October 1992, I now call on
the observer for the International Organization for
Migration.
Ms. Borgman (International Organization for
Migration): I shall deliver this statement on behalf of
Ms. Michele Klein Solomon, Permanent Observer of
the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
12-64810

The International Organization for Migration is
very pleased to take the floor today with reference to
the reports of the Secretary-General on the coordination
of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance by the
United Nations.
Recent and protracted crises have forced millions
of people to flee their homes, either within or outside
the borders of their countries, which calls for the
international community to respond collectively. IOM,
as the global lead agency on migration, continues to
provide essential life-saving assistance to refugees,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and other migrants
affected by crises around the world.
Based on the comprehensive reports of the
Secretary-General, I would like to take up three points
for reflection.
First, when providing humanitarian assistance
during crises, our response must take into account
the specific needs of migrants, whether they are
refugees, IDPs or migrant workers, who are sometimes
referred to in this context as third-country nationals.
Recent emergencies have demonstrated the vulnerable
situation of people crossing borders and of those who
are stranded or unable to leave. Among these are some
particularly vulnerable persons, including women,
children, the disabled and indigenous peoples, who also
merit special attention.
Such humanitarian emergencies can often be
regarded as migration crises, causing complex and
often large-scale migration flows and mobility patterns.
They show the need for a rapid and inclusive response
that provides immediate life-saving assistance as well
as longer-term life planning and preparedness. IOM
has developed a migration crisis operational framework
that allows for the improvement and systematization of
such a multidimensional response. The framework was
recently endorsed by the IOM Council, which comprises
IOM’s 149 member States.
Secondly, the multifaceted character of migration
requires strong partnership and coordination with
Governments, with partner international organizations
from a range of areas of expertise, and with many actors
in civil society, from academia to direct assistance
service providers. Working with many partners in the
process of leveraging expertise to meet the protection,
assistance and recovery needs of the affected
populations is critical to IOM’s operational work.

13

A/67/PV.55

We are grateful to see Member States acknowledge
in the current draft humanitarian omnibus resolution
(A/67/L.39) that the effectiveness of humanitarian
response is improved through coordination among
humanitarian actors. We appreciate the welcoming
of partnerships with regional organizations and the
private sector. IOM highly values the leadership role
of national Governments and continues to provide its
support to them. Strong and consistent partnerships
enable us to build long-term solutions.
Thirdly, as the Secretary-General states in his report
(A/67/89) on strengthening humanitarian assistance,
delivering life-saving support in emergencies is
essential, but it addresses only short-term needs.
Long-term development is crucial to limit the need for
emergency relief in future.
For IOM, it is therefore of the utmost importance that
humanitarian and development action be linked in order
to build national and local preparedness and response
capacity and to increase the resilience of populations.
The multilayered and often long-lasting challenges
confronting migrants cannot simply be divided into
two stages. People on the move may find themselves in
need of both humanitarian and development assistance;
one does not preclude the other. Furthermore, to ensure
sustainability, we must be aware that the transition is
a gradual process that requires both flexibility and
inclusiveness. Actors involved in both fields must
work together to ensure a smooth transition from
relief to development.
To conclude, let me reiterate IOM’s commitment
to those who are most vulnerable. We maintain
our commitment to strengthening partnerships and
coordination and are convinced that, as providers
of emergency humanitarian assistance, we can and
must continue to contribute to long-term development
solutions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 70 and its
sub-items (a) to (c).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/67/L.32, A/67/L.37, A/67/L.38 and A/67/L.39.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.32, entitled “Participation of
volunteers, White Helmets, in the activities of the United
Nations in the field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation
and technical cooperation for development”.

14

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in the draft document, the following countries
have become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.32:
Albania, the Dominican Republic, Grenada, Honduras,
India, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Panama, Portugal,
Serbia and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.32?
Draft resolution A/67/L.32 was adopted (resolution
67/84).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.37, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed on the draft document, the following countries
have become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.37:
Albania, Argentina, Georgia, Honduras, Madagascar,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova, San Marino,
Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.37?
Draft resolution A/67/L.37 was adopted (resolution
67/85).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.38, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft

12-64810

A/67/PV.55

resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
on the draft document, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.38: Andorra,
Argentina, Burkina Faso, Guatemala, Liechtenstein,
Montenegro, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, the Russian Federation, San Marino and
Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.38?
Draft resolution A/67L.38 was adopted (resolution
67/86).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.39, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed on the draft document, the following countries
have become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.39:

12-64810

Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mexico,
Montenegro, the Republic of Korea, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.39?
Draft resolution A/67/L.39 was adopted (resolution
67/87).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
70 and its sub-items (a) to (c).
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that consideration of the following agenda
items, originally scheduled for Monday, 17 December,
has been postponed to a later date to be announced:
agenda item 33, “Prevention of armed conflict”; agenda
item 34, “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and
their implications for international peace, security and
development”; and agenda item 120, “Multilingualism”.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

15
