General Assembly-Forty-second Session

2

3. Considers that the application of Title X of the
Foreign Relatior.., Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and
1989, in a manner inconsistent with paragraph 2 above
would be contrary to the international legal obligations of
the host country under the Agreement;
4. Considers that a dispute exists between the United
Nations and the United States of America, the host country,
concerning the interpretation or application of the Agreement, and that the dispute settlement procedure set out in
section 21 of the Agreement should be set in operation;
5. Calls upon the host country to abide by its treaty
obligations under the Agreement and to provide assurance
that no action will be taken that would infringe on the
current arrangements for the official functions of the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to the United Nations in New York;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue in his
efforts in pursuance of the provisions of the Agreement, in
particular section 21 thereof, and to report without delay to
the Assembly;
7. Decides to keep the matter under active review.
104th plenary meeting
2 March 1988

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/2 JO B of 17 December 1987
and bearing in mind its resolution 42/229 A above,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General of
JO and 25 February 1988,'
Affirmíng the position of the Secretary-General that a
dispute exists between the United Nations and the host
country concerning the interpretation or application of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations, dated 26 June 1947,' and noting his conclusions
that atteIJ1pts at amicable settlement were deadlocked and
that he had invoked the arbitration procedure provided for
in section 21 of the Agreement by nominating an arbitrator
and requesting the host country to nominate its own
arbitrator,
Bearíng in mind the constraints of time that require the
immediate implementation of the dispute settlement procedure in accordance with section 21 of the Agreement,
Notíng from the report of the Secretary-General of JO
February 1988' that the United States of America was not in
a position and was not willing to enter formally into the
dispute settlement procedure under section 21 of the
Agreement and that the United States was still evaluating
the situation,
Taking into account the provisions of the Statute of the
lnternational Court of Justice, in particular Articles 41 and
68 thereof,
Decides, in accordance with Article 96 of the Charter of
the United Nations, to request the lnternational Court of
Justice, in pursuance of Article 65 of the Statute of the
Court, for an advisory opinion on the following question,
taking into account the time constraint:
ln the light of facts retlected in the reports of the
Secretary-General,' is the United States of America, as a
party to the Agreement between the United Nations and
the United States of America regarding the Headquarters

of the United Nations,' under an obligation to enter into
arbitration in accordancc with section 21 of the Agreement?
104th plenar\' meeting
2 March /988

42/230.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Counh·l

The General Assem/11_\'.
Having considera/ thc reports ofthe Secretary-Gencral of
11 and 16 March 1988."
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations and. in particular, the provisions of
Chapter XVI,
Recalling its resolutions 42/21 O B of 17 December 1987
and 42/229 A and B of 2 March 1988.
Recalling that the United Nations was created with the
aim, ínter afia, as defined in the Charter. "to cstablish
conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained",
Recalling that the Agrecment between thc United Nations
and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations. dated 26 June 1947 .' was drawn
up in accordance with the Charter. in particular Articles 28
and 105 thereof.
C oncerned that the application to and enforcement
against the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York
of Title X of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act,
Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, would impede the realization
of the aims of the United Nations,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Court of
Justice for having unanimously adopted an order on 9
March 1988 accelerating its procedure on the request
submitted by the General Assembly for its advisory opinion
on "the applicability of the obligation to arbitrate under
section 21 of the United Nations Headquarters Agreement
of 26 June 1947" ,
Expressing grave concern about the attitude of the
Government of the host country as expressed in the letter
dated 11 March 1988 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the SecretaryGeneral,' which states. inter afia, that "the Attorney
General of the United States has determined that he is
required by the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987 to close the
office of the Palestine Liberation Organization Observer
Mission to the United Nations in New York. irrespective of
any obligations the United States may have under the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United
States regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations".
Expressing serious alarm at the warning contained in that
letter that "if the PLO does not comply with the Act, the
Attorney General will initiate legal action to close the PLO
Observer Mission on or about March 21 1988".
1. StronKIY supports the position taken by the Secretary-General and expresse~ its great appreciation for his
reports: •
'A/42/915/Add.2 and \.
•, t\142/91 'i/ Add ~. ann,:, 1

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committtt

2. Reaffirms that the Permanent Observer Mission of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations
in New York is covered by the provisions of the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations 2
and that the Palestine Liberation Organization has the right
to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional
facilities and that the personnel of the Mission should be
enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out
their official functions;
3. Ajfirms the crucial importance of the Agreement and
consequently the arrangements mentioned in paragraph 2
above concerning the functioning of the organs of the
United Nations, including the General Assembly, at Headquarters in New York;
4. Determines that the application to and enforcement
against the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York
of Title X of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act,
Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, is inconsistent with paragraph
2 above and is contrary to the international legal obligations
of the host country under the agreement;
5. Reaffirms that a dispute exists between the United
Nations and the United States of America, the host country,
concerning the interpretation or application of the Agreement, and that the dispute settlement procedure provided
for under section 21 of the Agreement, which constitutes
the only legal remedy to solve the dispute, should be set in
operation, and requests the host country to name its
arbitrator to the arbitral tribunal;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the proper constitution of the arbitral tribunal
provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
7. Deplores the failure of the host country to comply
with its obligations under the Agreement;
8. Urges the host country to abide by its international
legal obligations and to desist from taking any action
inconsistent with paragraph 2 above;
9. Notes the fact that, within the text of its order, the
lnternational Court of Justice on 9 March 1988 took note of
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 42/229 A;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to take adequate
measures on a preliminary basis, if necessary, in order to
ensure the discharge of the official functions of the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to the United Nations in New York;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly without delay on developments m
this matter;
12.

Decides to keep the matter under active review.
109th plenary meeting
23 March 1988

42/231.

Special plan of economic co-operation for
Central America

The General Assemblv.
Recalling its resolution 42/ l of 7 October 1987, in which
it expressed its firmest support for the agreement on
"Procedures for the e<t~hlishment of a firm and lasting

3

peace in Central America", º signed by Central American
Presidents at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987, at the
Esquipulas II summit meeting, and its resolution 42/204 of
11 December 1987, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to formulate, in consultation with the Governments
of the region and the appropriate organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, a special plan of co-operation
for Central America to be submitted for consideration by thc
General Assembly at its current session,
Bearing in mind the Joint Declaration of Central American Presidents, issued at San José on 16 January 1988, • and
the agreement adopted at Guatemala City on 7 April 1988'
by the Executive Commission, composed of the Central
American Ministers for Foreign Affairs in accordance with
the agreement concluded at the Esquipulas II summit
meeting,
Reiterating its appreciation to the Contadora Group and
the Support Group for their contribution to the peace
process in Central America,
Noting with satisfaction the Joint Political Declaration"
and the Joint Economic Communiqué'º adopted by the
European Community and the States parties to the General
Treaty on Central American Economic lntegration and
Panama at the Ministerial Conference on Political Dialogue
and Economic Co-operation between the European Community and its member States, and the States of Central
America and of the Contadora Group, held at Hamburg.
Federal Republic of Germany, on 29 February and 1 March
1988,
Considering that fulfilment of the agreement concluded
at the Esquipulas ll summit meeting and the implementation
of a special plan of economic co-operation for Central
America require political will and determination so that
peace and development can be consolidated in the region,
Reaffirming its conviction that peace and development
are inseparable,
Deeply concerned about the emergency situation in
Central America and alarmed by the seriousness of the
economic and social crisis it is facing,
Aware of the complexity and seriousness of the situation
of the refugees and displaced persons in the Central
American region, and of its effect on the social and
economic development of the area,
Convinced of the urgent need for concerted action by the
international community in support of the commitments
made by the Central American countries to improve the
living conditions of their peoples and to achieve social
justice as a foundation for a stable and lasting peace.
1 Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for formulating and submitting the Special Plan of Economi<.· Co-operation for Central America. 11 prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 42/ I and 42/204;
2. Also expresses its appreciation for the importan!
support provided by the United Nations Development
Programme, the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean ami the various regional integration and
co-operation bodies in the preparation of the Special Plan;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the United Nations Development Programme and in closc
'A/42/521-S/19085. annn
1\J42/91 l-SJl9447. annc,
'N42/948-Sil9764. annn.
" A/42/258, annex l.
'"!bid .. annex 11.
" A/42/949. annex
