United Nations

A/52/PV.82

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

82nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 31 March 1998, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Abu-Nimah
(Jordan), Vice-President, took the Chair.

Letter dated 20 March 1998 from the President
of the General Assembly addressed to the
Chairman of the Second Committee (A/52/836)

The meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/52/785/Add.2)
The Acting President: In a letter contained in
document A/52/785/Add.2, the Secretary-General informs
the President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communications dated 4 February and 23
March 1998, Djibouti and Sierra Leone have made the
necessary payments to reduce their arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of this information?

To enable the General Assembly to consider this
matter, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 97.
May I take it that the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the President of the General Assembly,
wishes to reopen the consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 97?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda of the fifty-second regular
session of the General Assembly and organization of
work: request for the reopening of the consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 97 (Renewal of the dialogue
on strengthening international economic cooperation for
development through partnership) submitted by the
President of the General Assembly

98-85177 (E)

The Acting President: In a letter dated 20 March
1998 from the President of the Assembly (A/52/836), the
President informs Member States that it is his intention to
bring to the attention of the General Assembly, at a
forthcoming date, a letter from the Chairman of the
Second Committee concerning sub-item (a) of agenda
item 97, entitled “Renewal of the dialogue on
strengthening international economic cooperation for
development through partnership” (A/52/832), in order
that the Assembly may take note of the letter from the
Chairman of the Second Committee.

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Representatives are aware
that sub-item (a) of agenda item 97 was allocated to the
Second Committee. However, in order for the General
Assembly to consider the sub-item and to take note of the
letter by the Chairman of the Second Committee, may I

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
take it that the General Assembly wishes to consider subitem (a) of agenda item 97 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
consider the sub-item just reopened at a future meeting of
the Assembly.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 17 (e), 17 (g), 113 to 116, 118, 119, 123 and 159,
125, 136, 141, 142 (a), 143 and 153. I request the
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee to introduce the reports
of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee (interpretation from Arabic): I have the honour
today to present the reports of the Fifth Committee on the
deliberations of its first resumed fifty-second session. The
Fifth Committee held its first resumed fifty-second session
for a period of three weeks, from 9 to 27 March 1998. The
Committee held 12 plenary meetings, and negotiations were
carried out through numerous informal consultations.
The following is a brief report on the result of the
work of the Fifth Committee at this first resumed fiftysecond session.
Regarding agenda item 17, entitled “Appointments to
fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”,
in particular sub-item (e), “Appointment of members of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal”, the report of the
Fifth Committee is contained in document A/52/674/Add.1.
In paragraph 4 of that report, the Fifth Committee, by
acclamation, recommends to the General Assembly the
nomination of Mr. Kevin Haugh of Ireland as a member of
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a term of
office beginning on the date approved by the General
Assembly ending on 31 December 1998.
With regard to sub-item 17 (g), “Appointment of
members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/52/676/Add.1. In paragraph 6 of
that report, the Committee recommended, by acclamation,
to the General Assembly the appointment of Mr. Nester
Odaga-Jalomayo of Uganda as a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office

2

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
beginning on the date approved by the General Assembly
and ending on 31 December 2000.
Concerning agenda item 113, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports of
the Board of Auditors”, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/52/732/Add.1. In paragraph
6 of that report, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, that
was adopted by the Committee without a vote as draft
resolution A/C.5/52/L.28.
Regarding agenda item 114, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning
of the United Nations”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/52/746/Add.1. Under this item,
the Committee took action on two questions: the proposed
United Nations Code of Conduct, which was also
considered under items 153, “Human resources
management” and 157, “United Nations reform: measures
and proposals”, and the question of procurement reform.
In connection with the proposed United Nations Code of
Conduct, the Committee decided to consider that question
at a later date during its resumed fifty-second session,
following the comments and observations of the
International Civil Service Commission. On the question
of procurement reform and outsourcing, in paragraph 9 of
its report the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution adopted by
the Committee as draft resolution A/C.5/52/L.31. Both the
oral draft decision and the draft resolution were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 115, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997”, the
report of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/52/743/Add.1. In paragraph 4, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft decision that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote as draft decision A/C.5/52/L.33.
Concerning agenda item 116, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999”, the report of the
Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/52/744/Add.2. In paragraph 15 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution regarding the Integrated
Management Information System project, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote as draft
resolution A/C.5/52/L.32. In paragraph 16 of the same
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of four draft decisions: “Interim

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
study of the question of honoraria payable to members of
organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations”;
“Reduction and refocusing of non-programme costs”,
adopted by the Committee as draft decision A/C.5/52/L.24;
“Office accommodation at the Palais Wilson”, adopted by
the Committee as draft decision A/C.5/52/L.23/Rev.1; and
“United Nations International Partnership Trust Fund”. The
draft resolution and the four draft decisions were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 118, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in
document A/52/842. In paragraph 6 of that report, the
Committee recommends that the General Assembly defer
consideration of this agenda item to the second part of its
fifty-second session. This oral draft decision was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 119, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained
in document A/52/734/Add.1. In paragraph 20 of that
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of four draft decisions. The
Committee adopted draft decision A/C.5/52/L.26, entitled
“Implementation of General Assembly resolution 52/214 A,
paragraphs 5 and 6” by a vote of 54 to 25 with 2
abstentions. The other draft decisions, “Upgrading of
conference rooms and interpretation booths”,
“Documentation related to the Conference on the
Standardization of Geographical Names” and
“Implementation of General Assembly resolution 52/214 B,
paragraphs 24 and 25”, were adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Regarding agenda items 123 and 159, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission” and “Financing of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola” respectively, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/52/547/Add.1. In
paragraph 6 of that report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that
was adopted by the Committee without a vote as draft
resolution A/C.5/52/L.29.
With regard to agenda item 125, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in
document A/52/843. In paragraph 6 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution that was adopted by the
Committee without a vote as draft resolution A/C.5/52/L.30.

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
Concerning agenda item 136, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan”,
the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in
document A/52/844. In paragraph 6 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution that was adopted by the
Committee without a vote as draft resolution
A/C.5/52/L.25.
With regard to agenda item 141, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti”, the
report of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/52/845. In paragraph 5 of that report, the Committee
recommends that the General Assembly take note of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions contained in document A/52/818.
This oral draft decision was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 142 (a), entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations: Financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations”, the report
of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/52/453/Add.2. In paragraph 9 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution that was adopted by the
Committee without a vote as draft resolution
A/C.5/52/L.27.
With regard to agenda item 143, entitled “Report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/846. In
paragraph 5 of that report, the Committee recommends
that the General Assembly defer consideration of this item
to the second part of its resumed fifty-second session.
This oral draft decision was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Finally, concerning agenda item 153, entitled
“Human resources management”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/52/739/Add.1. In
paragraph 6 of that report, the Fifth Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of two
draft decisions, one on the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the audit of the use of consultants
and the other on the respect for the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and related organizations. Both draft
decisions were adopted by the Committee without a vote.

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the
Fifth Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendations of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance with
General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless the Secretariat
is notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 17 (continued)

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
May I consider that the Assembly appoints this
person?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
(g) Appointment of members and alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/676/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 6 of the report
contained in document A/52/676/Add.1, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
appoint the following person as a member of the United
Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office
beginning on 31 March 1998 and ending on 31 December
2000: Mr. Nester Odaga-Jalomayo.
May I take it that the General Assembly appoints
this person?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee also
decided to postpone to a later meeting the remaining
appointment from the Group of Asian States.
We have concluded this stage of our consideration
of sub-item (g) of agenda item 17.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other appointments

Agenda item 113 (continued)

(e) Appointment of members of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal

Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors

Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/674/Rev.1/Add.1)

Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/732/Add.1)

The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of the report
contained in document A/52/674/Rev.1/Add.1, the Fifth
Committee recommends that the General Assembly appoint
the following person as a member of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal for a term of office beginning on
31 March 1998 and ending on 31 December 1998: Mr.
Kevin Haugh.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of part II of its report
(A/52/732/Add.1).

4

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

The draft resolution was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

We would first like to take this opportunity to thank
the coordinator of this item in the Fifth Committee, Mr.
Miles Armitage, for his professionalism in bringing
together consensus on such an important issue.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/212
B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 113.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the
(A/52/746/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 9 of Part II of its report
(A/52/746/Add.1) and the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 10 of the same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Procurement reform and outsourcing”, which was adopted
by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/226 A
and B)
The Acting President: We turn now to the draft
decision, entitled “Proposed United Nations Code of
Conduct”, which the Fifth Committee adopted without a
vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Kingdom, who will speak on
behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Thorne (United Kingdom): I have the honour to
take the floor on behalf of the European Union on the issue
of procurement reform. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union — Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated country Cyprus align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union attaches the greatest importance
to the issue of procurement reform, which is the subject
of the resolution we have just adopted in document
A/52/746/Add.1. We made the strength of our views clear
during our introductory statement on this issue when the
debate was resumed in the Fifth Committee three weeks
ago.
That this debate will once again have to be resumed
at our next session is a cause of considerable
disappointment and, indeed, some disquiet. This is an area
where the United Nations is exposed to commercial
society. Its performance in recent years has left much to
be desired. Repeated calls by the Member States for
fundamental reform have led to little or no significant
movement. That we achieved consensus on this resolution
with relative ease demonstrates our common conviction of
that unfortunate situation. Delegations were unanimous on
many important issues, not least in their call for the early
implementation of revised financial regulations and the
long-awaited rules governing procurement procedures. We
have asked for these to be submitted in good time for the
next resumed session of the Fifth Committee, which will
begin on 11 May.
We also ask the Secretary-General to examine and
report on three other key areas, which I will enumerate
briefly as follows: first, ways in which developing
countries and countries with economies in transition might
gain a larger share of United Nations procurement;
secondly, ways in which those who are fully paid up with
their contributions to the United Nations might be given
some measure of priority in the conclusion of
procurement contracts — we are particularly interested in
the experience of the World Bank in this context; and,
thirdly, ways in which the structure of the Procurement
Division might be better adapted to meet the needs of the
Organization.
For the first two of these issues, we have asked for
reports to be submitted to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session. The European Union believes that
these reports should be made available no later than the
autumn of 1998.
On the third point, the issue of the structure and
staffing of the Procurement Division, there was some

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

disagreement between Member States. The European Union
has consistently supported the Secretary-General’s own
view that he requires a highly qualified officer at the level
of D-2, with experience of top-level procurement, to run
United Nations operations. We continue to believe that such
an experienced pair of hands is necessary to deal with these
important issues where the United Nations must interact
with top international commercial competition.
We were pleased that Mr. Connor, the UnderSecretary-General for Administration and Management,
found the time to come and introduce this issue to the Fifth
Committee. We were also happy to welcome Mr. Niwa, the
responsible Acting Assistant Secretary-General, to some of
our informal consultations on these important matters. We
trust we can rely on their personal interest in an area which
will continue to attract attention.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 114.

Programme budget for the biennium 1996-1997
Fifth

Committee

(Part

The draft resolution is entitled “Integrated
Management Information System”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
52/227).
The Acting President: Draft decision I, entitled
“Interim study of the question of honoraria payable to
members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United
Nations”, was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a
vote. May I take it that the General Assembly too wishes
to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Reduction and refocusing of non-programme costs”. It
was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes also to adopt the draft
decision?

Agenda item 115 (continued)

Report of the
(A/52/743/Add.1)

recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 16 of
the same report.

II)
Draft decision II was adopted.

The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft decision recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 4 of part II of its report
(A/52/743/Add.1). The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to do likewise?

The Acting President: Draft decision III, entitled
“Office accommodation at the Palais Wilson”, was
adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft decision
III?
Draft decision III was adopted.

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999
Report of the Fifth
(A/52/744/Add.2)

Committee

(Part

Draft decision IV was adopted.
III)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 15 of part III of its report
(A/52/744/Add.2), and on the four draft decisions

6

The Acting President: Draft decision IV, entitled
“United Nations International Partnership Trust Fund”,
was adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes also to adopt the draft
decision?

The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 116.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

Agenda item 118

would be no programme budget implications arising as a
result of its adoption.

Joint Inspection Unit
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Indonesia on a point of order.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/842)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote; may
I consider that the General Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
Pattern of conferences
Report of the
(A/52/734/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the four draft decisions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 20 of part II of its report
(A/52/734/Add.1).
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled
“Implementation of General Assembly resolution 52/214 A,
paragraphs 5 and 6”.
I call on the representative of Japan on a point of
order.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Through you, Sir, I request
clarification from the Secretariat as to the programme
budget implications of draft decision I.
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Jin Yongjian (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I
should like to inform members that, should the General
Assembly adopt draft decision I, United Nations official
holidays would be set at 10 rather than nine days. The
Secretary-General would ensure the implementation of this
draft decision and make any adjustments required. There

Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): We have listened to the
statements by the representative of Japan and by the
representative of the Secretariat. In that regard, the Group
of 77 and China would like to place on record that we are
not convinced of the need for the Secretariat to have
made a statement on the financial implications of the draft
decision on which we are about to take action. Further,
we do not see the need to reopen the debate at this
moment, since the Fifth Committee, as the competent
committee with regard to administrative and budgetary
matters, has already taken action on the issue of United
Nations official holidays. As the President has recalled,
and as all Member States have agreed, we will be
applying rule 66 of the rules of the procedure of the
General Assembly.
Having said that, my delegation, once again on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, would sincerely
appeal to members not to insist on reopening the debate
on this issue. Furthermore, we would once again sincerely
appeal to all concerned members to understand the
position of the Group of 77 and China and to support the
draft decision, which has been adopted by the Fifth
Committee, so as to enable the General Assembly to take
action on it by consensus.
My delegation would therefore like to suggest that
we proceed in that manner to take action on draft decision
I.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Qatar on a point of order.
Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar): On behalf of the States
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
I wish to say that we support the position just set out by
the Chairman of the Group of 77. At the same time, I
think it is time for us to get beyond what happened in the
Fifth Committee. None of us should reopen this issue; in
a kind and friendly way, I urge all members to join
consensus on this issue.
The Acting President: I am informed by the
Secretariat that there has been no request for a vote on
draft decision I. May I therefore take it that the General
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft decision?

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Upgrading of conference rooms and interpretation booths”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: Draft decision III is entitled
“Documentation related to the Conference on the
Standardization of Geographical Names”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We turn next to draft decision
IV, entitled “Implementation of General Assembly
resolution 52/214 B, paragraphs 24 and 25”. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to those
speakers who wish to explain their positions on the draft
decisions just adopted.
Mr. Bista (Nepal): My delegation joined the
consensus in favour of draft decision I, entitled
“Implementation of General Assembly resolution 52/214 A,
paragraphs 5 and 6”, in the belief that it seeks, basically
and more than anything else, to promote the universal
character of the United Nations.
One of the principal objectives of the Organization is
to promote universal respect for the equal rights of peoples,
without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion —
an objective to be reflected also in our official holidays. It
is the view of my delegation that in the selection of official
holidays not only should a balance be struck between
international and local custom and the optimal use of the
resources of the Organization, but due regard should also be
paid to reflecting the main forms of civilization of the
world. The Secretary-General may therefore be well advised
to look into the matter more deeply and to report to the
General Assembly at an appropriate time so that our
reformed Organization does not have to make ad hoc
decisions in this regard in future.

8

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): The Group of 77 and
China welcome draft decision I on the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 52/214 A, paragraphs 5 and
6, which has just been adopted by the General Assembly
by consensus, and which decides that the United Nations
official holidays shall be set at 10 days in order to
observe the two holidays of Eid Al-Fitr and Eid Al-Adha
at United Nations Headquarters and other United Nations
duty stations.
The support given by the Group of 77 and China is
indeed a true reflection of genuine solidarity among its
members, which despite their multicultural make-up, can
agree to stand in unity and work to preserve the
international character of the United Nations. The Group
of 77 and China believe that the adoption of that decision
is of particular significance in that it recognizes the
extensive diversity of the Members of the United Nations.
Finally, I should like to express the appreciation of
the Group of 77 and China to those who worked in
support of the decision and also to request at this time
that the Secretary-General work to fully implement the
decision in its letter and spirit so that we may avoid
further debate on the subject in the future.
Mr. Thorne (United Kingdom): I have the honour
to take the floor on behalf of the European Union on the
issue of United Nations holidays and draft decision I,
which we have just adopted. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia — as well as the European Free-Trade Area
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union very much regretted that in the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly some
delegations insisted upon reopening the very carefully
balanced resolution 52/214, which we had adopted only
three months earlier. Last week the European Union was
obliged to vote against a text which changed the carefully
balanced agreement therein.
It is always regrettable when the Fifth Committee
resorts to voting. In order not to repeat that procedure, the
European Union has acquiesced in consensus on this
occasion. I would, however, recall that the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Resources Management,
Ms. Salim, informed the Fifth Committee on 26 March

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
that the Secretary-General continued to believe that he had
fully complied with the provisions of resolution 52/214.
This confirmed our own understanding of the position.
While it is for the General Assembly to decide upon the
number of official holidays to be accorded, it is for the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the staff, to decide
upon their allocation. To our knowledge, the General
Assembly has never in the past instructed the
Secretary-General in this way to allocate official holidays
in any specific fashion. In our view, it is wrong for it to do
so now. We therefore deeply regret the action we have
taken, first in the Fifth Committee and now here today,
which impinges directly upon the authority of the
Secretary-General and contravenes the principles of the
United Nations Charter.
The United Nations is, like the European Union itself,
an Organization of Member States which spans such a
broad range of traditions that, in order to respect all, it must
not privilege any. For this reason we attach the greatest
importance to the principles of equality enshrined in the
Charter. That is why we worked so hard to support those
who sought to explore all possible means to avoid this
outcome.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): I take
the floor today to address an issue of concern to the United
States, but one which we do not believe needed to come to
this pass. The issue of what holidays should be officially
celebrated at United Nations Headquarters and its duty
stations has become one of the most sensitive issues which
the General Assembly has considered at this session.
We are deeply concerned that the decision increases
the number of officially observed holidays. While we trust
the assurances from the Secretariat that increasing the
number of holidays will not have financial and budgetary
implications, our concerns remain straightforward: we
should not send a contradictory signal to the world that, at
a time when reform of this Organization should be
paramount, we would increase the number of officially
recognized holidays in which the staff has additional time
off.
The United Nations needs to be made more efficient
and cost-effective; increasing the number of officially
observed holidays does not work towards the goal of United
Nations reform. The perception alone of such a move is
contrary to reform.

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
We are also concerned that the decision undermines
the Secretary-General’s prerogative as chief administrative
officer of the Organization, to establish the holidays
observed at the different duty stations, on the basis of the
customs and practices of the various host countries. We
note that the United Nations currently recognizes over 50
holidays, which are celebrated as appropriate at the
various United Nations headquarters and duty stations.
Finally — and this is perhaps the most sensitive
aspect — we remain deeply concerned that the current
decision to make mandatory the observance of two
religious holidays at all United Nations duty stations is
not in conformity with the secular nature of the United
Nations; nor does it promote equity among the very
diverse religions and cultures of the Member States of the
Organization, as reflected in the spirit and intent of the
Charter.
During discussions in the Fifth Committee, the
United States expressed all these concerns and sought to
amend the proposed decision in order to find a reasonable
compromise. Unfortunately, our efforts did not prevail.
Nonetheless, we reluctantly join consensus at this time on
the proposed decision.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Having joined in the adoption
of draft decision I, I should like to make a brief statement
to explain my delegation’s position.
Earlier on, my delegation had to vote against the
draft decision (A/C.5/52/L.26) in the Fifth Committee
because the matter was prematurely put to the vote before
every effort to achieve consensus had been exhausted.
That is a well-established tradition in that Committee.
Also, the draft decision appears to depart from the
understanding of Member States at the time when the
General Assembly adopted resolution 52/214 A a few
months ago during the current session of the General
Assembly.
My delegation believes that official holidays at each
Secretariat duty station should be more appropriately
designated within the purview of the Secretary-General as
chief administrative officer of the Organization rather than
instructed by a decision of the General Assembly.
Therefore, my delegation welcomes the most recent
efforts made, which have led to the plenary taking action
today without a vote. We are pleased with the statement
made today by Under-Secretary-General Jin on behalf of
the Secretariat that through the Secretary-General’s

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
administrative adjustment, the present decision will not
entail programme budget implications.
Based on this clarification, my delegation takes that
decision to be consistent with the understanding of Member
States reached at the time of the adoption of resolution
52/214 A. It is for this reason that my delegation has
decided to join the consensus adoption of the present
decision in a spirit of cooperation and compromise.
Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar): On behalf of the member
States of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC),
I take this opportunity to extend my thanks to all. To me,
the adoption of the draft decision designating Ed Al-Fitr
and Ed Al-Adha as United Nations holidays represents a
new epoch of equality within this, our United Nations. Our
member States are very active in the work of the United
Nations. A number of our citizens are civil servants of this
Organization, and it is about time that our rights and theirs
are recognized. We do not believe that this is a regional
Organization, nor do we believe that secularism or financial
implications had anything to do with any position taken by
any country. We think there is something other than that.
But this is all behind us now, and again I extend my thanks
to all.
Mr. Hanson (Canada) (interpretation from French):
My delegation is pleased to associate itself with the
consensus that has emerged today on this issue. We are
pleased mainly because a vote was avoided and we have
returned to the procedure that is most suited to this kind of
decision.
(spoke in English)
We regretted that this matter was forced to a vote in the
Fifth Committee, and we are glad that it has been avoided
today.
My delegation has supported this decision, principally
on the basis of its own national practice. To have 10 days
of official holidays generally conforms to Canadian
practice, and is in fact slightly less generous than Canadian
practice. My delegation finds it necessary to recall,
however, that the United Nations is not a sectarian
Organization. It does not observe the holy days of any
religion in any religious sense. Instead, its legislative bodies
decide not to meet from time to time, in deference to the
needs and religious devotions of Member States and their
representatives, and at each duty station the Secretariat does
not work on a set number of days which are decided by the
Assembly.

10

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
My delegation continues to believe that the selection
of staff holidays at each duty station must continue to be
set by the Secretary-General in consultation with the staff,
in accordance with the Charter and the staff rules. The
decision which we have adopted today does not diminish
the authority of the Secretary-General. We therefore
welcome the statement made here today by the
representative of the Secretary-General, in whom we
continue to have complete confidence.
Mr. Armitage (Australia): My delegation believes
strongly in the importance of the principle of consensus
decision-making, particularly in relation to financial and
administrative issues in the United Nations. We accept
that we will not always be fully comfortable with the
compromises this approach inevitably requires, but we
take the view that our long-term interests and the interests
of the Organization are best served by the consensus
approach.
We have joined consensus on this occasion in
adopting draft decision I, but with reservations as to the
way it has been achieved and in particular the fact that it
is underpinned by a vote in the Fifth Committee. Voting
on such an issue was, in our view, an extremely
disappointing development which we hope will remain an
exception to usual practice.
My delegation attaches considerable importance to,
and will argue strongly for, the right of all Members to
observe their religious, cultural or political traditions.
However, that was not at issue in the present case. The
departure from the use of local practice as the primary
criterion for designating official holidays raises concerns,
both as a possible precedent and in light of the secular
nature of the Organization. In our view, the designation
of official holidays in the United Nations is the
responsibility of the Secretary-General, in consultation
with staff, taking into account local practice at each duty
station.
We are concerned also about the implications of this
decision for the authority of the Secretary-General as the
chief administrative officer and for the integrity of the
staff-management relationship. We are pleased with the
Secretariat’s statement here today.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 119.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

Agenda items 123 and 159 (continued)

Agenda item 136

Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/844)

Report of the
(A/52/547/Add.1)

Fifth

Committee

(Part

II)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of part II of its report
(A/52/547/Add.1).

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/52/844).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/229).

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 136.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/8 B).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda items 123 and 159.
Agenda item 125
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara

Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/845)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 5 of its report (A/52/845).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/843)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/52/843).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 141.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/228).
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 125.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote.

Agenda item 142 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
(a) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth
(A/52/453/Add.2)

Committee

(Part

III)

May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 143.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 9 of part III of its report
(A/52/453/Add.2) and on the draft decision recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 10 of the same
document.

Agenda item 153 (continued)

The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”,
without a vote.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of part II of its report
(A/52/739/Add.1).

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the audit of the use of consultants”, without
a vote.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 52/230).
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft decision, entitled “Implementation of General
Assembly resolutions 49/249 and 50/224”, without a vote.

Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (Part II)
(A/52/739/Add.1)

May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item
142.
Agenda item 143
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/846)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 5 of its report (A/52/846).

12

The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision II,
entitled “Report submitted by the Secretary-General on
behalf of and with the approval of the members of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination on the respect
for the privileges and immunities of officials of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and related
organizations”, without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: We have concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 153.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
