A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/80
11 January 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 81
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/50/601)]
50/80.

Maintenance of international security
A
Permanent neutrality of Turkmenistan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the permanent neutrality of
Turkmenistan,
Reaffirming the sovereign right of every State to determine
independently its foreign policy in accordance with the norms and principles
of international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming the legislative confirmation by Turkmenistan of its status of
permanent neutrality,
Welcoming also the desire of Turkmenistan to play an active and positive
role in developing peaceful, friendly and mutually beneficial relations with
the countries of the region and other States of the world,
Expressing the hope that the status of permanent neutrality of
Turkmenistan will contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the
region,
Taking note of the support by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
by the Economic Cooperation Organization of the status of permanent neutrality
of Turkmenistan,
Recognizing that the adoption by Turkmenistan of the status of permanent
neutrality does not affect the fulfilment of its obligations under the Charter
and will contribute to the achievement of the purposes of the United Nations,

96-76123

/...

A/RES/50/80
Page 2

1.
Recognizes and supports the status of permanent neutrality
declared by Turkmenistan;
2.
Calls upon States Members of the United Nations to respect and
support this status of Turkmenistan and also to respect its independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995
B
Development of good-neighbourly relations among Balkan States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, the annex to
which contains the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and its resolutions 46/62 of 9 December 1991 and 48/84
B of 16 December 1993,
Affirming its determination that all nations should live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours,
Emphasizing the urgency of the consolidation of the Balkans as a region
of peace, security, stability and good-neighbourliness, thus contributing to
the maintenance of international peace and security and so enhancing the
prospects for sustained development and prosperity for all its peoples,
Noting the desire of the Balkan States to develop good-neighbourly
relations among themselves and friendly relations with all nations in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Welcoming the present international efforts aimed at achieving an
overall political settlement of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the development
of good-neighbourly relations among the Balkan States, 1/
Stressing the importance of the ongoing cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Taking note of its deliberations on the subject at its present session,
1.
Notes with interest the views of some States on the development of
good-neighbourly relations among the Balkan States contained in the report of
the Secretary-General;
2.
Urges relevant international organizations and competent bodies
and organizations of the United Nations system to submit to the
Secretary-General their views on the subject;
3.
Calls upon all Balkan States to endeavour to promote
good-neighbourly relations and continually to undertake unilateral and joint

1/

A/50/412 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/50/80
Page 3

activities, particularly confidence-building measures as appropriate, in
particular within the framework of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe;
4.
Emphasizes the importance for all Balkan States to promote mutual
cooperation in all fields;
5.
Stresses that closer engagement of Balkan States in cooperation
arrangements on the European continent will favourably influence the political
and economic situation in the region, as well as the good-neighbourly
relations among all Balkan States;
6.
Urges normalization of the relations among all States of the
Balkan region;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek the views of
the Member States, particularly those from the Balkan region, and of
international organizations, as well as of competent organs of the United
Nations, on the development of good-neighbourly relations in the region and on
measures and preventive activities aimed at the creation of a stable zone of
peace and cooperation in the Balkans by the year 2000, and to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session taking into account, inter
alia, the views expressed by Member States;
8.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the
subject at its fifty-second session.
90th plenary meeting
12 December 1995
