S/PV.8165

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8165th meeting

Wednesday, 24 January 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Umarov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kazakhstan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. French

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2017/1109)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-01977 (E)
*1801977*

S/PV.8165

The situation in the Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2017/1109)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, and Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2017/1109, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: It is now almost one year since
Somalia underwent a peaceful transition of power
and the election of President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo. Like many new Governments,
his has been through a steep learning curve. In the
process, it has crafted a commendable national agenda
embracing financial reform, job creation, inclusive
politics, conflict resolution and reform of the security
sector. The focus is now on the essential task of
developing a plan for security transition.
In implementing that multipronged agenda, the
Federal Government is facing a number of major
challenges. One is the mobilization of adequate
technical and financial capacity. Another is ensuring
coherent and coordinated approaches by both national
and international actors. A third is successfully
managing the powerful constituencies that need to
2/11

24/01/2018

be on side. Those include federal member states,
parliamentarians, clan power brokers, the private sector
and international partners.
It is encouraging that following a period of
tension between federal member states and the Federal
Government late last year, the relationship has stabilized.
The form and structure of Somalia’s federal system
remains a matter of vigorous debate, but the renewed
commitment of the Federal Government and federal
member states to cooperate to address Somalia’s needs
is essential in order to make progress on all fronts. The
improving relationship between the Government and the
private sector is also encouraging, as evidenced by the
adoption of the telecommunications act — a milestone
in public regulation of the economy — and by an
increase in business confidence and domestic revenues.
In December, the International Monetary Fund
commended the Somali authorities’ progress on policy
reforms and its successful completion of the country’s
first staff-monitored programme since the end of the
civil war. That is setting the country on a pathway that
leads both to debt relief, increased public and private
sector loans and investment, and to more money for
basic services and infrastructure. That Somalia’s
relationship with international partners remains strong
was apparent at the Somalia Security Conference and
the Partnership Forum, held in Mogadishu in early
December 2017. The Government believes that it needs
and deserves greater financial support to implement its
reform agenda, even if that involves some calculated
risks by donors.
Somali politics, however, remain turbulent. In
December, tensions were sharply increased in Mogadishu
by the violent arrest by the National Intelligence and
Security Agency of a prominent opposition politician
and by a raid on the house of a leading parliamentarian.
The recent replacement of the Mayor has also created
waves. Those incidents have highlighted basic problems
that need to be addressed, such as inadequate rules and
safeguards governing the conduct of politics, including
impeachment procedures; blurred roles and lines of
accountability of the many security actors; and the
perpetuation of corrupt practices and of untraceable
money in the political marketplace.
Corruption is a blight, undermining reform efforts
and limiting the confidence and trust of Somalis in their
leaders and institutions. The effects can be seen in all
areas of public life from business to politics, justice to
18-01977

24/01/2018

The situation in the Somalia

security, while playing into the hands of extremists. The
Government has declared its determination to develop
plans to address corruption in the coming year. In the
meantime, all Somali actors need to respect the rule of
law and resist the use of violence against their political
opponents. Otherwise, the risk is that the many positive
developments under way will be overshadowed, and
the Government’s ability to implement its broader
agenda and improve the lives of the population will
be undermined.
The scale of the challenges facing the country are
daunting. Chronic poverty and persistent humanitarian
needs are casting an ominous shadow over Somalia. The
risk of famine continues to loom after four consecutive
failed rainy seasons. The 2018 humanitarian response
plan calls for $1.6 billion. Although famine was averted
in 2017 thanks to national leadership, collective
humanitarian action and historic levels of donor support,
food security needs are nearly double the five-year
average, and an estimated 6.2 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Malnutrition reached
emergency levels in many locations and is expected to
increase. Drought and conflict have displaced more
than 2 million people within the country — up to a
million of them in the last 12 months — including many
children and more than 80,000 pregnant women.
Given the recurrent nature of droughts in
Somalia, an imperative is to address the root causes
of Somalia’s fragility and build resilience to shocks.
That is needed to prevent further refugee flows and
displacement. Humanitarian interventions must be
complemented by investment in job-creating public
works and infrastructure. The basis for that will be
the drought impact needs assessment and recovery
resilience framework, which is being developed by
the Federal Government with support from the United
Nations, the World Bank and the European Union.
Continued support will be needed to help Somalia
break the cycle of recurrent crises that cause so
much suffering and undermine the peacebuilding and
State-building process.
Central to that process is gaining political agreement
as to how power will be exercised, shared and accounted
for. That requires progress in three key areas: review
of the provisional federal constitution, preparation for
the 2020-2021 elections, and conflict resolution and
reconciliation. The national constitutional convention
scheduled for March and/or April is expected to launch
the next phase of the constitutional review process,

S/PV. 8165

focusing on resource- and power-sharing between the
Federal Government and the federal member states, the
status of Mogadishu and harmonization of the Federal
and member state constitutions.
In December 2017, the National Independent
Electoral Commission launched its strategic plan to
achieve universal elections. That will require sustained
political support and donor funding. Registration of
political parties will help stabilize politics. Thus far,
seven have been registered, including one led by a
woman. Registration is also an essential step towards
holding universal elections. Immediate priorities
include the development and adoption of the electoral
law by the Parliament, reaching agreement on the
system of representation, decisions on voter registration
and ongoing capacity-building and the institutional
development of the national Independent Electoral
Commission, including in the Federal member states.
Regarding conflict resolution and reconciliation,
the Federal Government plans to launch a national
strategy in the coming months, while recognizing
the multifaceted nature of the many disputes and
grievances in the country. On the ground, there has
been some significant progress. Since 2015, Galmudug
has been split between the state authorities and Ahlu
Sunna Wal Jama’a, with the state administration
displaced to Cadaado. On 18 January in Dhusamareb,
President Farmajo oversaw a ceremony to mark an
agreement between the two to merge Assemblies,
constitutions and security arrangements, and return the
state administration to Dhusamareb — an agreement
reached through political dialogue. That bodes well for
efforts to resolve other disputes including in Galkayo.
Several continue to simmer, while creating space for
and distracting attention from the bigger threat posed
by Al-Shabaab.
There is a serious danger that long-standing disputes
between Puntland and Somaliland, and in particular an
armed stand-off in Sool, could erupt into violence in
the coming days, with potentially grave consequences.
That closely follows delayed presidential elections and
the orderly and peaceful transfer of power that took
place in Somaliland late last year. With the support of
international partners, including many on the Council,
I have urged the leaders of Puntland and Somaliland
to declare a cessation of hostilities, withdraw their
forces, restore the status quo ante and open channels
of communication.

18-019773/11

S/PV.8165

The situation in the Somalia

Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat, despite, or
perhaps because, it is on the back foot as a result of
financial pressures, counter-terrorism operations and
air strikes. On 14 October, Mogadishu suffered the most
deadly attack caused by an improvised explosive devise
ever perpetrated, with an estimated 512 people killed,
nearly all of whom were civilians. On 10 December
2017, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
released its first public report, entitled “Protection of
civilians: building the foundations for peace, security
and human rights in Somalia”, which covers the period
from 1 January 2016 to 14 October 2017. It documented
a total of 2,078 civilians killed and 2,507 injured.
The large majority of those casualties are attributable
to Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab abducted civilians and
conducted targeted assassinations and summary
executions. In addition, 729 civilians were abducted
by Al-Shabaab, of whom 403 were released. Five days
ago, the Somali National Army’s Danab special forces
rescued 36 children from an Al-Shabaab training
camp, many of whom had been forcibly recruited into
the movement.
Defeating Al-Shabaab will require both a military
and political strategy — the use of both sticks and
carrots — as well as sustained efforts to address
deficits that lend extremists a degree of credibility.
Those include corruption, the lack of educational and
job opportunities for young people, weak national
justice and corrections capacity, and grievances
arising from unresolved disputes. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains fundamental
to security in the country and can take credit for having
created the space to allow Somalia’s political progress
over the last decade. I pay tribute to the bravery and
sacrifice of its troops, and am grateful to the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their commitment
to Somalia.
AMISOM cannot stay indefinitely. This year will
require a dedicated effort by the Somali leadership,
the African Union and international partners to build
political acceptability and operational capability of the
Somali security sector. That should enable AMISOM
to gradually hand over responsibility to Somali
security forces and to enable the Federal and state
Governments as per the agreements in the national
security architecture to exercise a monopoly over the
use of force. The current situation, whereby security
responsibilities are fragmented, often privately
4/11

24/01/2018

controlled and unaccountable, is both dangerous
and untenable.
To that end, on 4 December 2017, the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
agreed to develop a transition plan in the first quarter of
this year, working closely with international partners,
most importantly the African Union, the troop- and
police-contributing countries and major international
investors in Somalia’s security, including the European
Union. They agreed to create a conditions-based plan
with clear milestones and target dates. It will be rooted
in the comprehensive approach to security to ensure
that planning focuses not only on military handover but
also on policing, the rule of law and the strengthening
of basic local governance, all of which are essential to
sustaining security gains and to the credibility of the
State. The transition plan will be the basis for securing
future support for Somalia’s security sector, and
for AMISOM.
The starting point for the plan is not ideal. The
Federal Government of Somalia has undertaken
an operational readiness assessment of the Somali
National Army and the Somali Police Force, providing
a much clearer understanding of their capability. They
have revealed multiple deficits and the enormous
challenge ahead in translating the national security
architecture into reality on the ground. AMISOM’s
continued presence will therefore be essential. The
premature drawdown of AMISOM forces would be a
gift to Al-Shabaab and risks undermining the gains that
have been made, at great human and financial cost, over
the past decade. The United Nations will continue to
work closely with the African Union and key security
investors to explore sustainable, predictable funding
mechanisms for AMISOM, and support to AMISOM to
effectively fulfil its mandate.
Progress is being made. The 2,400 Puntland defence
forces have been integrated into the Somali National
Army — a possible model for integration in other parts
of the country. There is agreement on the allocation of
police numbers for each state, for Mogadishu and the
Federal Government. Each federal member state has
developed a state police plan. A harmonized justice and
corrections model has been endorsed by the National
Security Council, which provides the basis for the
establishment of an independent and impartial justice
system. Action plans have been developed to implement
the national strategy on preventing and countering
violent extremism.
18-01977

24/01/2018

The situation in the Somalia

The human rights situation continues to be of
great concern. The rule of law is weak and capacities
and mechanisms to protect and promote basic rights
are lacking. Forced evictions, sexual violence and the
repression of freedom of expression are among the many
indicators, with marginalized and minority groups
being particularly vulnerable. The United Nations
is supporting the Federal Government to strengthen
frameworks, institutions and measures for upholding
human rights, address impunity and improve the
protection of women and children, and to take action to
end the involvement of children in armed conflict. The
formation of the national human rights commission is a
positive step forward.
Somalia is making definite progress, though the
risks remain real. It is fortunate to have a Government
that is committed to implementing reform, resolving
conflicts and meeting the formidable social, economic
and security needs of the population. Continued
progress is dependent not only on the strong political
will and skill of the Federal Government, but also on
cooperation and partnership with federal member states,
Parliament, clan elders, business and international
partners. When all of those constituencies cooperate,
huge strides can be made.

S/PV. 8165

impact on the country, and on our joint endeavour to
contain Al-Shabaab and put an end to insurgency and
violent extremism in the country and in the region. The
signing at Villa Somalia in Mogadishu on 6 December
2017 of the peace, unity and reconciliation agreement
between the President of Galmudug, Mr. Ahmed Duale
Geele “Xaaf”, and the leader of Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama’a, Mr. Sheikh Mohamud Shakir, and the highlevel ceremony on 18 January in Dhusamareb, marking
the beginning of the implementation of the agreement
in the presence of President Farmajo, the Head of State
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, is a very positive
development in the reconciliation process among the
political class in Galmudug. That important event, which
also included a reconciliation tour by President Farmajo
of towns and villages in Puntland and Galmudug,
is a clear demonstration of the determination of the
Somali people to strive to put aside their differences
and concentrate on the factors that unite them in order
to allow peace, unity and stability to be restored not
only in Galmudug, but also in the entire territory of the
Federal Republic of Somalia.

I bring the Council greetings from the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, who acknowledges the immense efforts that
the Council, the Federal Government of Somalia and
the African Union are making to restore peace, security
and prosperity to Somalia and its people.

In that vein, we congratulate President Mohamed
Farmajo for using his wisdom to convene and chair
a nine-day high-level consultative meeting with the
country’s top political leadership, thereby helping to
ease the difficult political environment surrounding the
crisis, and allowing for a profound and comprehensive
engagement by the political class and agreements to
be reached on the way to handle a variety of issues of
central importance for the future of the country. Those
agreements, which sought the most suitable ways to
improve security in the country and eliminate terrorism,
promote the federal system, fast-track the review of the
provisional constitution, adopt a unified approach to the
2020 electoral process, strengthen cooperation between
the Federal Government and the federal member states,
create development projects and provide humanitarian
assistance, highlight the importance of bridging gaps
in the national security architecture, accelerate the
formation of an integrated national army, reconfigure
defence forces and establish a technical committee of
the National Security Council to work on police force
and coastguard allocations, are central to our joint
efforts to approach security in a comprehensive manner
and to ensure lasting stability for the country.

Since my last statement to the Council (see
S/PV.7905), Somalia has witnessed political and
security developments, which had a considerable

The strong manifestation of unity of the Somali
political leadership is central and indispensable
to the success of our collective efforts in Somalia.

I strongly encourage Somali stakeholders to unite
to tackle those priorities and make 2018 a year of
implementation. Allow me to take this opportunity
to encourage international partners to continue their
financial generosity, their support for strengthening
technical capacities, and to be transparent and
coordinated in their assistance.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Sir, for another
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains
a great honour for me.

18-019775/11

S/PV.8165

The situation in the Somalia

Extreme poverty, insurgency, intolerance, entrenched
community grievances, ideological competition, violent
extremism and terrorism are some of the important
factors influencing the persistent volatile political
and security environment in the country. The newly
found unity of the Somali political leadership needs to
be harnessed. It is needed for these challenges to be
tackled and addressed comprehensively, concurrently
and with renewed determination.
Currently, the security situation in Somalia remains
volatile. Al-Shabaab attacks in the form of very crude
bombs. Improvised explosive devices, ambushes,
targeted assassinations and grenade attacks are being
registered with concerning regularity. On 14 October,
we saw the horrific example of the destruction that
Al-Shabaab can bring to Somalia and its people when,
in a cowardly attack, the group drove a large bomb that
exploded at the busy Zobe intersection in Mogadishu,
killing more than 500 people and injuring many
hundreds more.
The Zobe massacre was Somalia’s deadliest
terrorist attack and its scale shocked many beyond
Somalia and the region, yet, in the true spirit of the
brave Somali people, the massacre not only sparked
widespread protest against Al-Shabaab, but it also
united all the Somalis. Indeed, winning the people to
our side and denying Al-Shabaab territorial space and
shelter among the Somali communities is key to success
in our common endeavour to restore comprehensive
peace and security in Somalia. At a time when Somalia
was at its lowest, following the attack, we saw the
immediate and appropriate response from the Federal
Government. Not only did President Farmajo rally the
country behind a united front, but he also called for
an extraordinary session of parliament to direct both
houses to strategize on what additional courses of action
needed to be undertaken to effectively fight a common
enemy. We also note the President’s commendable
efforts to consult with and garner support from the
troop-contributing countries of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) following the attack.
This year is a crucial one for the African Union
and AMISOM in Somalia. This is tied to our current
mandate under resolution 2372 (2017), which requests
that AMISOM’s troops be drawn down, its police
personnel scaled up and offensive operations conducted
against Al-Shabaab. In spite of the burden this has
placed upon AMISOM and Somalia, AMISOM’s troop
levels have gone down and currently stand at 20,537
6/11

24/01/2018

following its drawdown in 2017. We have also seen the
additional deployment of police from Nigeria and, in
the coming weeks, we expect another formed police
unit from Sierra Leone.
As AMISOM prepares for its eventual exit from
Somalia, we are in regular contact with the Federal
Government, consulting on how to ensure that
AMISOM’s transfer of its security responsibilities
is not only seamless, but also conditions-based and
responsible, as mandated by the Council in August.
That is why the African Union and AMISOM have
continued to engage the Federal Government on the
transition process. In that vein, both the African
Union and AMISOM offered valuable observations
on the Government’s transition plan and co-chaired
the Government’s transition planning meeting of
15 January, which led to the establishment of a
transitional plan core group.
On the African Union and AMISOM’s part, we
wish to see coherence among various stakeholders
in Somalia’s transition plan. We also wish to see an
appropriate mechanism for leading the transition
plan that avoids duplication of efforts and takes into
consideration the 1 December 2017 decisions, in
particular the operationalization of the Somali-African
Union joint task force.
AMISOM looks forward to achieving a realistic
and responsible transition. We will work with the
Somali National Army and other stakeholders to
undertake robust operations against Al-Shabaab. We
will continue to secure main supply routes, protect
population centres and build infrastructure — such
as key bridges — in order to link population centres
and support humanitarian activities. These operations,
however, are all subject to the availability of requisite
support and force enablers and multipliers.
Permit me to remind the Council that the plan for
transition from AMISOM to the Somali security forces,
as requested in resolution 2372 (2017), anticipated a
national army built on the basis of the principle of four
As — a Somali army that is acceptable, accountable,
affordable and able. With the release of the Federal
Government’s frank and transparent operational
readiness assessment report in December, the African
Union and AMISOM share the Government’s assessment
that the Somali National Army, in its current state of
readiness, is not in a position to assume responsibility
from AMISOM forces currently deployed in Somalia.
18-01977

24/01/2018

The situation in the Somalia

The main objective of the operational readiness
assessment has been achieved to determine the current
operational capability of the Somali National Army and
its readiness to assume AMISOM’s responsibilities.
However, the African Union and AMISOM consider
the operational readiness assessment to be a process
that identifies gaps in the Somali National Army that
must be addressed before AMISOM can effectively
and responsibly transition. AMISOM, by far, carries
the burden of security in Somalia. We will continue to
mentor the Somali National Army and the Somali Police
Force, as requested by the Council resolution, until a
time when the conditions are deemed appropriate for
Somalia to have a transition to full sovereignty of its
security responsibility. Those must include operational
readiness assessment for the regional forces in the
coming weeks and months.
Resolution 2372 (2017) called for a revision of
AMISOM’s concept of operations. In the light of the
challenges faced by AMISOM in the implementation of
the current concept of operations, the Heads of State,
the Heads of Chiefs of Defence staff of the troop- and
police-contributing countries held a meeting in Addis
Ababa on 1 December 2017. They recommended
that the African Union Commission review the
Mission’s concept of operations, in collaboration with
other relevant stakeholders. We intend to work with
everybody. We will exclude no one, and we intend to
make sure that the concept of operations is in line with
the Government’s transition plan. We need a common
vision and approach so that the transition plan that the
Government of Somalia announced on 4 December is
one that we all share and are ready to implement. While
the consultations for a new concept of operations have
begun, the completion of the operational readiness
assessment exercise will be crucial to developing a
final transition plan that will inform a revised concept
of operations for AMISOM.
In spite of the realities that the operational
readiness assessment has made us all confront, the
Federal Government continues to show some progress
on the common approach to security, notably the
operationalization of the National Security Council and
the chairing of the first meeting of the Executive Group
by Prime Minister Khayre in November 2017. While
that meeting was held to update the international donor
community on the progress of the various strands of the
common approach to security, more progress is needed
on strands 1 and 2, which, as far as we are concerned, are

S/PV. 8165

two sides of the same coin, since enabling AMISOM to
undertake robust operations, protect population centres
and secure and protect the main supply routes makes
sense only if we enable the Somalis to undertake these
operations alongside us and eventually take them over.
In order to achieve those goals and not risk a
reversal of the gains made by AMISOM and its Somali
partners, predictable and sustainable funding must be
made available not only for AMISOM but also for the
Somali security forces. We therefore welcome the joint
decision of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, and Secretary-General
António Guterres to appoint Mr. Ramtame Lamamra
and Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno as AMISOM’s financing
envoys. They must be listened to very carefully. They
are genuinely trying to help overcome a problem that
has posed so many challenges to us in Somalia. We
expect that generous contributions will come out of
their efforts. Their role will be crucial in the coming
months as our partners deliberate on AMISOM’s
funding and as the two envoys set out the parameters
for possible options for that funding in the future, as
well as that of the Somali National Army.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, for their detailed and
informative briefings today.
We would first like to commend the joint work
being done by the United Nations and the African
Union in Somalia. Their deployment of civilian,
military and police personnel in peacebuilding
efforts — rebuilding the State, strengthening the rule
of law, reforming the security sector and other essential
objectives — is crucial to the quest for stability and
security in the subregion. We believe that the support
and assistance efforts of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nation Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia must be conducted with
a high degree of transparency as well as greater and
better coordination and information exchanges.

18-019777/11

S/PV.8165

The situation in the Somalia

24/01/2018

In that regard, the road map for political stabilization
in Somalia is crucial, consisting principally of
formalizing the statute of the federal member states,
implementing the security strategy, and building
resilience and promoting socioeconomic change, which
requires the Somali Government to define its priorities
within the framework of its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. With regard to Somalia’s
socioeconomic transformation, we believe that in order
to ensure lasting and sustainable peace and make the
Somali State less fragile, it is essential not only to
reform the security sector but also to work to restructure
its foreign debt, since in the post-conflict phase there
can be no sustainable peace without development and
there will be no development at all if the debt issue is
not resolved. With regard to security-sector reform,
Somali ownership is essential, based on a relationship
of trust, consensus and inclusivity on the part of both
the Federal Government and the federal states. In that
regard, we want to emphasize UNSOM’s important role
in supporting the National Security Council, which we
consider crucial to improving capacities in the areas
of demobilization, reintegration and disarmament, as
well as the handling of arms, maritime security and
strengthening the country’s police forces.

use of improvised explosive devices, car bombs and
large-calibre weapons.

Bolivia fully supports the efforts of the African
Union to implement all initiatives for mediation,
preventive diplomacy and dialogue aimed at arriving at
peaceful and sustainable solutions to conflicts. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the work of AMISOM
and its personnel, some of whom have sacrificed their
lives in fulfilling their mandate. The Security Council
and the United Nations must continue helping to
strengthen its capacity so that Somalia’s security forces
can take on full responsibility for the maintenance of
security in their country as soon as possible.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the holding of this briefing and express our
gratitude to Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), for his comprehensive briefing. We also
appreciate the briefing by the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira.

We are very concerned about the threat that
Al-Shabaab continues to pose in Somalia, constantly
endangering the process of political stabilization and
increasing tensions in the subregion through its deadly
and complex attacks on innocent civilians, the Somali
security forces and AMISOM. The attacks have once
again demonstrated the impact of this terrorist group
and the importance of coming up with measures to
counter its threats, especially in Mogadishu, where
attacks such as the one that occurred on 14 October
of last year have resulted in the loss of hundreds of
innocent lives and great material damage due to the
8/11

We are also concerned about the continued
precarious humanitarian situation. The abduction,
recruitment and indoctrination of child soldiers
persist, as does sexual violence against women and
girls, especially those who have suffered forced
displacement. We appreciate UNSOM’s coordination
with the United Nations Development Programme in
implementing support programmes for protecting the
victims of sexual violence and establishing preventive
measures. At the same time, the risk of famine is having
serious consequences for the most vulnerable sectors
of the population. In that regard, Bolivia condemns
anyone who obstructs humanitarian aid and demands
that the parties permit and facilitate the people’s full
and speedy access to supplies.
In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue working in close coordination with the
United Nations and the African Union in the interests of
consolidating peace, stability and security in Somalia
through inclusive dialogue and the implementation of
effective security mechanisms that will enable it once
and for all to eliminate threats to the peace process and
above all to the entire Somali people.

Peru supports the goal of achieving sustainable
peace in Somalia and vigorously condemns the terrorist
barbarism of Al-Shabaab. We also express our concern
about the serious human rights violations seen in the
country, especially the rights of boys and girls, many of
whom are victims of recruiting.
We also we want to recognize the progress made
by Somalia and the efforts of the new Government,
specifically in the process of building a federal State,
including the outline of a national security strategy,
despite the difficult circumstances and the fact that
much remains to be done in Somalia. We commend
the dialogue between the Federal Government and the
federal member states on, inter alia, agreeing on the
18-01977

24/01/2018

The situation in the Somalia

principles that should form the basis of that strategy.
We also welcome the establishment of the National
Security Council. We believe it is critical that there be
a gradual and orderly transition of responsibilities in
the area of security from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to Somali authorities, while
ensuring that they be properly prepared to respond
adequately to existing threats.
Along the same lines, we commend the steps taken
towards the building of a Somali police service and the
Somali National Army. My delegation is convinced that,
in addition to those institutions, joint and coordinated
action is necessary at all levels of Government. It is
key to continue building trust between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, as well
as to provide them with stability and predictability in
distributing roles and responsibilities among them. In
that regard, we believe an overhaul of the Constitution
is critical to resolve key issues of the conflict. We
welcome the adoption of a road map, and we stress
the need to agree on a division of powers and a model
for managing and controlling natural resources and
distributing income.
The political divisions that have existed in Somalia
are perhaps the biggest obstacle to the reforms the country
needs. National reconciliation should be understood as
a grassroots-driven process that is initiated by society
from the local level to the federal level. We believe it
is appropriate to evaluate the possibility of beginning
parallel preparations for universal elections in 2020 and
2021. We believe that encouraging greater participation
by women and young people in the elections could have
a substantial impact on consolidating a national agenda
focused on sustainable development in the country.
Those efforts must go hand in hand with affirmative
policies in the areas of human rights and international
humanitarian law for the entire population.
We recognize the significant contributions of
AMISOM, UNSOM and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and their partners in
bringing about peace and stability in the country. We
believe that it is important to provide predictable and
sustainable financing for AMISOM in order to avert
risks related to a premature or sudden drawdown, as it
is quite possible that that would reverse the substantial
political progress made over the past decade. It is
also important to maintain coordinated efforts among
AMISOM, UNSOM and UNSOS and the countries
that contribute to the peace process. In that regard, it

S/PV. 8165

is worrying that differences among some countries in
the Middle East may be accentuating the differences
between the central Government and the federal
member states.
Moreover, we would like to commend the initiative
to complement the response to the humanitarian
crisis in Somalia with a preventive perspective.
The drought needs assessment will help the Federal
Government understand the factors that contribute to
the vulnerability of the country.
Lastly, given this situation, it is important to
bear in mind that more than half of the workingage population, most of whom are young people, are
currently unemployed — a situation exacerbated by
the return of 400,000 refugees. We therefore commend
the fact that the Government has launched a national
development plan aimed at promoting the recovery
of the Somali economy and tackling the deep-seated
causes of the conflict, and we hope it will receive the
support of the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): Please allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to acknowledge the successful tenure
of your predecessor and the positive role he played in
leading the Council last month.
The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to making continuous progress on security and
financial reform. There has been much progress since
the Somalia Security Conference, including a plan for
the plan within the deadline, which was developed
in close cooperation with the federal member states.
The relationship between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states is strong,
as demonstrated by President Mohamed Abdullahi
Farmajo’s current peace tour in the north-eastern and
central regions of Somalia and his visit to Galkayo
with President Xaaf of Galmudug and President Gaas
of Puntland. During this week’s peace tour, President
Farmajo visited several towns in Puntland and
Galmudug states and held crucial meetings with state
leaders, elders, civil society groups and politicians
on the reconciliation process. The meeting that led
to the agreement between Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a
and Galmudug was another milestone. There has also
been close collaboration with the federal member

18-019779/11

S/PV.8165

The situation in the Somalia

states on economic recovery, including dealing with
anti-corruption issues and reform. A path to inclusive
politics has been charted, and discussions will now also
include security sector reform.
However, the existing arms embargo framework on
Somalia is major obstacle to the effective implementation
of our ambitious security sector reform plans. The
current arms embargo supports a disjointed supply of
weapons and ammunition to various different security
sector entities or federal member states, without the
knowledge or the approval of the Government. That
contributes to fragmenting our country and jeopardizes
our peacebuilding, our political progress and, above all,
the unity of Somalia.
There may be a rationale for limited specific
exemptions, but the arms embargo framework must be
closely aligned with the Somali security architecture.
The Monitoring Group, in its Implementation
Assistance Notice No. 2 of 2016, recognizes those
concerns and provides recommendations to the Security
Council, which have to date not been implemented. We
are a fragile, recovering State, and it is critical that
all members of the Security Council play their part
in influencing a reduction in the micromanaging and
current destabilizing levels of foreign interference in our
internal affairs, especially with regard to the ongoing
Gulf crisis. Needless to say, we see those concerns
as an affront to our sovereignty and independence.
In the past, there was less clarity on security than on
economic and political reform; but our national security
architecture now provides a comprehensive approach.
The devastating truck bomb explosion of 14 October
at a major junction in Mogadishu, which destroyed
property and killed over 500 innocent civilians, with
more than 200 injured or missing, was regarded as
the biggest and deadliest vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device terrorist attack in the world’s history.
That event again served to underscore the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group’s ability to stage large-scale attacks,
despite months-long offensives against it by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army (SNA). Somalia will forever remember
that dark day in our history. The Somali people and
our Government are more united than ever in the fight
against Al-Shabaab.
After the attack, on 11 November, the Prime
Minister chaired the first meeting of the executive
group on a comprehensive approach to security. Each
10/11

24/01/2018

of the group’s strands is led by a relevant member from
a federal ministry, with the support of international
partners, including AMISOM, the European Union,
the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the
United States. A critical priority is to enable AMISOM
operations by enhancing its operational effectiveness
and providing predictable and sustainable funding. In
that regard, it is crucial to listen to, and to take into
due consideration, the joint message of the African
Union and United Nations envoys on the AMISOM
funding consultations.
Moreover, the recently conducted operational
readiness assessment revealed that the Somali National
Army lacked the properly trained manpower, barracks,
weapons and ammunition, as well as logistical support.
The Somali National Army needs to be capacitated
in all fields — training, equipment, mobility and
weapons — to be able to inherit, hold and preserve the
gains achieved. Without support against the constraints
I mentioned, the transition from AMISOM to the Somali
national security forces will be a mirage. The transition
from AMISOM to the SNA should be conditions-based.
We take this opportunity to pay special tribute
to the African Union. Ten years ago, Somalia was in
a very different position, and Somalis everywhere are
grateful to AMISOM for the sacrifices made to help
our people. Somalia needs AMISOM for the transition
and the continued support of our partners in building
the Somali national security forces, based on our
national security architecture and the outcome of the
operational readiness assessment.
The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to carrying out democratic, transparent and credible
elections by 2020-2021 under the leadership of President
Farmajo. The holding of the elections in 2020-2021 is
clearly articulated in the provisional constitution of
the Federal Republic of Somalia. The political road
map emphasizes that democratization is an essential
component in building a viable State. The road map
sets out the critical steps necessary to achieve the
envisaged credible direct elections in 2020-2021, with
a division of roles, responsibilities and timelines of the
different constitutionally mandated institutions of the
Government. Accompanying the road map is a logical
framework matrix to monitor and evaluate progress, on
a weekly basis, on the political benchmarks of all the
relevant institutions by the Cabinet subcommittee for
inclusive politics, chaired by the Prime Minister.
18-01977

24/01/2018

The situation in the Somalia

I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the looming humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
According to United Nations specialized agencies,
6.2 million people are still in need of humanitarian
assistance due to the drought and the conflict in Somalia.
The agencies are particularly concerned that the belowaverage rainfalls for a fourth consecutive season and
the forecast indications of a fifth consecutive belowaverage season indicate that the risk of famine remains
in many parts of Somalia in 2018. We also remain
concerned about the more than 1 million people who
have been newly displaced, in addition to the 1.2 million
already in a state of protracted displacement. We thank
our partners for their continued support and strongly
appeal to their generosity in taking the necessary
actions, including the provision of resources, to ensure
the continued delivery of urgent humanitarian relief.

S/PV. 8165

To conclude, my delegation wishes once again
to express to the Council the gratitude of the Somali
people and their Government for the efforts of the
United Nations to ensure peace and stability in their
country. I would also like to reiterate my Government’s
commitment to implementing its economic, political
and security reforms. The road to final peace may be
long and difficult but, with the support of our partners,
we are optimistic that we will continue on the path to
peace, progress and prosperity.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

18-0197711/11
