A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/229
22 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 102
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/54/590)]
54/229. United Nations Institute for Training and Research
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/207 of 21 December 1993, 49/125 of 19 December 1994, 50/121 of
20 December 1995, 51/188 of 16 December 1996, 52/206 of 18 December 1997 and 53/195 of 15 December
1998,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 and the reflections of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research on the development and possible reorganization of
the Institute,2
Welcoming the efforts towards consolidation of the restructuring process of the Institute and the recent
progress made by the Institute in its various programmes and activities, including the improved cooperation
that has been established with other organizations of the United Nations system and with regional and
national institutions,
Expressing its appreciation to the Governments and private institutions that have made or pledged
financial and other contributions to the Institute,

1

A/54/480.

2

A/54/390, annex.

00 27235

/...

A/RES/54/229
Page 2

Noting that contributions to the General Fund of the Institute have not increased along with the
increased participation of the developed countries in the training programmes, and stressing the urgent need
to address this discrepancy,
Reiterating that training activities should be accorded a more visible and larger role in support of the
management of international affairs and in the execution of the economic and social development
programmes of the United Nations system,
1. Reaffirms the importance of a coordinated United Nations system-wide approach to research and
training, and underlines the need for United Nations training and research institutions to avoid duplication
in their work;
2. Also reaffirms the relevance of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, in view of
the growing importance of training within the United Nations and the training requirements of States, and
the relevance of research activities related to training undertaken by the Institute within its mandate;
3. Stresses the need for the Institute to strengthen further its cooperation with other United Nations
institutes and relevant national, regional and international institutes;
4. Welcomes the progress made in building partnerships between the Institute and other agencies and
bodies of the United Nations system with respect to their training programmes, and, in this context,
underlines the need to develop further and to expand the scope of these partnerships, particularly at the
country level;
5. Stresses the need for continuity in the management of the Institute in order to ensure efficient and
effective completion of the process of restructuring and revitalization;
6. Requests the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to
intensify its efforts to attract experts from developing countries and countries with economies in transition
for the preparation of the relevant training materials for the programmes and activities of the Institute, and
stresses that the Institute’s courses should focus primarily on development issues;
7. Renews its appeal to all Governments, in particular those of developed countries, and to private
institutions that have not yet contributed financially or otherwise to the Institute to give it their generous
financial and other support, and urges the States that have interrupted their voluntary contributions to
consider resuming them in view of the successful restructuring and revitalization of the Institute;
8. Encourages the Board of Trustees of the Institute to continue its efforts to address the discrepancy
between the decline in contributions to the General Fund of the Institute and the increase in participation in
its programmes;
9. Also encourages the Board of Trustees to consider organizing events of the Institute at additional
sites, including the cities hosting regional commissions, in order to promote greater participation and to
reduce costs;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Institute and with United Nations funds
and programmes, to continue to explore ways and means systematically to utilize the Institute in the
execution of training and capacity-building programmes;
/...

A/RES/54/229
Page 3

11. Notes with appreciation the services rendered by the Executive Director of the Institute in the light
of the challenges emanating from the increased responsibilities encountered by his office;
12. Renews its call to the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible ways and means to
provide additional facilities to the Institute for maintaining its offices and for conducting programmes and
training courses that are provided at no cost to States and to their representatives accredited to United
Nations offices in New York, Nairobi, Geneva and Vienna;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
87th plenary meeting
22 December 1999
