S/PV.8716

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8716th meeting

Friday, 7 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Bencosme Castaños
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Allen
Mr. Barkin
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Tenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2020/95)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03163 (E)
*2003163*

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Tenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2020/95)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
and Ms. Mona Freij, civil society representative.
Ms. Freij is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Istanbul.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/95, which contains the tenth report
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: Let me begin by expressing my
sincere condolences to Afghanistan, Burkina Faso,
Egypt, Nigeria, Somalia and all other Member States
that recently suffered terrorist attacks. My heartfelt
thoughts and sympathy go to the survivors and the
families of the victims.
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the tenth report
(S/2020/95) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat, as mandated by
resolution 2368 (2017).
2/25

07/02/2020

As members of the Security Council are aware,
the report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), led by
Ms. Coninsx, and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, led by Mr. Edmund
Fitton-Brown, in close collaboration with my Office,
with contributions from other United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities.
ISIL lost its last stronghold in the Syrian Arab
Republic in March last year and saw a change in
leadership after the death of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi in
October; but this report shows that the group remains at
the centre of the transnational terrorism threat. We must
stay vigilant and united in confronting this scourge. ISIL
has continued to seek resurgence and global relevance
online and offline, aspiring to re-establish its capacity
for complex international operations. ISIL’s regional
affiliates continue to pursue a strategy of entrenchment
in conflict zones by exploiting local grievances.
Due to their high number, foreign terrorist fighters
who travelled to Iraq and Syria are expected to
continue to pose an acute short-, medium- and longterm threat, with estimates of those alive ranging from
20,000 to almost 27,000. The situation of ISIL fighters
and associated family members in detention and
displacement facilities in Iraq and Syria has worsened
since I presented to the Council the ninth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/612) on the threat posed
by the group (see S/PV.8605). Their fate remains a
major challenge to the international community. ISIL
has become increasingly focused on freeing them.
Meanwhile, most Member States have not yet assumed
responsibility for the repatriation of their nationals.
The report of the Secretary-General also highlights
relevant activities of United Nations entities in support
of Member States over the past six months, especially
in the light of the requirements under resolutions 2396
(2017), 2462 (2019), 2467 (2019), and 2482 (2019).
In the Middle East, ISIL’s reconstitution as a covert
network in Syria follows a similar pattern to that
followed in Iraq since 2017. The north-east of Syria
has seen a spike in attacks targeting the international
coalition against Da’esh and local non-State armed
groups. Along the Syrian-Iraqi border, the crossing of
fighters in both directions presents a challenge.
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8716

The most pressing challenge, however, is the
untenable situation of the more than 100,000 people
who remain stranded in detention and displacement
facilities in the north-east of Syria, of whom more than
70,000 are women and children in the Al-Hol camp.
Their situation has short-to-long-term implications that
require the urgent attention and action of all Member
States concerned. The humanitarian crisis on the
ground, together with issues related to physical security,
the risk of escapees and the potential radicalization to
violent extremism in the facilities, must be addressed.

In Asia, ISIL’s affiliate in Afghanistan suffered
a major setback in November 2019, with its virtual
expulsion from what had been its Afghan headquarters
in Nangarhar province. Nonetheless, ISIL remains
active, ambitious and threatening in the country and
has established informal contacts with other terrorist
groups. In South-East Asia, securing porous maritime
borders to prevent the movement of foreign terrorist
fighters is a challenge. Another persistent concern is the
role of women in the operational planning, financing
and execution of terrorist attacks in the region.

Reports of children deprived of their liberty and
interned in pre- and post-trial detention camps for their
actual or alleged association with ISIL remain of concern.
Children, including those with links to United Nationslisted terrorist groups, should be treated primarily as
victims, and any prosecution should be conducted in
accordance with internationally recognized standards.
The best solution is to get those children out of harm’s
way and back to their home countries with the rest of
their families as soon as possible.

I would like to highlight a few of the important
activities of my Office that are mentioned in the report.
Those efforts are possible only thanks to the generous
financial support of all our donors, including our three
largest donors — the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
State of Qatar and the European Union.

I urge Member States to shoulder their primary
responsibility for their nationals in terms of protection,
repatriation, gender-sensitive and age-appropriate
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies,
consistent with all their obligations under international
law, including international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law. I commend Member States that have
repatriated, or are in the process of repatriating,
their nationals suspected of having links with United
Nations-listed terrorist groups from Iraq and Syria.
With regard to Africa, in my previous briefing (see
S/PV.8605) I reported a striking increase in ISIL- and
Al-Qaida-linked recruitment and violence in the west of
the continent. Unfortunately, the situation has further
deteriorated and the trend is of even greater concern
today as the Islamic State’s West Africa Province in the
Lake Chad basin reinforces its links to the Islamic State
in the Greater Sahara.
In Europe, there are concerns about the anticipated
release this year of approximately 1,000 terrorismrelated convicts, including frustrated travellers and
returned foreign terrorist fighters, which is compounded
by persisting concerns about the effectiveness of
rehabilitation programmes. The continued threat of
online terrorist radicalization and ISIL-inspired attacks
by lone actors are also of concern.

Council members will recall that, at our previous
briefing, I reported on the development by the United
Nations system of the key principles to support Member
States in the protection, repatriation, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children
with links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups. The
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of my Office
is now finalizing a project with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and CTED to
support requesting Member States in that area, based
on those principles and the addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles.
The report also points out that countering the
financing of terrorism should remain a key focus area.
ISIL may still have as much as $300 million in financial
reserves. The need to cut access to funds for terrorists
was reiterated by the Council in resolution 2462 (2019).
In response to that resolution and in consultation with
CTED, the Counter-Terrorism Centre has expanded its
capacity-building efforts by developing a comprehensive
global counter-terrorism financing programme.
In the area of law enforcement and border security,
the implementation of the multi-agency United Nations
Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by my
Office to support Member States in implementing
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019), has
gained momentum. We currently count 33 confirmed
beneficiaries in different regions and are at different
stages of implementation in several pilot countries,
including Azerbaijan, Ghana, the Sudan and Togo.

20-031633/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Secretary-General’s report also emphasizes
that the diversion of small arms and light weapons,
improvised explosive device components and their
precursors continues to aggravate the situation in
conflict zones. In that regard, the Counter-Terrorism
Centre is launching a pilot project in Central Asia in
collaboration with CTED, as well as UNODC and the
Office for Disarmament Affairs, on the nexus between
organized crime and terrorism, with a focus on the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and
their supply to terrorists, in line with resolutions 2370
(2017) and 2482 (2019).
During the reporting period, my Office has also
continued to collaborate with partners to further the
implementation of other relevant Security Council
resolutions. Just a couple of days ago, Executive
Director Coninsx and I briefed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the increasing cooperation between the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and CTED and our efforts
to ensure that our capacity-building activities respond
to CTED recommendations.
Last week, the Counter-Terrorism Centre presented
its work on strategic communications during an open
briefing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
countering terrorist narratives in line with resolution
2354 (2017). CTED, INTERPOL and the CounterTerrorism Centre have organized regional expert
workshops to enhance the implementation of resolution
2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure,
and resolution 2396 (2017), on soft targets. My Office
has also developed a global programme on the protection
of vulnerable targets, in close coordination with CTED
and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations.
On Monday, we launched a new global programme
on the security of major sporting events and the
promotion of sports and its values to prevent and
counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism, in
partnership with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, the United Nations Interregional Crime
and Justice Research Institute and the International
Centre for Sport Security, which is based in Qatar.
As both the Council and the General Assembly
have repeatedly emphasized, international counterterrorism cooperation at all levels and with all relevant
stakeholders is indispensable. I therefore welcome the
initiative to invite a civil society briefer, Ms. Freij, to
this meeting. Civil society has an active role to play in
4/25

07/02/2020

support of efforts to prevent and counter terrorism, as
indicated in resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017).
The Madrid Guiding Principles and the addendum
thereto also emphasize the importance of community
engagement and civil society participation, particularly
that of women, in addressing the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon. The views of civil society are
crucial to effective, context-specific rehabilitation and
reintegration of returning foreign terrorist fighters and
their families.
My Office continues to sustain the momentum
from the first United Nations High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States, held in 2018, through the organization of regional
high-level conferences addressing priority issues under
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and Security Council resolutions. Since my previous
briefing we have held successful regional conferences,
in partnership with the Governments of Belarus,
Hungary and the United Arab Emirates, with strong
participation from Member States, civil society and
regional and international organizations.
Next week we will convene a joint conference in
Vienna with the Government of Switzerland and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
on the theme “Foreign terrorist fighters: addressing
current challenges”. In mid-March we will organize
a regional conference with Trinidad and Tobago and
the Caribbean Community on the implementation of
regional counter-terrorist strategies.
At the same time, preparations are gaining speed
for the second United Nations counter-terrorism week,
which will be held from 29 June to 2 July, including the
seventh biennial review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The counter-terrorism
week will contribute to the commemoration of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization and will
focus on building social and institutional resilience
to terrorism. During that week, we will also hold the
first-ever United Nations Global Congress of Victims
of Terrorism and the second United Nations High-level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of
Member States.
At a time of heightened divisions among Member
States, we cannot afford to jeopardize the global fight
against terrorism. I am encouraged by today’s reports
about the death of the leader of Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula — one of its deadliest regional affiliates. I
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

urge the Council and Member States to maintain and
reaffirm their unity in the face of the persisting threat
posed by ISIL and Al-Qaida and their affiliates, as well
as terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. I urge
the international community to maintain the sense of
urgency and solidarity needed to save lives and support
the victims and survivors of terrorism. The United
Nations system will continue to play its role with
determination in support of Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Voronkov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the tenth report
(S/2020/95) of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
and the range of United Nations efforts to support
Member States in countering the threat. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
his overview of the report. I commend both the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Analytical
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, led by Mr. Edmund
Fitton-Brown, for their collaboration in preparing
the report with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), among others.
I also welcome the opportunity to hear Ms. Mona
Freij share her experiences as a survivor of ISIL
rule and her efforts to heal her community and build
resilience against future radicalization to violence. I
commend Ms. Freij for her bravery and willingness to
share her experiences with us today. It is vital that we
listen to the voices of those directly affected by ISIL’s
atrocities and recognize the essential role played by
women in building peaceful and resilient communities
and preventing terrorism and violent extremism.
Despite its military defeat in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the death of its leader, Abu Bakr
Al-Baghdadi, ISIL continues to adapt and evolve.
We will continue to face significant challenges in
countering its activities. The magnitude of the problem
is well documented and the solutions are not easy, but
inaction is not an option.
Thousands of ISIL-associated women and children
remain in makeshift camps in appalling conditions.
Leaving them to fight for survival, facing threats of
further radicalization, would not only be contrary to
our shared principles of humanity but also detrimental

S/PV. 8716

to our counter-terrorism efforts. To help Member States
better understand the associated challenges and trends,
CTED published two analytical briefs in September on
the repatriation of ISIL-associated women and children.
They highlight current approaches and challenges,
while emphasizing the urgent nature of the issue.
Understanding the motivations and drivers of
radicalization among ISIL associates, including
women, is complex and multifaceted. We should avoid
stereotyping, generalization and oversimplification in
developing appropriate policy responses, particularly
as women have often had simultaneous roles as victims
and perpetrators. They therefore require genderresponsive, tailored prosecution and rehabilitation
strategies that are consistent with international human
rights standards. Nevertheless, the rate of return of
ISIL-associated women remains significantly lower
than that of men and children.
Children, regardless of their affiliation, are
primarily victims and must be dealt with as such. As
the most vulnerable victims, they have experienced
tremendous trauma and suffering under ISIL. The
internment of a generation of children is neither
acceptable nor sustainable. Through repatriation and
rehabilitation efforts, the international community must
work together to prevent recurring cycles of violence
and further victimization and offer those children a
life of dignity and safety. I welcome the steps taken by
some Member States to repatriate all or some of their
nationals from this group.
Other impacted States should also seek to develop
and implement comprehensive repatriation strategies
that are in line with international law, including the
principle of non-refoulement. The longer we wait, the
less likely we are to succeed. The ways in which we
address prosecution, repatriation and rehabilitation
efforts now will resonate for generations to come.
Bringing ISIL perpetrators to justice continues to be
of critical importance. CTED has been working closely
with Member States and United Nations agencies to
facilitate support for that effort. We continue to help
States identify gaps and facilitate delivery of technical
assistance to strengthen national counter-terrorism
and countering violent extremism responses. During
our recent assessment visits to Africa, we noted the
lack of mechanisms to address radicalization within
correctional facilities, ineffective training of officials
to manage violent extremist detainees and the absence

20-031635/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for
prisoners upon release. Last November’s Arria Formula
meeting discussed those issues and highlighted the
varying degrees of success among Member States’
strategies to prevent radicalization in prisons and
develop effective rehabilitation processes.
Terrorists continue to be adept at using the Internet
to spread their propaganda and ideologies. That was the
focus of discussion in last week’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) open meeting, which emphasized
the need for a whole-of-society approach in countering
terrorist narratives. During our assessment visits and
dialogue with Member States on behalf of the CTC,
we have also seen the prosecution-related challenges
associated with a lack of admissible evidence, a failure to
guarantee due process and a fair trial, the determination
of criminal responsibility and jurisdiction. All of those
challenges undermine States’ efforts to bring ISIL
associates to justice through prosecution.
To mitigate one aspect of that problem, in December
CTED issued the Military Evidence Guidelines, aimed
at strengthening the collection, handling, preservation
and use of evidence collected by the military to
prosecute terrorism-related offences. Taken together
with CTED’s joint initiative with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on electronic evidence,
the guidelines will help facilitate evidence collection
and preservation for use in criminal and terrorist
prosecutions, in compliance with international law.
In that regard, I commend the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant to collect and preserve witness
testimony, including its recent support for prosecutions
in Finland, to prosecute ISIL members for crimes
committed in Iraq.
ISIL’s depravity is evident from their numerous
crimes. But its institutionalization of sexual violence and
slavery requires special attention. I am deeply troubled
by the continued lack of progress in bringing ISIL
perpetrators of sexual violence to justice. Women and
children abducted by ISIL have yet to be reunited with
their families, numerous children conceived through
rape lack legal recognition and a culture of impunity
for sexual crimes persists. Member States must act
decisively to address that issue. Adopting a survivorcentric and rights-based approach to judicial remedies
and reparation efforts is the only way to deliver justice
to the survivors. In that regard, I welcome the launch of
6/25

07/02/2020

the Global Survivors Fund, which will provide muchneeded reparations and redress mechanisms to victims
of sexual violence worldwide.
ISIL has destroyed entire communities, uprooted
families and brainwashed thousands by spreading its
toxic and misguided ideology. Today the international
community has an opportunity to prosecute the
perpetrators, rehabilitate the victims and facilitate
reconstruction and community development in places
destroyed by ISIL violence. The repatriation of women
and children will accelerate that process. And the
prosecution of ISIL fighters and their affiliates, in
accordance with international human rights law, will
help bring closure to victims. This is one of the defining
counter-terrorism challenges of our time. Inaction now
will only make our future counter-terrorism efforts
harder. In that regard, rest assured that CTED will
continue to do its utmost to support the global counterterrorism community in facing those challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Freij.
Ms. Freij (spoke in Arabic): I am grateful for this
opportunity to share with the Security Council part of
what I experienced in my city.
My name is Mona. I am from the city of Raqqa
in north-east Syria. I received news of the death of
my mother and brother while I was in exile. My last
memories of them go back to mid-September 2014
before I left Syria, when elements of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh, armed to the
teeth, burst into my house to arrest me. The sounds of
shots fired in the air to scare us still ring in my head. I
remember the pain I felt when I was pulled by the hair
into the inner courtyard of the house. My mother fainted
because her heart was broken. One of our neighbours
stood up to Da’esh and created a problem with them
to help me flee. Miraculously, I manged to escape.
That a woman was able to escape made the Da’esh men
furious. They believed it to be a failure and a stain on
their reputation that a woman was able to flee the city
in nearly 48 hours.
Because I escaped, my family suffered threats
and intimidation. My brother’s wife was arrested with
her children, followed by my sister and my brother.
They were tortured and traumatized and have not yet
recovered. Raqqa was liberated from that tyrannical
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

regime and became a free city on 4 March 2013, which
marked the birth of a genuine civil society in every
sense. The members of that civil society were able to
manage the city’s affairs and distribute its resources,
ensuring freedom throughout.
Since the beginning of the Syrian revolution, I
have been working as an activist for women’s rights
in civil society institutions based on my sense of civic
responsibility. I am convinced that women have a role
in society free from gender stereotypes. I was one of
the first women to work in local councils in Syria after
2011. I have always shed light on all the practices and
violations that took place in my city, without fearing for
possible consequences.
When Da’esh took down the cross from the Church
of Our Lady of the Annunciation in 2013, I participated
in demonstrations to protest that action. I participated
in the civil movement. We raised the cross and
demonstrated in front of Da’esh headquarters calling
for the release of detainees who, to this very day, have
still not resurfaced. During one of those demonstrations
I carried a sign calling for the fall of ISIL. My family
and friends have been terrified ever since because of
the brutality of Da’esh. I and others always tried to use
peaceful means to resist Da’esh. We stressed education
and raising awareness among children. We held secret
classes in our homes, despite the dangers, including
the threat of death. We knew that education and raising
awareness were the only way to get rid of Da’esh.
After my escape I remained outside of Raqqa until
the withdrawal of Da’esh, waiting for the right time to
return. I did return, at the end of 2017, after the last
elements of Da’esh had left the city. Back in Raqqa I
was unable to recognize the terrified, incredulous
faces of people who could not believe that the Da’esh
nightmare was over.
Women were the most miserable and helpless.
Everybody was a victim of Da’esh, but women were
deprived of education at schools and universities. They
could not leave their houses without a close relative
male escort — a father, brother or an uncle. Young
Girls could not travel for any reason, so as to ensure
that they too would not receive education in areas not
under Da’esh control.
I met young women taking care of orphaned children
whose fathers had been killed in battles. The women
told me they were forced to marry Da’esh fighters and
bear their children. If they refused the sexual advances

S/PV. 8716

of the fighters, they were beaten. They were unable to
put an end to their pregnancies due to lack of medicine
and medical treatment. They were semi detained and
had to obey the orders of those monsters. Even today,
those women have difficulty determining the paternity
of their children.
My experience with tyranny did not begin with
Da’esh and has not ended yet. Since I returned, I
attempted as much as I could to create a safe space for
women. I visited camps and listened to their needs.
I was then in contact with certain organizations to
meet those needs. I encouraged women to not give up
on life while in the camps and to remain resilient by
working. That is what some of them have done in their
respective fields, such as nursing, sewing and even
selling vegetables. Some of them have qualifications
and are literate, so they took training courses in certain
skills, such as using computers or child care. I also
raised various issues, such as women’s participation in
public life and in the political arena, the importance
of promoting women’s empowerment, their cognitive
and economic abilities as well as their participation in
politics and decision-making.
Da’esh suffered a military defeat. Raqqa triumphed
over terrorism, but not yet over tyranny. We attempted
to vanquish tyranny since the very first day of the
Syrian revolution. That tyranny has been personified
by the Al-Assad regime. We continued to fight tyranny
when it was personified by Da’esh. We cannot disregard
the tyranny in Raqqa today.
My experience is not unique; it is similar to those
of thousands of women in various parts of Syria. Those
women have confronted tyranny, chanted for freedom
and continue to demand their political, economic
and social rights. They were faced with shootings,
killings, oppression, rape, sexual slavery and forced
displacement. What saddens me today is the fact that
the international community has forgotten us.
As I address the Council, international law is
being violated. Civilians in Idlib are the victims of
premeditated bombings, perpetrated with weapons of
all kinds. Such violence has continued for weeks and
has led to the forced displacement of thousands of
families, who are still seeking refuge. That reminds me
of what took place in Raqqa and the spread of terrorism
in it. It is now our fear that terrorism can spread to any
city in Syria.

20-031637/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We request that the Security Council assist civilians
in preventing another humanitarian disaster in Idlib,
northern Syria and the rest of the country. Ceasefire
and disarmament constitute the only path to finding a
solution. All roads must now lead to Geneva so that
serious negotiations can begin.
I would like to thank the delegation of Belgium
for the opportunity to brief the Council. I, along with
millions of Syrians, would be very grateful if the
Council were to make every effort to launch a process of
transitional justice in Syria and end impunity so that all
those responsible for perpetrating serious human rights
violations will be accountable. The political process
should move forward in order to achieve a full political
transition in Syria. The transition should meet the
aspirations of Syrian men and women for a democratic,
pluralistic regime that respects human rights.
Terrorism does not occur in a vacuum, and it does
not happen by coincidence. It is the inevitable result
of tyranny, repression, marginalization and the lack of
democracy in a society.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Freij
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Coninsx and the Monitoring Team
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, for
their contributions to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/95) on the evolving threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and on continuing United
Nations efforts to counter that threat.
I also thank Ms. Freij for sharing her personal
story and for briefing us today on her important work
preventing violent extremism and recruitment to ISIS.
Last year, our collective efforts resulted in ISIS
losing its territory and its leader. Those victories in the
battle against ISIS are a testament to the work of the
global coalition to defeat ISIS, the Government of Iraq
and other key partners on the ground. The coalition
continues to pursue four main non-military lines
of effort — counter-financing, counter-messaging,
detention, repatriation and accountability for crimes
8/25

07/02/2020

and abuses by foreign terrorist fighters and the
stabilization of areas liberated from ISIS. It is critical
that the coalition continue each of those lines of effort.
The Secretary-General’s report confirms that
ISIS affiliates still pose a serious threat to the world,
from West Africa to South-East Asia. The scale of
that threat is vast — a fact we wish to call attention
to by identifying, sanctioning and targeting each ISIS
affiliate. Recently, the United States nominated ISIS in
the Greater Sahara and ISIS West Africa in the 1267
Sanctions Committee. We are grateful to the many
countries that have co-sponsored those listings, most
recently the Niger, and encourage other Member States
to join us in countering those groups and their spread
around the world. In addition, we ask all Council
members to support those listings without further
delay, as well as those we will be proposing soon for
additional affiliates.
Even though ISIS and its so-called caliphate have
been defeated on the battlefield, we must work together
to ensure that detention facilities and camps do not
become incubators in which ISIS can reconstitute. We
share the Secretary-General’s deep concerns about the
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and their families
still being held in camps and detention facilities in Iraq
and Syria.
ISIS foreign terrorist fighters should be repatriated
and face prosecution and accountability for their crimes.
And we must also rehabilitate and reintegrate their
children to prevent the emergence of a new generation
of fighters. Where it is appropriate to rehabilitate and
reintegrate terrorist offenders back into society, it is
essential to continue engaging with offenders after
their release to avoid recidivism. That is why the United
States intends to bring back every American from Syria
and hold them legally accountable for their actions.
In Iraq, the world witnessed ISIS target thousands
of innocent Iraqis in barbaric attacks. As the body
dedicated to maintaining international peace and
security, it is our moral responsibility to acknowledge
the atrocities ISIS committed, document those
atrocities, pursue justice and hold those responsible
for them to account. That is why the United States is
a strong supporter of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Before concluding, I would like to underscore that
the guise of counter-terrorism operations can never be
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

used to justify the arbitrary incarceration of dissidents,
journalists or members of religious and ethnic minority
groups. Effective counter-terrorism must be rooted
firmly in full and complete respect for human rights.
In fact, they are mutually reinforcing. Individual rights
must not be made subservient to collective security.
As such, the Secretary-General and United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies need to work more closely
with High Commissioner Bachelet, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the broader community of non-governmental
organizations to closely monitor, report on and address
violations of human rights in the conduct of counterterrorism activities, through relevant mechanisms.
We continue to be deeply concerned about the
situation in Xinjiang, where more than 1 million
Uyghurs and other Muslims have been detained in
internment camps, under the guise of counter-terrorism.
Confinement that is imposed on the basis of ethnicity
and religion and, moreover, without any credible
basis of individual wrongdoing is highly inconsistent
with international law. Furthermore, the refoulement
of Uyghur defectors under the false pretence of
repatriating terrorists is unacceptable. In addition
to violating individual rights, such actions can be
counterproductive, leaving deep and lasting grievances.
Countering terrorism and violent extremism should
never be used as a pretext to silence political views those
in power find objectionable, violate religious freedom
or repress minority groups. The United States is fully
prepared to work with our partners to prevent violent
extremism and to counter terrorism, while protecting
and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings. I would like to say a special
thanks to Ms. Mona Freij for her powerful and
sobering statement. That serves to underline the
importance of the Security Council being briefed by
civil society representatives and is a clear reminder that
effective counter-terrorism depends to a great extent on
civil society. The role and influence of civil society in
preventing individuals from falling prey to the false
promises of terrorist groups cannot be overestimated.
We are concerned that the terrorist threat remains
imminent despite the military defeat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Syria and the

S/PV. 8716

death of Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi, as demonstrated by
the very disturbing increase in ISIL-linked terrorist
activities in West Africa, the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin. Countering terrorism and violent extremism
needs to remain at the top of our international security
agenda. I would like to briefly touch on three issues that
seem very important to us: the need for international
cooperation on, and a comprehensive approach to,
counter-terrorism; the need for any reaction to terrorism
to be in line with our standards and principles; and the
importance of including a gender perspective in the
Council’s work on counter-terrorism.
On the first issue, international, regional and
subregional cooperation remain crucial to successfully
fighting terrorism. A transnational threat can
be overcome only through joint, comprehensive
international action. In that regard, we would like to
express our appreciation for the broad scope of United
Nations activities in the field of counter-terrorism, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/95),
and we commend the women and men in the field who
do the actual work, members of the armed forces and
law enforcement agencies and others on the front line.
It is the Council’s duty to ensure a comprehensive
approach to counter-terrorism, while balancing
preventive and repressive measures, in order to achieve
sustainable long-term success in the fight against
terrorism. No fight can be won by military means
alone, which definitely holds true for the fight against
terrorism as well. Such a fight includes, among other
things, finding a common approach to dealing with
returning foreign terrorist fighters and their families
in terms of prosecution and criminal justice, as well as
deradicalization, rehabilitation and reintegration.
It is obvious that civil society plays a very important
role in that regard, too. Furthermore, we need to counter
terrorist financing, including through social media
platforms or new methods, such as cryptocurrencies.
We are particularly committed to supporting the work
of the Financial Action Task Force as the international
standard-setter on counter-financing.
Secondly, any reaction to terrorism must be in
line with our standards and principles. Our values
strengthen our credibility and enable us to defeat
terrorist ideology. As soon as we are perceived as
employing methods similar to those used by the very
terrorists we claim to fight, we have lost the battle for

20-031639/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

hearts and minds. Counter-terrorism measures must
never serve as a pretext for human rights violations.
Yet there are multiple examples around the world
of counter-terrorism measures that indiscriminately
target ethnic or religious minorities, in violation of
international human rights law. Furthermore, the
exclusion of ethnic or religious minorities can cause
marginalized persons to turn to violent extremism
and fall into the hands of terrorist networks. It is
therefore additionally counterproductive in trying to
prevent terrorism.
That is why we must ensure that human rights,
international humanitarian law and the rule of law
are respected in the fight against terrorism, which
will increase trust in State structures. In that context,
I would like to underline the need for international
mechanisms that ensure due diligence is done and,
in that regard, commend the Ombudsperson to the
ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, for his exemplary
work, which is vital to the credibility, fairness and
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.
Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of
including a gender perspective in the work of the Council,
particularly in the lead-up to the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000). The gender dimension plays
an important role in countering the terrorist threat in
a number of ways. Women are particularly affected by
violent conflict and terrorism. However, as the report
shows, women are not only victims of terrorism but are
also taking on a more important operative role within
ISIL. Therefore, female radicalization and women
linked to, and operating for, terrorist groups should
also become a priority item on our agenda.
Let me conclude by stressing once again that
international cooperation based on adhering to
international law and principles is key to our success.
Going it alone and questioning our values means
playing into terrorist hands.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I, too, would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their
briefings. We are especially grateful as well to civil
society representative, Ms. Mona Freij, for her presence
and briefing. We honour her work and the powerful
words she shared, and we applaud her bravery and that
of all the women who stand against the worst excesses
of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh).
10/25

07/02/2020

Today’s meeting is undoubtedly an important
opportunity for the Security Council to reaffirm its
condemnation of all forms of violence, including
terrorism. Indeed, despite all our efforts, terrorism
remains a pressing challenge and one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. As noted in
the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2020/95), the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters remains acute. An
estimated half to two thirds of the more than 40,000
persons who joined the so-called caliphate are alive.
That means that foreign terrorist fighters are on the
move, returning home or relocating to other theatres of
conflict. Given the current assessment of the financial
reserves available to ISIL at $100 to $300 million,
we encourage all Member States to fully adhere to
their obligations under resolution 2462 (2019). It is
incumbent upon us to ensure that those financing,
planning, perpetrating and supporting terrorist acts are
brought to justice.
At the same time, we wish to alert the Council to
the fact that well-meaning but ill-fitting regulatory
attempts to combat the financing of terrorism have
had unintended effects on the banking system in small
island locations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
like many other countries around the world, has put
mechanisms in place to combat those scourges. The
establishment of our financial intelligence units is a
critical tool in that area.
My delegation strongly supports the Accra initiative
to address threats posed by terrorism and transnational
organized crime in West Africa. The launch of a
joint United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and
INTERPOL project, to be implemented in 2020, to
facilitate information exchange on foreign terrorist
fighters in Europe, Central Asia and the Middle East
is one that we particularly hope will make a positive
impact in the region. We also applaud the investigative
efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, including
its role in collecting key documentary, digital, forensic
and testimonial material in support of domestic
proceedings to hold ISIL accountable for its crimes.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is of the firm
view that addressing the multidimensional threats to
international peace and security — in this instance
those resulting from terrorism — requires gender-aware
and gender-responsive analysis and action. Therefore,
we really appreciated the briefing by Ms. Coninsx in
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

that regard. Action and operational plans must include
gender-just approaches that centre on the participation
of women; promote survivor-centred remedial
and reparatory actions against sexual and genderbased violence; and address the overall differential
involvement in, and effects of, terrorism on women,
men and children. In that connection, there is a need
to design actions that are attentive to the other forms of
difference and inequality that produce the condition of
dispossession often exploited by terrorist organizations.
Global and regional security challenges have
increased in recent years, becoming more complex,
multidimensional and fluid. In response to the
concerns of terrorism and in an effort to enhance
and guarantee a safe and free region, the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) counter-terrorism strategy
was implemented in 2018. Formulated in keeping with
and in support of, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted by the Secretary-General in
2006, the CARICOM strategy incorporates prevention,
deterrence, denial, disruption, defence and response.
We welcome the common joint Caribbean CommunityUnited Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism high-level
regional conference on counter-terrorism strategies and
preventing violent extremism, to be held in Trinidad and
Tobago in March, as mentioned by Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov. We are really looking forward to
that event in the Caribbean.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy represents the most comprehensive and
effective decision taken by the international community
to eliminate that dangerous threat. We welcome its
seventh review, which will provide an additional
opportunity to consider an improved and more
effective translation of all its four pillars into concrete
actions and measures. In our view, the issues being
discussed here today can contribute to a meaningful
outcome of the seventh review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
In closing, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is
of the view that the fight against terrorism calls for
hard work based on, among other things, collective
action and intelligence-sharing to find and identify the
perpetrators of the threat, pinpoint their locations and
understand their strategies and goals.
Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office

S/PV. 8716

of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, for their comprehensive
briefings. I would like also to thank Ms. Mona Freij for
sharing her own experience regarding the suffering of
civilians, especially women, in Raqqa, from oppression
under the yoke of the terrorist group Da’esh. That is a
testament to the need for a participatory approach to
counter-terrorism that includes all factions of society,
especially women, given their role in building balanced
societies capable of achieving peace and stability.
Despite the military defeat of Da’esh in Iraq
and Syria and the killing of its leader, Abu Bakr
Al-Baghdadi, Da’esh continues to pose a threat to peace
and security. That terrorist group has been able to cope
with its territorial losses in Syria and Iraq. It is currently
attempting to regroup and organize systematic attacks
by taking advantage of the deteriorating security and
political situations in certain regions. The current
situation presents a number of serious challenges related
to the fate of foreign terrorist fighters, estimated at
around 40,000, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/95). Those fighters pose a threat, given
that they are battle-hardened and weapon-trained. In the
absence of the necessary measures to ensure the judicial
follow up, rehabilitation and reintegration of those
returnee fighters, they could join local terrorist groups
or sleeper cells, thereby becoming vectors of terrorist
and violent ideologies. They represent a direct threat
to their countries of origin and neighbouring countries.
Da’esh fighters seek to relocate to other conflict
zones in the world, which represent breeding grounds
for Da’esh offshoots and terrorist groups in general. That
would make these conflicts more severe, prolonged,
complex and bloody. In that context, Tunisia follows
with grave concern the latest reports on the relocation
of numerous terrorist fighters from Syria to Libya,
which will pose an additional threat to the security not
only of Libya but also of neighbouring countries and
the Sahel region.
Tunisia welcomes the progress made by the United
Nations in combating terrorist threats. We call for
continued efforts until Da’esh and other terrorist
groups are completely eliminated, especially through
the implementation of international legal instruments
and relevant resolutions. My country welcomes the
adoption by the Council last year of resolution 2462
(2019), on combating the financing of terrorism, as
well as resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between

20-0316311/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism and transnational organized crime. In that
regard, I would like to make the following points.
First, there is a need to intensify bilateral and
multilateral cooperation on information-sharing,
border security and the protection of civil aviation in
order to monitor and prevent the relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters to conflict zones or other countries. I
underscore the need to build the capacities of States and
provide them with the resources necessary to protect
soft targets, such as public spaces, archaeological and
tourist sites, places of worship and sporting and cultural
events, which constitute easy targets for terrorist
groups, especially lone-wolf attackers.
Secondly, my country emphasizes the fact that
the phenomenon of terrorism is closely linked to
deteriorating political and security situations across
the world, especially in the Middle East and Africa.
Conflicts, intra-State wars and the availability of
weapons contribute to an environment conducive to
violence and extremist and criminal groups. Tunisia
stresses the need for the Council to play an active and
vital role by using all the tools provided to it by the
Charter of the United Nations to resolve such conflicts
and combat the trafficking of weapons.
Thirdly, Tunisia stresses that combating terrorism
will not be effective without a comprehensive and
participatory approach that is not limited to security
solutions but addresses the root causes of terrorism, such
as poverty, marginalization and exclusion, which push
vulnerable groups, especially young people, towards
radicalization. Achieving sustainable development and
investing in the stability and prosperity of people are
our first line of defence against conflicts, violent and
extremist rhetoric.
Fourthly, the international community must
promote accountability mechanisms to hold to account
those who participate in, encourage, finance or support
terrorist acts in order to achieve fair accountability,
prevent impunity and restore the dignity of the victims of
terrorism. Tunisia welcomes the adoption of resolution
2490 (2019) in September 2019, renewing for one year
the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
My country looks forward to continued partnership
between the Iraqi authorities and the Investigative
Team in the area of preserving, storing and maintaining
evidence of the horrific terrorist crimes committed by
12/25

07/02/2020

those terrorist groups, while fully respecting Iraq’s
sovereignty and jurisdiction over crimes committed
on its territory. Tunisia also welcomes the initiative
to organize the first meeting of its kind for victims of
terrorism, to be held at United Nations Headquarters in
June, which will shed light on the rights of the victims
and their active role in combating terrorist rhetoric.
Fifthly, Tunisia expresses its concern over the
increased use of communications technology, in
particular social media, to spread terrorist narratives
and attract and recruit young people. We welcome the
open meeting held by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
last month, which focused on various mechanisms and
lessons learned in combating the narrative of terrorism,
while taking into account freedom of expression and
human rights.
In conclusion, my country underscores the need
for combating terrorism to be based on respecting
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We must include all actors, especially
civil society, women, young people, the victims of
terrorism and the private sector, as key partners in
addressing the root causes of terrorism, given their
pivotal role in building balanced and cohesive societies
that would be the best defence against terrorism.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me begin
by thanking Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their
briefings, which we very much appreciated. We are
also very grateful to the participant from civil society,
Ms. Mona Freij, for her courageous briefing to the
Security Council today. Her briefing serves to remind
us of the horrors perpetrated by Da’esh, as well as
the resilience of the human spirit in surviving and
overcoming such devastating experiences.
On the subject of resilience, we note with concern
the findings of latest strategic-level report (S/2020/95)
of the Secretary-General on the resilience of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its toxic
ideology, despite seemingly devastating setbacks. It is
clear that — despite having lost its territorial presence
in its self-declared caliphate in the Middle East and
having suffered the death of its leader and other senior
figures — ISIL nevertheless continues to be resilient,
remaining a threat to international peace and security,
which merits the Security Council’s attention.
That demonstrates the group’s highly adaptive and
resourceful nature and the dogged commitment of some
of its followers to its ideology and agenda, which will
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

require our equal determination to effectively counter
their actions and narrative. In doing so we must ensure
that there is accountability for the group’s barbaric
crimes. We commend the continued efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant on the significant strides that it is
making in that challenging task.
We are of course particularly alarmed by the
report’s findings concerning our continent. The report
is in line with our own assessment, which suggests that
ISIL has begun to expand its presence on the African
continent in the face of pressure in the Middle East
and elsewhere. Those efforts have seen the group
attempt to exploit the continent’s security challenges
to perpetuate its existence and agenda via regional
affiliates that utilize Africa as an operational base and
a target for attacks.
Allow me to reiterate South Africa’s steadfast
commitment to standing together with our fellow African
brothers and sisters in the fight against terrorism on the
continent so that its terrible scourge is not allowed to
erode the hard-won progress that we have collectively
made in prioritizing the continent’s development.
As previously stated, South Africa remains
committed to addressing terrorism holistically. That
is to say that we believe that, in order to effectively
counter the scourge of terrorism, we must give the same
weight to addressing the conditions and factors that
give rise to and sustain it that we give to addressing
its security dimensions. It is also critical that counterterrorism measures be implemented in full compliance
with international law, including international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and that
States avoid unilateral counter-terrorism measures,
which often result in unintended casualties, stoking
further resentments and a continued cycle of violence.
The international nature of the terrorist threat, which
knows no boundaries, demands a multilateral response,
which is best coordinated by the United Nations. In
that regard, we value the work of the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies in assisting Member States
to fight the scourge of terrorism, including through
capacity-building measures such as the development of
handbooks on children affected by the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, as well as the guidelines on
mutual legal assistance developed in collaboration with

S/PV. 8716

the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Association of Prosecutors.
South Africa also welcomes efforts to improve
cooperation with regional bodies, including the
African Union, to improve our joint capacity to counter
terrorism. In that regard, we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s international regional conferences, including
the African Regional High-level Conference on
Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent
Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, which was held
in Nairobi in 2019. The outcomes of that meeting and
other regional conferences elsewhere in the world will
complement the counter-terrorism week to be held at
the United Nations in June.
Domestically, South Africa remains committed to
improving its counter-terrorism capacity in line with
all United Nations recommendations and actively
cooperates with its region on those matters. We were
pleased to host in December 2019, in collaboration with
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, a joint subregional
dialogue for select member jurisdictions of the Eastern
and Southern Africa Money-Laundering Group on
improving capacity to counter the financing of terrorism
in the subregion.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating that South
Africa will continue to remain a committed and
responsible partner in all United Nations counterterrorism bodies, underpinned by the principles that
have been highlighted.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Before delivering my
statement, I would like to express my full support for,
and solidarity with, the Permanent Mission of Tunisia
and our dear colleague Ambassador Moncef Baati.
Let me start by joining my colleagues in thanking
today’s briefers. I also would like to express Estonia’s
support for the outstanding work that they are all doing.
I am especially glad that we had a chance to hear from
the civil society representative about the situation and
challenges on the ground. I thank all our briefers for
their collaboration.
Estonia strongly condemns all forms of terrorism
and considers it a significant threat to international
peace and security. I fully share the assessment made
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/95)
and agree that, despite the progress made in fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
transnational threat of terrorism remains acute and ISIL

20-0316313/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and its affiliates remain at the centre of it. We share
the concern raised in the report concerning the Sahel
region, which has experienced a devastating surge in
terrorist attacks on civilians and military targets in
recent months.
As we have learned from the past and as the
Secretary General’s report points out, terrorists are
quick to adapt to changing situations and exploit
vulnerabilities. Therefore, we must continue our efforts
to tackle the threat, and the United Nations system
has a central role to play in that regard. I would like to
focus on three elements that Estonia considers vital in
the fight against terrorism: the priority of cooperation,
the value of a two-sided approach and the importance
of accountability and justice.
The importance of cooperation cannot be stressed
enough. Terrorism is a global phenomenon, and no State
can address it alone. The experiences of the European
Union, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and other regional organizations in counter-terrorism
cooperation confirm that notion. Member States bear
the primary responsibility to stand up to terrorism.
However, at the same time, Estonia encourages
and supports the engagement of other stakeholders,
including the private sector, civil society and academic
and religious organizations.
Secondly, in countering terrorism Estonia supports
a two-sided approach. Security operations must
go hand in hand with addressing the root causes of
radicalization and terrorism. One without the other is
not enough and will not reduce threats and instability.
Although Estonia has been untouched by terrorism
directly, we know that no State is immune to the threat.
We take seriously our responsibility to stand side by
side with the global community in the fight against
ISIL and its affiliates. Estonia contributes both in terms
of sharing the responsibility to take military action and
contributing in the humanitarian area.
Currently, Estonia contributes to counter-terrorism
operations in different regions, and our troops are
currently stationed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Mali. We
also do our share to address the root causes of instability
by reducing poverty and the marginalization of certain
groups and promoting gender equality. For example,
our aid activities are focusing on Syrian refugees living
in Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. We are teaching them
information technology skills and entrepreneurship and
offering psychological support.
14/25

07/02/2020

Thirdly,
restoring
justice
and
ensuring
accountability remain an essential part of countering
terrorism. It is our duty to deny impunity for terrorists.
Combating impunity for the most serious crimes under
international law enables reconciliation in society and
helps to prevent the resurgence of terrorism. At the
same time, accountability measures must comply with
international law and fair trial standards, including
by ensuring the highest standards of witness and
victim protection.
Member States operating in conflict and postconflict environments often face significant challenges
in obtaining evidence to bring ISIL to justice. In that
light, Estonia fully supports the establishment and the
work of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious
Crimes under International Law Committed in the
Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). We owe it to the victims
to ensure that crimes will not go unpunished. We
further welcome progress made by UNITAD to collect,
preserve and store evidence of acts that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that all measures
against terrorism must be taken in compliance with
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law. Let me also reiterate the fundamental
role of the United Nations, including the role of the
Security Council, in the fight against terrorism. Estonia
will continue to engage resolutely in multilateral efforts
to combat that global threat.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. We
welcome the tenth report (S/2020/95) of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace and
security. We also listened carefully to the statement by
civil society representative Mona Freij.
The international counter-terrorism situation
remains grim at present, with extremism and terrorism
closely intertwined. Terrorist attacks in many parts
of the world have wrought havoc on the countries
involved. As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the transnational threat posed by terrorism remains
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

grave. Despite setbacks, ISIL is rapidly reorganizing
in the form of covert networks and continues to attack
official personnel and facilities in remote areas of
Iraq. The resettlement of foreign terrorist fighters, the
links between terrorist organizations and transnational
organized crime and the plethora of underground
channels for terrorist financing pose severe challenges
to countries.
Faced with that reality, the international community
must remain vigilant against a resurgence of global
terrorism, while fostering a common awareness of
humankind’s shared future and strengthening practical
cooperation in our joint efforts to address the threat
of terrorism.
First, it is imperative to continue to leverage the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and
the Security Council in the fight against terrorism,
which must adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, respect the sovereignty
of the countries concerned and acknowledge the
primary responsibility of Member States in counterterrorism efforts. We should adhere to unified standards
and comprehensively implement the relevant Council
resolutions and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Secondly, we must strive to eliminate the root
causes of terrorism. The international community
should promote the peaceful resolution of hotspot
issues by political means, while assisting Member
States in alleviating poverty and achieving sustainable
development. We must encourage dialogue among
civilizations and religions on an equal footing,
strengthen education for young people, increase
employment opportunities, promote social inclusion
and remove the influence of extremist ideologies. We
should provide assistance to developing countries and
help Member States to build their counter-terrorism
and deradicalization capacities.
Thirdly, we should strengthen international
counter-terrorism cooperation in the light of current
and emerging trends and characteristics of international
terrorism. We must focus on supporting Member States
in addressing prominent issues, such as terrorists’ abuse
of the Internet and information and communications
technologies, the diversification of channels of terrorist
financing and collusion between terrorist groups and
organized criminal networks.

S/PV. 8716

The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT),
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and
other mechanisms should strictly follow the relevant
resolutions and rules of procedure, cooperate closely
and work in synergy.
On the more prominent issue of foreign terrorist
fighters, China believes that the relevant departments
of the Secretariat should strengthen the collection of
information and the examination of each situation
in order to lay the groundwork for Member States to
take the next steps. In that process, it is imperative to
strengthen consultations with the countries concerned
and respect their judicial sovereignty. Priority should be
given to the principle of territoriality. Each case should
be dealt with according to law; imposed solutions must
be avoided.
China has been deeply engaged in counter-terrorism
cooperation within the United Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Global CounterTerrorism Forum, among others, and has cooperated
effectively with many Member States in the areas of
counter-terrorism intelligence-sharing and crackdowns
on terrorist financing, transnational organized crime
and cyberterrorism.
Through the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Fund, China has supported UNOCT in
its various projects, including the security of major
sporting events and capacity-building for African
counter-terrorism coordination efforts. China will
actively participate in and contribute to a series of
regional conferences on counter-terrorism led by
UNOCT, including the seventh review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
activities during the high-level week on counterterrorism.
China received CTED during its visit to China in
late October, which facilitated understanding and policy
dialogue between the two parties and strengthened
counter-terrorism cooperation between China and
United Nations agencies. China is ready to work with
other countries to address the threat of terrorism and
jointly safeguard world peace and stability.

20-0316315/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

At the present time, the United States has levelled
unwarranted accusations against China. Such attacks
deviate from the subject of this meeting and are
completely baseless. They also constitute unwanted
interference in China’s internal affairs and a brazen
attempt to provoke confrontation. China expresses
its firm opposition to, and categorical rejection of,
such remarks.
The issues that Xinjiang is facing do not involve
ethnic groups, religion or human rights, but rather
counter-terrorism and deradicalization. For some time,
China’s Xinjiang region has suffered frequent terrorist
attacks that have seriously jeopardized the lives
and property of all ethnic communities and resulted
in grave violations of human dignity. In response,
China has taken determined legal measures to combat
terrorism and extremism, thereby eliminating — to
the extent possible — all conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism and extremism. Those measures
have produced good results and have effectively curbed
the spread of rampant terrorist activities and served to
safeguard citizens’ basic rights, including their right to
life and development.
The Chinese Government has issued white papers
on Xinjiang that comprehensively outline relevant
policies and measures. The fight against terrorism and
extremism in Xinjiang constitutes a crucial part of
global counter-terrorism efforts. The useful exploration
of preventive counter-terrorism in Xinjiang represents
an important contribution to combating that scourge
at the international level. At present, the situation
in Xinjiang is largely stable and the local economy
continues to grow. People of all ethnic groups live
in harmony and the region has been free of terrorist
attacks for more than three years.
The Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security — it is
not and should not become a venue for a certain country
to stage its political shows. The United States, in the
name of Xinjiang, has hypocritically portrayed itself as
a human rights defender while engaging in unilateralism
and violating international law and the norms
governing international relations, thereby plunging
the world into chaos. That is what the United States
has done. Regime change, interference in the internal
affairs of other countries and triggering humanitarian
crises — that is what the United States has done. The
abuse of force in international relations and inciting
war in the Middle East, where Muslim countries and
16/25

07/02/2020

people have suffered — that is what the United States
has done. Serious human rights issues, lack of social
cohesion, rampant racial discrimination have all arisen
in the United States.
We agree that counter-terrorism must not be pursued
at the expense of human rights. We urge the United
States to heed the demand of United Nations human
rights mechanisms to close its prisons in Guantanamo
and stop its actions. Some time ago, China invited close
to 1,000 people from more than 70 delegations of foreign
diplomats, officials and international organizations and
press to visit Xinjiang. After seeing the situation on
the ground, they all acknowledged and commended the
Chinese Government’s efforts to combat and prevent
terrorism, in accordance with the law.
Last October, more than 60 Member States
expressed their support for China’s position on Xinjiang
in their statements in the General Assembly’s Third
Committee. China urges the United States to carefully
listen to the international community’s voice of justice,
respect facts and give up bigotry and double standards.
It must stop interfering in China’s internal affairs, stop
undermining the unity of the Council, stop politicizing
counter-terrorism issues and stop seeking confrontation
at the United Nations.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Belgium for the choice of this topic at a time
when the populations of several countries of the Sahel,
including the Niger, are facing a surge in extremely lethal
terrorist acts. I would also like to thank Mr. Voronkov
and Ms. Coninsx for their briefings
As the Secretary-General clearly underlines in his
report (S/2020/95), the destruction of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant did not put an end to the spread
of barbarity by its combatants, let alone diminish their
ambition to conquer and possess territory. We therefore
do not have the right to give them yet another chance to
reconstitute their sanctuary in another part of the world.
In his briefing to the Council on 8 January (see
S/PV.8698), Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, drew our attention to the intensification in recent
months of terrorist attacks of unprecedented scope in
the Sahel region, with the threat progressing from the
north of Mali towards the so-called three-border zone
countries — Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger — and
potentially spreading to coastal countries. In the space
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of three years, he told us, the number of victims of
terrorist attacks in those three countries had risen
five-fold, rising from approximately 770 in 2016 to over
4,000 reported deaths in 2019.
One month ago, my country experienced three
deadly attacks that claimed the lives of 179 Nigerien
soldiers. The Islamic State’s West African Province
claimed responsibility for the attack on the military
camp of Inates, on the Malian border, on 11 December,
killing 71 soldiers; the ambush of 25 December, against
a convoy of soldiers escorting teams in charge of the
electoral registration, killing 14 people; and the attack
against the military camp of Chinagodar, also on the
Malian border, on 9 January, killing 89 soldiers. The
recurring terrorist attacks in the subregion have led to
the forced displacement of hundreds of thousands of
people, thereby exacerbating the already worrying food
insecurity in the region and accelerating the closure of
thousands of schools and health centres.
It is evident that the Sahel has become an
ideal zone for the most dangerous terrorist groups,
which collaborate with other transnational criminal
organizations operating in the region, such as drug,
arms and human traffickers, to do their dirty work.
As a result, the Governments of those countries are
making enormous efforts to protect their populations
and the integrity of their territories. For example, the
Government of the Niger allocates more than 25 per
cent of its national budget to that end, to the detriment
of basic social services, such as health and education.
To be even more effective against this transnational
enemy, those countries have pooled their forces through
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) and the Multinational Joint Task Force, which
have been effective, particularly in the Lake Chad
basin, where they triumphed over the Boko Haram
combatants, now entrenched in the Sambisa forest. I
thank all the friendly countries and organizations that
support us in this struggle by training and/or equipping
our soldiers, as well as through military operations on
the ground.
Despite the resolve of our Governments and the
bravery of our soldiers, our countries clearly do not
have the necessary or appropriate means to defeat
this transnational enemy. That is the reason for the
escalating threat to which I referred earlier. That is
why — in the name of collective security and before
it is too late — I call for more active and effective

S/PV. 8716

international solidarity to eradicate all security threats
in the Sahel and other affected parts of Africa, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report.
In conclusion, we believe that such international
solidarity would be embodied by an early resolution
to the Libyan conflict; the financing of the G-5 Sahel;
broad membership of the international Coalition for
the Sahel, created on 10 January in Pau, France; the
strengthening of the capacity and mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to enable it to be more on
the offensive and lend a hand in the event of an attack
on a G-5 Sahel country by terrorists; the promotion of
information-sharing between MINUSMA and the G-5
Sahel on the presence and movement of terrorist groups;
substantive support for the Governments of the affected
countries in the implementation of their development
and good governance programmes — because, as we
fight the terrorists militarily, we will also have to
simultaneously combat the sources of its financing and
address the factors that promote the emergence of its
ideology, such as ignorance and precariousness; and
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to warmly thank our briefers for their
briefings on the threat posed by Da’esh. I would also
like to salute the courage of Ms. Freij, who spurs us
to pursue our efforts to eliminate the terrorist threat,
particularly Da’esh.
The military defeats suffered by Da’esh show that
the collective efforts in the fight against terrorism have
made it lose its territorial foothold. But it is clear that
this struggle will bear fruit only if we act everywhere
and at all levels, because the Da’esh threat has not been
eradicated. The group is still present underground in
the Levant and has spread through its franchises all
over the world. In that connection, I would like to stress
four priorities that must guide our efforts to combat the
influence of this terror organization.
First, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/95)
notes the ongoing threat, particularly in Syria and
Iraq, where Da’esh has been beaten but not completely
defeated. The collective priority for the region must
therefore be to continue the efforts of the Global
Coalition against Da’esh in the Levant to prevent the
resurgence of the terrorist group. In that context, France
wishes to remain militarily engaged in Iraq, at the

20-0316317/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

request of the Baghdad authorities and in full respect
for its sovereignty.
The fight for security, however, will not be enough
so long as terrorist ideology continues to recruit
adherents. It is therefore critical to prevent terrorist
radicalization. That will require the commitment of
all stakeholders, including on the Internet, which can
be used to spread terrorist propaganda and connect
terrorist groups and those who wish to join them.
France is at the forefront in that fight. We are proud
to have launched the Christchurch Appeal, along with
New Zealand, which has already brought together
about 50 countries, organizations and major Internet
companies. France also supports the European Union’s
draft legislation requiring Internet companies to remove
terrorist content within one hour. Without undermining
our commitment to the freedom of expression, the aim
is not to let the Internet become a sanctuary for, or tool
used by, terrorist groups.
While prevention is necessary, we must also
adapt our legislation and mechanisms in order to
prosecute and provide support for those lured by the
false promises of terrorist groups. That is a complex
undertaking, given the diverse profiles of the men
and women concerned. For several years now, France
has taken several measures to address such situations
and attaches particular importance to the care and
monitoring of minors who have returned or been
repatriated from Syria and Iraq.
Our second priority is to combat terrorist financing.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/95)
mentions, terrorist groups, even if cut off from their
territorial base, continue to prosper, thanks to resources
derived from ordinary crimes, organized fraud,
kidnapping, extortion and trafficking in weapons, drugs
and art, to name but a few examples. They need money
to conduct their activities, recruit new candidates and
spread their hate speech. Efforts made over the past 20
years to dry up those resources must continue, in line
with resolution 2462 (2019).
Our third priority is to work tirelessly to ensure that
the reprehensible crimes committed by Da’esh do not
go unpunished. Too many civilians, including women
and children, have been the victims of crimes that,
in addition to qualifying as acts of terrorism, might
constitute, among other things, war crimes or crimes
against humanity.
18/25

07/02/2020

We supported the establishment of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, through resolution 2379 (2017), and the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. That is the first step in the
fight against impunity. We will continue to support
those efforts so that victims can receive reparations.
Lastly, our fourth priority is to ensure that the
fight against terrorism is conducted with full respect
for human rights law and international humanitarian
law. That fight must not be used as a pretext for
discrimination against any religious group. Respect
for human rights, the freedoms of expression, religion
and belief, and the rule of law, as well as inclusion and
social cohesion, are the sine qua non of any strategy
to prevent and combat terrorism. The efforts of actors,
including non-State actors, constitute another condition
for success in that fight. I have already mentioned actors
such as companies, including Internet companies, but I
would also like to recall the importance of civil society
actors, whose contribution to countering hate speech
and strengthening the resilience of societies is essential.
In conclusion, I once again welcome Ms. Freij to
our discussion today and thank her for her briefing
on today’s topic. France will remain committed to
combating terrorism, on all fronts, in order to eradicate
the threat.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Coninsx and civil society
representative Mona Freij for their briefings.
We are pleased to observe the fruitful collaboration
between the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and encourage them to continue on that
path. On that note, we note the important work that
they have conducted to date and look forward to
sharing Indonesia’s experience and lessons learned in
preventing and countering terrorism when we host both
entities, as well as the Coordinator of the Monitoring
Team, later this month in Jakarta.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Monitoring Team, CTED, the Office of CounterTerrorism and other United Nations entities for the
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

comprehensive report before us (S/2020/95). My
delegation takes note of various salient points in the
report, including the point that, despite the decrease in
the overall level of violence related to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the group continues to pose
a serious threat through its affiliates and the attacks it
has inspired. Of equal concern is the remaining large
number of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs). With that
in mind, let me make three brief points.
The first relates to the threat of terrorism by ISIL
affiliates. Far from Iraq and Syria, ISIL affiliates
continue to threaten other parts of the globe. The report
clearly demonstrates that ISIL affiliates have become
even more active in West and Central Africa, the
Greater Sahara area, Central Asia and South-East Asia.
We know that it is a threat that evolves quickly and
takes on different forms. Therefore, we must ensure
that our preventive measures and responses evolve
equally quickly and with greater dynamism.
Secondly, we note the continuing humanitarian and
security challenges posed by FTFs. Issues such as how
to deal with the relocation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of returning FTFs and their
accompanying family members present significant
challenges for Member States. In that regard, with a
view to discussing existing practices and challenges
in South-East Asia, Indonesia, together with CTED,
co-organized a regional meeting in Jakarta last week
on the theme “Comprehensive and tailored strategies
for the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of
persons allegedly associated with terrorist groups”. We
believe that further efforts need to be made to strengthen
the coherence, coordination and effectiveness of
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
among Member States, with the support of the relevant
United Nations agencies.
That leads to my last point — preventing recidivism.
As mentioned in the report, the threat posed by
returnees, terrorist perpetrators, frustrated travellers
and radicalized prisoners is also of continued concern.
Despite the fact that some of them are still believed to
be dangerous according to records, they are expected
to be released soon. We cannot afford to take risks. We
cannot undertake deradicalization efforts that only lead
back to prison. In that connection, Indonesia advocates
a comprehensive approach.
To that end, with the support of the Group of
Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism, Indonesia,

S/PV. 8716

together with Belgium and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, co-hosted an Arria Formula meeting
in November 2019 on the challenges of radicalization
in prisons in order to discuss strategies, best practices
and persistent challenges in managing incarcerated
terrorists and other violent extremist prisoners.
In conclusion, while continuing with law
enforcement, Indonesia believes that we should also
invest in soft measures to counter terrorist narratives
and steer people away from extremism. We need to
promote and facilitate the spread of messages of peace,
moderation and tolerance, as the best approach to
confronting hatred and prevent incitement. We must
provide messages that at the same time turn back
negativity and amplify credible positivity.
Mr. Bencosme Castaños (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General, United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, and Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for their briefings on the tenth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/95). We also thank Ms. Freij for her
moving testimony.
While there has been significant progress in
the fight against terrorism, in particular the loss of
territorial control previously held by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the impact on its leadership from various
operations, we remain extremely concerned about the
ability of those groups to mutate into new modalities
for inflicting pain and fear, in their zeal to demonstrate
their relevance through inspired attacks and regional
affiliates, becoming a covert network with aspirations
of carrying out large-scale attacks.
We continue to pay special attention to the threat
posed by the number of foreign terrorist fighters at
the disposal of terrorist groups, which take advantage
of porous borders to carry out insurgent attacks on
officials, infrastructure and checkpoints. Such attacks
have claimed the lives of hundreds of soldiers and
innocent civilians. Weapons and funding continue to
be provided to those groups, which seek to consolidate
their actions and cooperate with transnational organized
crime networks.
The Dominican Republic again strongly condemns
all terrorist acts as unjustifiable, barbaric and cowardly.
We therefore extend our sincere condolences to the
families and the countries affected by the attacks. We

20-0316319/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have recently noted with astonishment the increase in
the number and scale of attacks perpetrated against
members of the security and defence forces of Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso.
As we have previously stated in the Council, we
agree on the need to urgently and holistically address,
on the basis of experience and best practices and with
greater collaboration among Member States, the issues
of protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of the most vulnerable, in particular
women and children with ties to those terrorist groups,
who are stranded in conflict zones, crowded camps and
detention centres.
In that regard, we are concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
camps and detention centres, such as in Al-Hol camp
in Syria, whose population, which is more than 70 per
cent women and children, is exposed to deplorable
conditions and a lack not only of basic food, water,
medical care and education services but also of adequate
support programmes to counter the risk of exploitation
and radicalization.
We acknowledge the challenges Member States
face in conducting comprehensive risk assessments,
minimizing stigmatization and determining possible
criminal responsibility, while safeguarding and
adhering to international law, including international
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law.
Consequently, we agree on the importance,
in implementing repatriation, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies, of continuing to improve the
design of policies that are focused on the needs of the
individual, as well as evidence-based, gender-sensitive
and age-sensitive, with particular emphasis on the
condition of victims, which should take precedence in
the treatment of children, as stipulated in the Madrid
Guiding Principles and other protocols, .
Finally, we commend the Office of CounterTerrorism, the Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for their work with Member States to strengthen their
counter-terrorism policies and measures, as well as the
processes for the repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters and their
dependants, in order to reverse the cycle of violence
and victimization that makes it impossible for societies
to function effectively and to prevent the spread of
violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
20/25

07/02/2020

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle Coninsx
for their briefings, as well as Ms. Mona Freij for
courageously sharing her experience. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for the tenth report
(S/2020/95) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat.
We are following with great concern the reports
of the ongoing transformation of ISIL into a covert
global network, continuing to launch attacks and seek
resurgence. ISIL’s regional affiliates have continued
their strategy to exploit conflict situations and local
grievances and expand their network in other parts
of the world. A number of the remaining foreign
terrorist fighters have relocated to other regions or
have returned to their home countries, thus posing
challenges for rehabilitation and reintegration and the
risk of radicalization.
The report also notes the alarming trend of the
growing nexus between terrorism and organized
crime, as well as the risk of women being recruited
to plan and carry out attacks. That reality requires
all Member States to remain vigilant and united. We
join the call for greater cooperation among States and
other stakeholders in order to strengthen our collective
efforts and be innovative in our actions. In that regard,
my delegation would like to make three points.
First, we underscore the paramount need to
strengthen international cooperation to address the
threat posed by terrorism. Cooperation among the
relevant authorities is crucial for the collection, analysis
and sharing of intelligence about terrorists’ imminent
attacks, networks, recruitment, training and financing,
as well as evidence for their prosecution. Enhancing
national capacities and building national and regional
institutional mechanisms to counter the threat of
terrorism are equally important.
We welcome the capacity-building efforts of the
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
including CTED’s recent updates to the technical
guide for the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and other relevant resolutions, which are very useful
to Member States. We support the central role of the
United Nations system in coordinating the global
fight against terrorism. We commend the increased
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

efforts to strengthen the coherence, coordination and
effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism
work, in particular the cooperation between UNOCT
and CTED.
It should be noted that in undertaking all measures
to address the threats of terrorism, Member States and
all relevant stakeholders should uphold the Charter of
the United Nations and ensure full compliance with
their obligations under international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, we have consistently maintained that one
of the most effective ways of countering the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism
is to address the root causes of terrorism, including
unresolved conflict, poverty, inequality and injustice.
The Security Council should scale up its efforts and pay
greater attention to addressing unresolved conflicts.
Regional organizations should play an instrumental
role in settling disputes and strengthening a region’s
resilience in the face of terrorism.
Thirdly, we note with concern the presence of ISIL
terrorist groups in Asia, including the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters in South-East Asia. At the regional
level, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) has spared no effort to counter the threat of
terrorism, including by effectively implementing the its
Convention on Counter-Terrorism and its Plan of Action
to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalization
and Violent Extremism. Viet Nam maintains its firm
position to reject and condemn terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We are committed to cooperating
with Member States and relevant stakeholders in
countering the scourge of terrorism and contributing
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx
for their detailed analysis of the situation regarding the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We express our support for the activities of the
entities they head and the plans and initiatives being
developed in the area of counter-terrorism. We also
thank Ms. Mona Freij for her statement.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s assessment
of the threat posed by the ISIL. The members of that
terrorist organization maintain their footholds in
Syria and Iraq, have transformed into an extensive
underground network there and continue to build
capacity in other regions, specifically in Afghanistan,

S/PV. 8716

West Africa and the Lake Chad basin. They are also
trying to infiltrate and establish a presence in the AsiaPacific region. ISIL-Khorasan remains a key factor in
the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan. ISIL activity
in that country is fuelled by, inter alia, foreign terrorist
fighters with combat experience in Syria and Iraq. We
see in the group’s continued presence in the country
the threat of terrorist activities spilling over into central
Asian States. Our priority is the application of the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism sanctions regime
to individuals and organizations that are a part of or
directly linked to the Afghan branch of ISIL.
ISIL terrorist activity in Libya poses a threat. The
situation is further compounded by the fact fighters are
being redeployed to that area from Idlib province in
Syria. Absent a normalization of the situation in that
country, stabilization of the security situation in the
region is virtually impossible. We are already enduring
the fallout of the collapse of statehood in Libya in West
Africa and the Sahel-Sahara region.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/95) flags
the issue of the Al-Hol camp in Syria and the plight
of those detained there. We have repeatedly stated,
and are ready to reiterate, that there is and can be no
order wherever Syrian sovereignty is violated. Without
cooperation with the legitimate authorities, there is
no way to solve counter-terrorism, humanitarian and
human rights issues. We are confident that the efforts
of the international community must be aimed at
preventing the resurgence of ISIL and the emergence of
a new driving force for the terrorist internationale. In
that regard, we support the work of the United Nations
and its specialized agencies, inter alia, to counter
terrorist and extremist propaganda and combat the
financing of terrorism.
Unfortunately, however, we continue to observe
attempts to pander to terrorists and to use them for
geopolitical purposes. We believe that this approach
is both reckless and pernicious. Such games entail
disastrous consequences in specific countries and
persistent violations of freedoms and human rights.
For some reason, it is only after tragedy strikes and
casualties climb into the thousands that people take note
of and consider the situation. At yesterday’s Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.8715), we addressed in
detail the reasons for the recent resurgence of terrorist
activities by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. We presented tried
and true figures and facts, compiled by the Russian

20-0316321/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

07/02/2020

military personnel present in Syria. The threats that
have arisen will indubitably be eradicated.

its very strong contribution to the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/95).

To date, the international community faces another
pressing issue, namely, what is to be done with foreign
terrorist fighters and their families. We are convinced
that justice for terrorists must be carried out in national
jurisdictions, based on the principles of the inevitability
of punishment and proportionality vis-à-vis the crime
committed. International cooperation in that area
must be rooted in full compliance with the relevant
provisions of universal counter-terrorism conventions,
including the principle of extradite or prosecute.

Let me say that we agree with the assessments set
out in the report. Al-Qaida remains a destabilizing
influence, and while Da’esh has lost territory, it remains
a considerable threat, both militarily and politically.
With the appointment of the successor to Abu Bakr
Al-Baghdadi and the emergence of strong affiliates and
supporters from West Africa to South-East Asia, their
core narrative or brand continues. The United Kingdom
will continue to work with coalition partners to bring
an end to Da’esh once and for all.

Russia has consistently opposed granting various
groups the right to protect areas where fighters
are being held, and especially to decide their fate.
Unfortunately, some countries prefer to distance
themselves from resolving the issue of bringing to
justice their own citizens who fought in the ranks of
terrorists in Syria and Iraq. Patronage and connivance,
against the backdrop of impunity, fuel the unacceptable
increase in terrorist activity, as we are seeing today in
Idlib. Family members of foreign terrorist fighters who
are illegally present in Syria and Iraq and who are not
suspected of involvement in terrorist activities must be
expeditiously repatriated to their countries of origin
and citizenship. Terrorists need to be duly punished.

The United Kingdom has been clear that individuals
who have fought for or supported Da’esh must face
justice and accountability in the most appropriate
jurisdiction, which is often in the region where crimes
took place. We continue to pursue all available avenues
with international partners and reaffirm the need to
implement resolution 2396 (2017). In that regard, we
welcome the unanimous renewal in September of the
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
and very much support its work on supporting victims
and collecting critical evidence to hold Da’esh
accountable for its horrific crimes.

We believe that the report on the threat of ISIL
should not fail to focus on the question of manpower,
material, financial and weapon support for terrorism.
The document under discussion today mentions the
issue of supplying military equipment to terrorist
organizations only in passing. Meanwhile, terrorist
groups in the Middle East and Africa continue to
receive weapons from external sponsors. We call on
all responsible States to immediately stop all illegal
arms transfers and to not play into the hands of radical
elements under the pretext of facilitating myriad
incarnations of the so-called moderate opposition.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, as
always, thank our briefers — Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov, Executive Director Coninsx and
Ms. Freij — for their briefings today. I would also like to
thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526
(2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities for
22/25

On the subject of repatriations, the United Kingdom
works with all concerned to facilitate the return of
unaccompanied or orphaned children, where feasible.
Each case is considered on an individual basis, subject
to national security concerns.
As we adopt our tools, so do the terrorists. We were
therefore pleased that recent resolutions reflect new
methods of terrorist financing and links of criminality,
and welcome the increased focus on the protection of
principled humanitarian action. We encourage the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism to continue developing their work on
that aspect.
The Secretary-General’s report illustrates the
complex and multiple roles of women and the need
to ensure gendered analyses and responses. We
heard today the brave testimony of Ms. Freij and the
invaluable contributions of women on the front lines.
Ms. Freij reminded us not only of the importance of
ensuring that there is a security response to terrorism,
but also that there is a need to build societies’ resilience,
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

including through civil society. It is important to win
over hearts and minds, and failure risks reversion to
terrorism in the future. I know that Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov very strongly supports the role of
civil society in tackling terrorism.
Following the recent CTED visit to Beijing, we
commend it for completing assessment visits now
to all permanent members of the Council, as well,
of course, to many of its current, previous and — I
dare say it — future members. We welcome CTED’s
constructive engagement in facilitating those visits
and that of those Members of the United Nations. The
United Kingdom, for its part, invited a second follow-up
CTED visit in October last year, covering a robust and
comprehensive agenda. It is important that those visits
not be simply for show, but produce detailed reports
and recommendations, which can aid our counterterrorism approaches.
The United Kingdom has sadly faced two attacks in
recent months from Da’esh-inspired terrorism. I want
to pay tribute today to members of the public and police
in the United Kingdom who confronted those terrorists
and prevented greater harm. The United Kingdom
will ensure that we take measures to tackle all forms
of terrorism, including from the extreme right wing.
As we continue to review our own report from CTED,
we expect that all visited States will work towards the
finalization of their reports.
The Secretary-General’s report rightly highlights
the importance of respect for human rights in effective
counter-terrorism policies. Indeed, the council has
repeatedly stressed the importance of human rights
in counter-terrorism and determined early on through
policy guidance in 2006 that human rights is an
important component of CTED’s work.
We also commend United Nations entities for their
many initiatives in ensuring that measures to prevent
violent extremism integrate human rights and gender
as cross-cutting issues. We continue in that context
to have strong concerns with regard to the human
rights situation in Xinjiang, including the extrajudicial
detention of more than 1 million Uyghur Muslims and
other minorities in so-called political re-education
camps, systematic restrictions on Uyghur culture
and the practice of Islam, and extensive and invasive
surveillance targeting minorities, much of which has
been revealed in the Chinese Government’s own papers.

S/PV. 8716

We recognize, of course, that China may have
terrorism concerns, but it is our view that its actions are
disproportionate and indiscriminate and, moreover, that
they will be counterproductive in the long-term because
they risk exacerbating ethnic tensions and creating
conditions that lead to radicalization and terrorism. I
note that Under-Secretary-General Voronkov visited
China and went to Xinjiang, although he did not have
access to the camps, and that such a visit was not on
CTED’s agenda. We therefore encourage China to
agree an early date for a visit by United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Bachelet and to
guarantee her free and unfettered access to Xinjiang.
I would just say that I was a little surprised to hear
my Chinese colleague say that the Security Council was
not an appropriate forum for the discussion of Xinjiang.
At the Security Council meeting on 25 September
2019, under the Russian presidency, State Councillor
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi proactively
raised the situation in Xinjiang and described China’s
actions as both “preventive counter-terrorism” and
“implementing the United Nations Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism” (S/PV.8626, p.13). He
spoke third that day, after the representatives of Kuwait
and Belgium, neither of whom had raised Xinjiang in
their interventions. It was therefore China’s choice to
place the issue on our table here.
I do not wish to revisit yesterday’s meeting (see
S/PV.8715). That would take us far too long, but I would
just say to the Russian representative that tackling
terrorism can never be and is not an excuse or a reason
for widespread attacks on civilians or for breaching
international law.
In conclusion, the terrorist threat is constantly
evolving, and we must be ready to adapt our tools.
However, one constant remains that human rights and
counter-terrorism are mutually reinforcing and not
contradictory goals. The Council has developed a robust
and balanced counter-terrorism framework through its
resolutions. We should continue our collective efforts
to ensure that the measures we take do not contribute to
exacerbating future challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium.
We note with concern that, despite the military
defeat of Da’esh in Iraq and Syria, the group continues
to operate clandestinely and carry out attacks — hence,
the importance of continuing our efforts within the

20-0316323/25

S/PV.8716

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

coalition to completely defeat the group and its ideology.
We are also concerned about developments vis-à-vis
Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates and supporters in other
conflict areas, including in the Sahel, Somalia and the
Arabian peninsula. The destructive influence of those
terrorist groups, their exploitation of local conflicts and
their acquisition of capacities normally limited to States
is having disastrous consequences for those regions, as
our colleague from the Niger underscored.
The threat has not disappeared in Europe, either.
Last Sunday’s attack in London, for which Da’esh
claimed responsibility, demonstrates once again that
the monitoring, rehabilitation and reintegration of
individuals linked to such terrorist groups, including
lone actors, remain a challenge that is as complex as it is
urgent. How can this ever-evolving threat be countered
most effectively?
First, it can be countered by continuing the
work that we are doing here, including through the
development and implementation of appropriate
international security measures. Major results have
already been achieved. One particular example that
comes to mind is the use of Passenger Name Records,
Advance Passenger Information and information and
communication technologies.
Secondly, we must continue to focus on combating
the root causes of violent extremism and terrorism. As
the representative of Indonesia mentioned earlier, we
co-organized, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), an Arria Formula
meeting on radicalization in prisons. Detention and
rehabilitation can succeed only if we devote the attention
required for the implementation of appropriate prison
standards and individualized follow-up programmes,
including following the period of detention. We
encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to pursue its consideration of this
issue with the Member States visited and the UNODC
to prioritize it in its capacity-building programmes.
We must also enable civil society to play its full and
unimpeded role in combating the spread of terrorism.
We note that Da’esh and Al-Qaida continue to exploit
vulnerable groups within our societies, the members of
which feel marginalized and passed over. Through the
joint efforts of States and civil society organizations,
we can help marginalized groups overcome their
isolation and vulnerability. Such joint efforts will
help strengthen the resilience of communities faced
24/25

07/02/2020

by terrorist narratives and stanch terrorists’ ability to
recruit new combatants. In that regard, I thank Ms Freij
once again for her testimony and commend her on her
work within her community.
Lastly and above all, such measures would be futile
if they were to contravene international standards
concerning human rights, fundamental freedoms and
international humanitarian law. Violations of those
principles would only reinforce the extremist and violent
narratives of terrorist organizations and facilitate their
recruitment activities. In that regard, we strongly
encourage the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism to pursue his engagement
with the Security Council and every State Member.
We look forward to pursuing constructive
cooperation with the member States of the Security
Council, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
the United Nations United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and all our partners in the fight against
international terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of China has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I have
asked for the floor once again to express our firm
opposition to the accusations made against China by
the representative of the United Kingdom.
Regrettably, the United Kingdom once again
blindly followed in the footsteps of the United States
against China in the Security Council. Just now, China
has comprehensively elaborated its position on Xinjiang
and we believe that the United Kingdom has taken note
of it. China urges the United Kingdom not to blindly
follow the United States in using the Security Council
to make trouble, spread rumours and interfere in the
internal affairs of China.
The allegations made just now by the British
representative about Xinjiang are not new and have
no factual basis. However, the United Kingdom has
suffered many terrorist attacks in the past, including
the recent knife attack in London. We advise the
20-03163

07/02/2020

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

United Kingdom to abandon its hypocrisy and double
standards and face up to its own serious problems of
racial discrimination and human rights violations. It
will be good for the United Kingdom.
Just now, the representative of the United Kingdom
mentioned that State Councillor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Wang Yi raised the situation in
Xinjiang in September (see S/PV.8626). That is because
we knew that certain countries wanted to try to use
that opportunity to attack China and cause trouble. We
wish to make it clear that we categorically reject such
attempts at provocation.

S/PV. 8716

China’s position on Xinjiang remains consistent,
and we are firmly opposed to the use of Security
Council meetings to discuss the situation in Xinjiang.
It is our hope that the members of the Security Council
present will in good faith shoulder their responsibility
to maintain international peace and security instead of
creating political spectacles, spreading rumours and
launching unprovoked attacks on other countries. Such
behaviour is inconsistent with the role of a Security
Council member.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

20-0316325/25
