Resolution 228 (1966)

Resolution 228 (1966)

of 25 November 1966

du 25 novembre 1966

The Security Council,
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
Jordan and Israel concerning the grave Israel military
action which took place in the southern Hebron area
on 13 November 1966,
Having noted the information provided by the Secretary-General concerning this military action in his
statement of 16 November 17 and also in his report of
18 November 1966,18
Observing that this incident constituted a largescale and carefully planned military action on the territory of Jordan by the armed forces of Israel,

4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation under review and to report to the Security Council
as appropriate.

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant entendu les declarations des representants de
la Jordanie et d'lsrael concernant la grave action militaire israelienne qui a ete menee dans la partie meridionale de la zone d'Hebron, le 13 novembre 1966,
Ayant pris note des renseignements concernant cette
action militaire fournis par le Secretaire general dans
sa declaration du 16 novembre 17 ainsi que dans son
rapport du 18 novembre 1966 18,
Constatant que cet incident constitue une action
militaire de grande envergure et soigneusement preparee des forces armees israeliennes en territoire jordanien,
Reaffirmant les resolutions anterieures du Conseil
de securite condamnant des actes passes de represailles
executes en violation de la Convention d 'armistice
general entre Israel et la Jordanie 19 et de la Charte
des Nations Unies,
Rappe/ant les resolutions reiterees du Conseil de
securite demandant la cessation d 'incidents violents a
travers la ligne de demarcation, et n'oubliant pas les
incidents passes de cette nature,
Reaffirmant la necessite d 'adherer strictement a la
Convention d 'armistice general,
1. Deplore les pertes de vies humaines et les graves
dommages materiels causes par !'action menee par le
Gouvernement israelien le 13 novembre 1966;
2. Censure Israel pour cette action militaire de grande
envergure menee en violation de la Charte des Nations
Unies et de la Convention d'armistice general entre
Israel et la Jordanie;
3. Souligne a l'intention d'lsrael que les actes de
represailles militaires ne peuvent etre toleres et que,
s'ils se repetent, le Conseil de securite devra envisager
des mesures nouvelles et plus efficaces, prevues par la
Charte, pour assurer que de tels actes ne se repetent
pas;
4. Prie le Secretaire general de suivre la situation et
de faire rapport au Conseil de securite, comme ii
conviendra.

Adopted at the 1328th meeting by 14 votes to none, with
1 abstention ( New Zealand).

Adoptee a la 1328• seance par
14 voix contre zero, avec une
abstention ( Nouvelle-Zelande).

Ibid., Twenty-first Year, 1320th meeting.
Ibid., Thenty-first Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1966, documents S/7593 and Add. I.
19 Ibid., Fourth Year, Special Supplement, No. 1.

Ibid., vingt et unieme annee, 1320• seance.
Ibid., vingt et unieme annee, Supplement d'octobre, novembre
et decembre 1966, documents S/7593 et Add.l.
19 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme annee, Supplement special n° J.

Reaffirming the previous resolutions of the Security
Council condemning past incidents of reprisal in breach
of the General Armistice Agreement between Israel
and Jordan 19 and of the United Nations Charter,
Recalling the repeated resolutions of the Security
Council asking for the cessation of violent incidents
across the demarcation line, and not overlooking past
incidents of this nature,
Reaffirming the necessity for strict adherence to the
General Armistice Agreement,
1. Deplores the loss of life and heavy damage to
property resulting from the action of the Government
of Israel on 13 November 1966;
2. Censures Israel for this large-scale military action
in violation of the United Nations Charter and of the
General Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan;
3. Emphasizes to Israel that actions of military reprisal cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated,
the Security Council will have to consider further and
more effective steps as envisaged in the Charter to
ensure against the repetition of such acts;

17

17

18

18

11
