S/2020/1150

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2020
Original: English

United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 51 of Security Council
resolution 2502 (2019), covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 19 September to 1 December 2020. It describes progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stab ilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) since the report of
21 September 2020 (S/2020/919). It provides an overview of political developments,
including the progress made towards the strengthening of State institutions and key
governance and security reforms. It also outlines the progress made in adjusting the
Mission’s priorities, posture and presence, as well as the pursuit of its comprehensive
approach to the protection of civilians. Furthermore, the report provides information
concerning the joint transition strategy with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and implementation of the measures aimed at improving the
Mission’s performance in accordance with Action for Peacekeeping commitments.

II. Political developments
2.
Political dynamics were marked by persistent tensions within the ruling Cap
pour le changement (CACH)-Front commun pour le Congo (FCC) coalition
concerning nominations to key positions in the military and the judiciary, in particular
the swearing-in of three judges to the Constitutional Court appointed by the President,
Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi, on 17 July.
3.
On 13 October, the President of the National Assembly, Jeanine Mabunda, and
the President of the Senate, Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, met President Tshi sekedi to
express their reservations about the constitutionality and legality of the nomination
of the three new judges. On 14 October, President Tshisekedi also received a
delegation from the Conseil supérieur de la Magistrature, which declared that the
presidential ordinances appointing the three judges were lawful and constitutional.
On 21 October, the three judges were sworn-in during a ceremony in Parliament,
attended by President Tshisekedi and 60 parliamentarians from CACH, but not FCC affiliated parliamentarians and members of the Government, including the Prime
Minister, the President of the Senate and the President of the National Assembly.

20-15795 (E)

021220

*2015795*

S/2020/1150

4.
Addressing the nation on 23 October, President Tshisekedi expressed concern
about continuing divergences within the ruling coalition. He also announced his
intention to undertake consultations with political and civil society actors. On
2 November, he began his consultations and held separate meetings with civil society
organizations, religious and traditional leaders, opposition parties, provincial
governors, former presidential candidates, former prime ministers and political
leaders.
5.
On 15 September, the National Assembly and the Senate opened their ordinary
session. Both chambers examined three finance bills, including the revised 2020
budget, which was reduced from $11.2 billion to $5.7 billion. The National Assembly
is also expected to examine the backlog of bills from its previous sessions, including
three judiciary reform bills and a bill on electoral reform, and the 2018 elections
report of the Commission électorale nationale indépendante and the nominations to
the Commission.
6.
Civil society leaders remained actively engaged in several political and electoral
issues. On 19 October, following its fifty-seventh ordinary plenary assembly, the
Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic of the Congo issued a statement in
which it denounced what it described as political manoeuvres by members of the
ruling coalition aimed at controlling the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante ahead of the 2023 elections. The Episcopal Conference also denounced
the lack of consensus on electoral reforms, interference in the functioning of the
Constitutional Court and tribalism and community conflicts exacerba ted by political
actors.
7.
On 7 October, President Tshisekedi chaired a virtual summit with the Presidents
of Angola, Rwanda and Uganda. The four Heads of State expressed their willingness
to eradicate the threat posed by “negative forces” in the Great Lakes subregion,
strengthen national capacities to cut the financing sources of armed groups, set up a
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cross-border response plan and explore further
economic opportunities. On 5 October, in Bujumbura, the State Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Marie Tumba Nzeza, met the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Development Cooperation of Burundi, Albert
Shingiro, to discuss bilateral cooperation on peace and security.
8.
The economic situation in the country remained fragile. Nevertheless, the
Central Bank of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which had foreseen a 2.4 per
cent contraction of the national economy in 2020 as a result of the socioeconomic
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, revised that forecast to a 1.7 per cent contraction.
9.
With regard to the participation of women in public life, on 3 October, Cécile
Ntumba Muanza was installed as the President of the Tribunal de grande instance in
Mbanza-Ngungu of Kongo Central Province, followed by the swearing-in, on
23 October, of Alphonsine Kalume Asengo, the first woman appointed to the
Constitutional Court.

III. Security situation
A.

North Kivu Province
10. In Petit Nord, North Kivu, the security situation deteriorated in the su rroundings
of Pinga, where in-fighting between rival factions of the Nduma défense du Congo Rénové (NDC-R) escalated in September and October. Those clashes resulted in the
death of 17 civilians, including 1 woman, the rape of 3 women and the displacement
of 5,149 families. The situation was further exacerbated by the increased activity of

2/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

Nyatura militias and of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
which attempted to seize control of areas vacated by NDC-R as a result of the split
within the group. Overall, MONUSCO recorded at least 113 incidents, resulting in
the death of 85 civilians, including at least 10 women and 6 children, representing a
12 per cent increase in the number of civilians killed compared with the previous
reporting period.
11. In Grand Nord, in Beni territory, attacks by suspected Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) persisted against civilians and the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (FARDC). Suspected ADF elements, allegedly working in cooperation
with local Mai-Mai groups, carried out 30 attacks against civilians, resulting in at
least 174 civilians killed (127 men, 42 women and 5 boys), 11 injured (10 men and 1
woman) and 59 abducted (47 men, 9 women and 3 boys), as well as 40 houses
destroyed. This represents 35 per cent of all incidents and 85 per cent of all killings
of civilians occurring in Grand Nord. Although there has been a 27 per cent decrease
in incidents against civilians compared with the previous reporting period, the death
rate resulting from those attacks increased by 34 per cent. On 18 November, a team
of military investigators led by the prosecutor at the Operational Military Court was
deployed to Mwalika, with support from MONUSCO, and confirmed that 30 civilians
had been killed, presumably after being abducted by ADF combatants in Lisasa,
Kisimba and Kasanza on 31 October.
12. Attacks by ADF and its clashes with FARDC are reaching a level of intensity
not seen since July 2020, indicating a deterioration in the security situation. Foll owing
an attack against FARDC by suspected ADF elements on 5 October, the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade responded and repelled the assailants. On 20 October, in a
separate attack by suspected ADF elements on the Beni prison, 1,335 prisoners
escaped. In response, MONUSCO deployed a quick reaction force and launched an
unmanned aerial system to fly over the area and assist local authorities in locating
escaped prisoners on the run. As at 12 November, 404 prisoners had been located and
returned to the prison.
13. In line with the trend noticed in the previous reporting period, a continued
increase in movements of suspected ADF elements was observed in southern Irumu
territory along the border with North Kivu, as well as the Mbau -Kamango and BeniKasindi axes that lead to Uganda. Furthermore, insecurity in the south -east of Beni
town increased, reportedly in connection with the harvest season for cocoa and other
agricultural produce, with ADF and Mai-Mai groups competing for control of that
lucrative seasonal activity.
14. Persistent civilian casualties led to an increase in public demonstrations and
anti-MONUSCO sentiment. Seven peaceful demonstrations were held in Beni town,
Mbau and Oicha, led by various groups, including La lutte pour le changement, as
well as civil society organizations. The Mission increased its engagement with and
outreach to the local community in an effort to counter disinformation and reduce
anti-MONUSCO sentiment.

B.

South Kivu and Maniema Provinces
15. The security situation deteriorated in the Hauts Plateaux of Minembwe, amid
persistent inter-ethnic strife. FARDC reduced the rate of its operations owing to the
redeployment of units outside South Kivu and logistical challenges. Seven of the eight
territories in South Kivu were affected by harassment, looting, razing of dwellings,
cattle rustling and attacks against civilians by armed groups. The Hauts Plateaux of
Fizi, Mwenga and Uvira territories, comprising the zones of Bijombo, Mikenge and
Minembwe were the most insecure areas in South Kivu, with 131 attacks against

20-15795

3/17

S/2020/1150

civilians recorded, resulting in at least 38 civilians killed (including 15 women and 1
child) and 22 injured. The situation deteriorated further following the official
installation of a member of the Banyamulenge community as the mayor of
Minembwe, which triggered demonstrations led by members of the Babembe,
Bafuliro and Banyindu communities. In Bijombo, internally displaced persons
remained the target of opportunistic attacks by armed mili tias. Five direct attacks
against internally displaced persons resulted in 8 civilians killed or wounded, mostly
women, in addition to 18 cases of rape and sexual violence. In the territory of Fizi,
four humanitarian workers were kidnapped.
16. Violence also persisted in the Ruzizi plain of Uvira territory, as well as
throughout Kalehe, Walungu, Kabare and Shabunda territories. This was due in part
to limited FARDC deployments and the return of several leaders of Mai -Mai Raia
Mutomboki to South Kivu after a failed attempt to demobilize. In Kalehe territory,
the insufficient deployment of FARDC enabled ongoing armed group activity and
increased recruitment in Kalonge and Ziralo groupements. Meanwhile in Shabunda,
there was a surge in violence, including sexual violence, by Raia Mutomboki groups.
In the Ruzizi plain, Mai-Mai Kijangala and local gangs have been active in cattle
rustling, imposing illegal taxation and directly attacking villages, while in Muturule
four civilians from the Banyamulenge community were allegedly kidnapped by armed
elements from Burundi on 17 October.

C.

Ituri Province
17. The security situation in Ituri improved slightly, compared with the previous
reporting period, mainly as a result of a decrease in attacks by the Coopérativ e pour
le développement du Congo (CODECO) and other, mainly Walendu community,
armed militia groups in Djugu territory. Notwithstanding ongoing negotiations led by
a delegation of former armed group leaders sent by President Tshisekedi, various
factions and groups have yet to reach a consensus and cease hostilities. CODECO and
the other factions continue to target civilians, including through harassment and
extortion. From 3 to 9 October, more than 15 incidents involving CODECO elements
were reported, resulting in the killing of at least 11 civilians, including 3 women and
2 children.
18. In Irumu territory, the Front patriotique et intégrationniste du Congo (FPIC)
continues to threaten civilians and launch attacks on FARDC. Against the background
of the government-negotiated peace process with the Force de résistance patriotique
de l’Ituri (FRPI), human rights violations decreased in the area compared with the
previous reporting period. Frustrations surrounding delays in the peace process boiled
over on 30 September when FRPI attacked the proposed disarmament and
demobilization sites in Karatsi and Kazana, looting and destroying equipment and
supplies in the camps. In addition, Mai-Mai and ADF activity continued in Irumu and
Mambasa territories along the border areas of Ituri and North Kivu. The increased
presence of those armed groups also fuelled underlying tensions between the Nande,
Nyali and Hutu communities, who accuse one another of supporting the movement of
those armed groups into the area.

D.

Tanganyika Province
19. The overall security situation in Tanganyika continued to improve. Nevertheless,
from 19 September to 18 November, 16 civilians were killed, 27 injured and 4 women
and 1 girl raped in Kalemie and Nyunzu territories. Most of those i ncidents were
reportedly attributed to Twa militia. Overall, there was a 20 per cent decrease in the

4/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

number of incidents and a 65 per cent decrease in the number of civilians killed
compared with the previous reporting period. With at least 19 ambushes rep orted and
attributed to Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale and Mai-Mai Kabeke along the Kalemie-Bendera
axis, Bendera in Kalemie territory was the area most affected by armed group
violence. The surrender, on 5 October, of a Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale leader, Kasongo
Amuri, led to reduced levels of violence in the north-eastern part of Nyunzu territory.

E.

Kasai and Kasai Central Provinces
20. Overall, the security situation in Kasai and Kasai Central remained relatively
calm, although there were reports of small-scale, localized inter-community conflicts
over customary power and boundary issues. Former Kamuina Nsapu elements
unsuccessfully attempted to reorganize, especially in Dibaya and Dimbelenge
territories of Kasai Central, following the arrest in May of one of the K amuina Nsapu
leaders and the lack of support within the communities.

IV. Human rights situation
21. Between July and October, 2,747 human rights violations and abuses were
documented throughout the country, a small decrease compared with the previous
four months (March to June). State agents, in particular FARDC soldiers, were
responsible for 48 per cent of those violations, whereas 52 per cent were committed
by armed groups, with Nyatura, ADF and FDLR combatants as the main perpetrators.
Some 12 per cent of the violations were related to restrictions on democratic space,
which represents a decrease from the previous four months.
22. Approximately half of all the violations documented between July and October
occurred in North Kivu, in which at least 407 civilians (308 men, 72 women and 27
children) were killed and 237 wounded (188 men, 37 women and 12 children) during
attacks against civilians and clashes between armed groups. In South Kivu, the
intercommunal conflict in the Hauts Plateaux resulted in at least 35 civilians (26 men,
8 women and 1 child) killed and the widespread destruction of villages and
livelihoods. At least 308 civilians were killed by armed groups in Ituri.
23. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, between July and October, 27 human
rights violations were documented in relation to the enforcement of prevention
measures, of which 18 were committed by agents of the Congolese National Police
(PNC). Those violations included the extrajudicial killing of 2 men, the ill -treatment
of 42 people (34 men, 5 women and 3 children) and the arbitrary arrest and illegal
detention of 16 people (13 men and 3 women). Training and awareness-raising
activities were delivered on human rights in the response to COVID -19, especially to
law enforcement agents, civil society and members of the National Human Rights
Commission in Kinshasa, South Kivu and Tanganyika.
24. Between July and October, the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
documented 76 deaths in custody (74 men, 1 woman and 1 child) , caused mainly by
the conditions of detention, in particular the lack of food and access to appropriate
health care. In addition to the Beni mass prison escape, the lack of security in prisons
was illustrated by the mutiny in the prison of Lubumbashi betw een 25 and
28 September, during which at least 4 prisoners escaped, 3 were shot dead and 18
wounded by security and defence forces. Some 50 women detainees were also
rounded up in a courtyard and at least 21 of them were gang raped. The Human Rights
Office engaged with national judicial and administrative authorities to address the
situation at the prison, especially of women detainees. Civil justice authorities opened
an investigation into the mass rape of women detainees, and another investigation
20-15795

5/17

S/2020/1150

into the escape, mutiny and use of force by defence and security forces was opened
by military justice. Women detainees received medical and psychological support by
a local non-governmental organization (NGO), with the support of the United Nations
Children’s Fund.
25. Following the enhanced interactive dialogue on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on 2 October, the Human Rights Council adopted, on 7 October, a resolution
on technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of human rights. By its
resolution, the Council renewed the mandate of the team of international experts on
the situation in Kasai and of the technical assistance team that, as in the previous
resolution, was requested to provide assistance, including forensic expertise, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in supporting judicial authorities in their
investigations into allegations of human rights violations and abuses throughout the
country.

V. Humanitarian situation
26. On 18 November, the Minister of Health declared the end of the eleventh Ebola
virus disease outbreak in Equateur Province. Since 1 June 2020, 130 cases (119
confirmed cases and 11 probable cases) were recorded, with 55 deaths and 75
survivors (72 men and 58 women). As at 18 November, 41,433 people had been
vaccinated against the Ebola virus disease throughout the province. The Deputy
Special Representative (Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator) and partners
called for continued efforts to monitor Ebola survivors and strengthen the community based surveillance system. To this end, the Ministry of Health is developing a 90 -day
post-Ebola plan, with support from partners.
27. Allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by members of the
Ebola response during the tenth outbreak in the eastern par t of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo surfaced during the reporting period. In this specific context,
no allegation has been reported to date against MONUSCO personnel. An action plan
to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse was put in place in July 20 20 by the
humanitarian country team. The Deputy Special Representative (Resident Coordinator/
Humanitarian Coordinator) worked closely with the Government, concerned
humanitarian actors and victims’ rights advocates to address the situation. With the
support of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee, which deployed a team of experts
on the ground, humanitarian actors are investigating the allegations, reviewing
existing preventive measures and identifying gaps in prevention and response. In
parallel, the World Health Organization appointed an independent commission to
investigate the allegations, identify systemic issues and review existing prevention
measures.
28. As at 15 November, the Democratic Republic of the Congo had registered
11,838 COVID-19 cases in 22 of 26 provinces, including 322 deaths and 11,081
survivors. On 9 October, the Council of Ministers adopted a decree by which it
established an institutional framework for the implementation of the multisectoral
emergency mitigation programme. Meanwhile, COVID-19 prevention measures
hampered humanitarian operations and the movement of humanitarian staff within
and across provinces. Polymerase chain reaction COVID-19 test result requirements
for inter-provincial movements remain a challenge for humanitarian actors,
notwithstanding the 1 October decision of the Prime Minister to increase the validit y
of the required polymerase chain reaction test result from three to seven days.
29. Notwithstanding the ongoing humanitarian assistance and government -led
community dialogue initiatives in conflict-affected areas, an estimated 5.2 million
people remain internally displaced. Violence, protection concerns, outstanding land
6/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

disputes and a lack of access to basic services remain major impediments to their
sustainable return. In addition, owing to conflict, economic decline, the COVID -19
pandemic and natural hazards, 21.8 million people are facing acute food insecurity.
30. Humanitarian access continues to be hampered by insecurity, compounded by a
weak State presence and poor transport infrastructure. Moreover, during the reporting
period, one humanitarian national staff member was killed in North Kivu, three
humanitarian staff members were reported missing in Ituri and several kidnapping
incidents were recorded in North Kivu and South Kivu.

VI. Protection of civilians
A.

Mission strategies and political processes
31. To support the implementation of the targeted provincial strategies, and in
accordance with Action for Peacekeeping commitments to strengthen the protection
provided by peacekeepers, MONUSCO developed operational plans for Ituri, North
Kivu, South Kivu, Tanganyika, Kasai and Kasai Central. Those plans, developed in
close coordination with the United Nations country team, identified clear outcomes,
priority areas of intervention and indicators of achievement, which will enable
MONUSCO to prioritize its response to key security challenges in the areas where it
is still present. The plans will be reviewed every six months. Meanwhile, sustained
efforts to improve coordination between MONUSCO, humanitarian agencies and the
Congolese defence and security forces at the field level contributed to the
development of and improvement in comprehensive responses to threats.
32. In view of its progressive drawdown, MONUSCO continued its efforts to ensure
the sustainability of local protection of civilians tools and build the capacity of local
security actors, including through the provision of logistical support and training of
the Congolese defence and security forces, and support for the Congolese judiciary
in efforts to combat impunity and for the restoration of State authority in areas
previously controlled by armed groups. MONUSCO also pursued its efforts to build
the capacity of protection units within the provincial ministries of interior.

B.

Field-level responses
33. During the reporting period, MONUSCO deployed 11 standing combat
deployments, 3 joint protection teams and 23 joint assessment missions in different
conflict-affected areas. Those activities contributed to strengthening the performance
and impact of the Mission, in keeping with Action for Peacekeeping commitments. In
Ituri, MONUSCO developed an integrated security plan to respond to growing
security threats in and around Bunia. Additional efforts included strengthening
community alert networks and early warning systems, as well as conducting robust
joint patrols with FARDC in the most at-risk areas. MONUSCO also deployed a
standing combat deployment to Marabo to deter FPIC activities. Outside of Bunia
town, MONUSCO continued to provide protection to civilians, especially at sites for
internally displaced persons in Djugu and Irumu territories with the ongoing standing
combat deployments and by ensuring access to the national highway 27, a key trade
route linking Uganda and Kisangani. MONUSCO also undertook a joint assessment
mission to Tchabi and Boga, to evaluate the security situation following attacks
against civilians and a flare-up of ethnic tensions between communities in the area.
34. In Petit Nord, North Kivu, MONUSCO intensified its protection of civilians
efforts through increased political engagement in response to the deterioration of the
security situation along the border between Masisi and Walikale territories, caused

20-15795

7/17

S/2020/1150

mainly by infighting between NDC-R factions. Standing combat deployments were
deployed in Lukweti, Pinga and Kalembe to increase the Mission’s presence and
facilitate protection activities by civilian components, including community
engagement, human rights investigations and the reinforcement of local protection
mechanisms and early warning systems. MONUSCO ensured the protection of
internally displaced persons gathered around Pinga hospital during clashes between
the two factions of NDC-R and escorted humanitarian partners to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Mission also supported the efforts of the
Government towards the consolidation of peace and the restoration of State authority
in Pinga through capacity-building, logistical and intelligence support to national
security forces, as well as by facilitating mediation efforts b y authorities.
35. In Grand Nord, North Kivu, attacks against civilians by armed groups took place
in retaliation against FARDC offensive operations, in particular in the north -east,
north-west and south-east of Beni territory, and along the national highway 4 and
Mbau-Kamango roads. In response, MONUSCO strengthened its protection activities
by deploying five joint assessment missions to engage with local protection actors on
mitigation measures. A standing combat deployment was also deployed in Kilya,
Halungupa area, to deter and respond to ADF attacks against civilians, which tend to
escalate during the cacao harvesting season. In addition, MONUSCO continued to
strengthen coordination and intelligence-sharing with FARDC and increased joint
patrolling with FARDC in an effort to deter attacks. The Mission also organized a
training session with community liaison assistants and the Intervention Brigade to
enhance the early warning system in the Grand Nord area of operations.
36. In the Hauts Plateaux of South Kivu, MONUSCO continued to protect civilians
and internally displaced persons in Bijombo (7,182 internally displaced persons) and
Mikenge (2,750 internally displaced persons), including by escorting internally
displaced persons to their fields and local markets and conducting joint patrols with
FARDC. To prevent a further escalation of tensions over land use, the Mission
conducted workshops with community leaders and civil society organizations to
encourage community-based conflict resolution. Meanwhile, the Mission continued
to develop the second phase of its action plan aimed at contributing to the long -term
protection of civilians, including through the strengthening of State presence and
sustainable protection of civilians capacities in Shabunda and Wa lungu territories.
37. In Tanganyika, MONUSCO focused on the employment of its good offices with
the provincial authorities to further consolidate stabilization gains in Nyunzu
territory. Delivering as one, the Mission provided support to United Nations a gencies
for the effective provision of humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
and returnees in the Nyunzu and Bendera areas. Furthermore, the Mission intensified
patrols along the main axes where armed elements were present, while maintain ing
close engagement with community leaders and local security actors to reduce
tensions. Notably, those efforts resulted in the surrender of 40 Mai -Mai Apa Na Pale
elements and 3 children associated with the armed group in Nsela village.
38. In Kasai Central, MONUSCO supported national and provincial authorities in
the management of escalating tensions and clashes between the Kuba and Lulua
communities over a border dispute in Demba and Mweka territories. Following a joint
assessment mission, MONUSCO provided additional support in the form of air
transportation for the deployment of FARDC and the Congolese National Police to
stabilize the disputed area. The Government, supported by the Mission, organized a
peace conference in Kananga from 9 to 11 October, at which the concerned
communities reached an agreement over the border dispute.

8/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

VII. Stabilization and the strengthening of State institutions
A.

Stabilization and root causes of conflict
39. Addressing the root causes of conflict remained a priority for the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy and the Stabilization Coherence Fund. In
partnership with international NGOs, the Fund launched three new projects in South
Kivu. The projects are intended to: (a) reduce customary po wer conflicts through
inclusive local governance; (b) reduce land and transhumance conflicts; and
(c) support communities and the political authorities in reaching an agreement on an
approach to disarmament, demobilization and community-based reintegration in the
province.
40. In Kasai and Kasai Central, the Mission supported several community -based
initiatives designed to encourage peaceful cohabitation between communities and
strengthen the capacity of the State to manage conflicts. From 26 to 28 Septembe r, in
Dimbelenge territory, in Kasai Central, MONUSCO facilitated community dialogue
between the Bakwa Kanyinga and Bakwa Ndaye groupements, involving 60 local and
customary leaders (including 16 women) with the aim of fostering peaceful
coexistence. The chiefs of both groupements signed an acte d’engagement, which was
subsequently endorsed by the provincial government.

B.

Security sector and justice system reform
41. MONUSCO continued an integrated approach to security sector reform,
leveraging its good offices to support national authorities in pursuing long -term
institutional transformation. MONUSCO also worked in partnership with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the International Criminal Court to
develop a training curriculum and carry out the training of FARDC on human rights,
international humanitarian law and the efforts to combat the recruitment of child
soldiers and gender-based violence. On 21 October, MONUSCO held a coordination
meeting with international partners to discuss options to bolster the institutional
capacity of the security and defence forces and address governance deficits, in line
with the joint transition strategy.
42. On 26 November, the Ministry of Justice, the Conseil supérieur de la
Magistrature, MONUSCO and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
approved the joint United Nations justice reform support programme, a four-year
initiative that is intended to support the justice system and the national justice reform
strategy. Developed in close collaboration among all partners, the programme
supports justice reform at both the national and provincial levels, including by
enhancing the performance of the criminal justice chain in Kasai Central, Tanganyika
and North Kivu.
43. The Mission also continued to assist the Congolese authorities in their efforts to
prosecute those accused of war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious
human rights violations. On 30 September, the Operational Military Court of North
Kivu convicted two members of the FDLR/Forces combattantes abacunguzi (FOCA)
and 14 Mai-Mai Mazembe-Union pour la protection des innocents (UPDI) members,
including the leaders of both groups, of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
participation in an insurrectional movement related to crimes committed in Miriki
and Vuvotsio villages in 2016. MONUSCO provided technical, logistical and
financial support to the judicial authorities, from the investigative stag e to the
prosecution of that priority case. On 7 October, the Tribunal militaire de garnison of
Bukavu sentenced two members of Raia Mutomboki Hamakombo to 20 years in

20-15795

9/17

S/2020/1150

prison each for crimes against humanity, including murder, rape, sexual slavery,
torture and other inhumane acts committed in Kambale and Kanwe villages between
2016 and 2018. MONUSCO also provided technical support and coordinated
assistance to the trial. In Kalemie, the Tribunal militaire de garnison began trials of
14 cases against members of FARDC and the Congolese National Police for alleged
sexual violence. As at 10 November, nine FARDC members had been convicted and
two National Police officers acquitted. On 10 November, the Tribunal militaire de
garnison in Ituri sentenced nine Mai-Mai to life imprisonment for war crimes related
to attacks on Ebola response teams in Biakato and Lwemba between 15 September
and 28 November 2019, which resulted in the killing of four people. Four other
defendants were acquitted.
44. On 23 November, the Operational Military Court of North Kivu sentenced the
former NDC leader, Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka, to life imprisonment for war crimes,
including murder, rape, sexual enslavement and the recruitment of children
committed from 2007 to 2017 in Walikale territory. MONUSCO provided protection
to victims and witnesses and technical, logistical and financial support to judicial
authorities during joint investigations and the trial.
45. In response to the 20 October attack on Beni prison, the Mission supported
efforts to recapture escapees, including almost 100 ADF members whose trial before
the Operational Military Court in Beni and Butembo had been postponed as a result
of the escape. The Mission also worked with judicial and security institutions to
mitigate the risk to victims and witnesses from reprisals by escapees, adjust trial
schedules, identify those prisoners who had escaped and strengthen prison security
measures.
46. In September, as part of ongoing prison reforms, MONUSCO facilitated a
retreat with national prison authorities on draft prison laws and helped the national
prison reform committee to conduct field missions to assess prison infrastructure.
Through the Mission’s good offices, in October, the Government released funds,
which boosted food supplies to prisons. Since the beginning of 2020, the Mission’s
support to the prison authorities in implementing decongestion measures has led to
the release of 1,037 eligible prisoners from detention facilities throughout the country,
which, on average, hold more than three times their capacity.
47. MONUSCO supported the development of a national action plan for the
management of women prisoners and children in conflict with the law, supported the
construction of a family area in Ndolo military prison in Kinshasa and donated
modified, written-off United Nations vehicles to Bunia and Goma prisons for use as
ambulances. To facilitate the reinsertion of children in conflict with the law,
MONUSCO assisted in the introduction of computer training programmes in
Kinshasa and Goma. The Mission also organized simulation exercises on readiness
for security incidents in all 12 priority prisons, established a database for high -risk
prisoners in 3 priority prisons and provided uniforms for prison personnel.

C.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
48. Overall, 83 Congolese ex-combatants were demobilized by MONUSCO and 17
children were separated from armed groups and handed over to child protection
partners for psychosocial support and reunification with their fami lies. Following the
lifting of COVID-19-related travel restrictions, 25 ex-combatants (23 men and 2
women) and 35 dependents (12 men and 23 women) were repatriated to Rwanda (58)
and Uganda (2).
49. At the provincial level, in Ituri, negotiations between FRPI and the Government
remained suspended. The request of FRPI for reintegration into FARDC, with the

10/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

recognition of their ranks and a general amnesty, was rejected by the Government.
This was reiterated by the national Minister of Defence during his visit in September
to the province, when he urged the armed group to disarm. On 30 September, FRPI
elements attacked the disarmament sites. As part of efforts to facilitate the resumption
of negotiations, MONUSCO supported a workshop organized by the FRPI peace
agreement steering committee, to agree on the way forward. The Government agreed
to proceed with the payment of pending stipends, enabling the FRPI leadership to
resume the negotiations. On 31 October, the disarmament process commenced.
Following identification, verification and orientation, 31 FRPI elements entered the
demobilization camp, including 29 combatants who were demobilized and returned
to their communities, 1 child associated with the group who was separated and handed
over to child protection actors, and 1 combatant who opted to apply to join FARDC
and remains in the demobilization camp. The combatants also handed over 10
weapons. However, the process was halted again because the FRPI leadership was
requesting the payment of the agreed stipends before further disarmament. The total
expected number of combatants to disarm is 1,138.
50. From 5 to 8 October, during his visit to Goma, North Kivu, President Tshisekedi
reaffirmed his stance in favour of a community-based approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and his commitment to breaking the cycle of
amnesty and integration into the armed forces. He requested the establishment of a
substantial budget for the 2021 fiscal year to meet community needs in the eastern
provinces. MONUSCO continued to support the development of a new comprehensive
community-based national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration framework.
Consultations are ongoing within the Government and are expected to result in the
adoption of the revised national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
framework.

VIII. Women and peace and security
51. MONUSCO continued to advance the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda through targeted engagement with national, provincial and loc al
authorities, as well as advocate increased space for the political participation of
women. In the framework of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) and in line with Action for Peacekeeping commitments, the Mission,
together with the United Nations country team, supported a series of initiatives to
foster further progress on the women and peace and security agenda and mobilize
support for the second national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). The Mission
also supported women community leaders in Fizi, Mwenga and Uvira territories
through training in conflict management and women’s inclusion in local peace
processes. In Ituri Province, the Mission conducted a mapping of hotspot areas where
women and girls were more at risk of sexual violence and other human rights
violations. The mapping was shared with local protection committees. The Mission
also worked with 200 members of FARDC and the Congolese National Police in
North Kivu (140 men and 60 women) to integrate a gender-based analysis into their
operational security roles and to enhance the participation of women in security and
protection-related decision-making.

IX. Child protection and sexual violence in conflict
52. MONUSCO verified 245 grave violations against children (88 girls and 157
boys), representing an increase of 1 per cent compared with the previous reporting
period. Nine children (four girls and five boys) were reportedly killed or maimed,
including two children killed by FARDC during fighting against armed groups in
20-15795

11/17

S/2020/1150

North Kivu. Thirty girls were raped or subjected to other forms of sexual violence,
including 11 rapes attributable to State agents. Meanwhile, 184 children (38 girls and
146 boys) formerly associated with armed groups escaped or were separated, among
whom 81, including 43 associated with Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale in Tanganyika and 25
associated with Mai-Mai Mtetezi in the Hauts Plateaux of South Kivu, were
voluntarily released by commanders who committed themselves to protecting
children. In addition, two commanders of armed groups (Mai -Mai Apa Na PaleMandjosa and Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale-Kamutu) in Tanganyika signed a unilateral
declaration and road map to end child recruitment. To date, 35 armed groups h ave
made such commitments to end and prevent child recruitment since July 2018. A total
of 2,121 children, including 304 girls, have been voluntarily released by commanders
of armed groups.
53. Between July and October, 248 victims of conflict-related sexual violence,
including 152 women, 94 girls and 2 men, were documented by the Mission. This
represented a decrease of almost 33 per cent compared with the previous four months,
which can be attributed in part to increased difficulties in documenting such c ases in
many of the conflict-affected provinces, especially North Kivu and South Kivu, as
well as Kasai, Kasai Central, Maniema and Tanganyika. In some areas of North Kivu,
survivors were, for example, prevented, including by perpetrators, from gaining
access to medical care, which, in turn, hampered the reporting process. Additional
monitoring missions and investigations are planned in areas affected by conflict related sexual violence to ensure adequate documentation and survivor-centred
support. Ongoing efforts to demobilize armed groups, such as in Ituri where fewer
cases of conflict-related sexual violence have been reported, may also have
contributed to the decrease in documented cases. Overall, armed groups were
responsible for 55 per cent of conflict-related sexual violence-related incidents, with
North Kivu representing the most-affected province. Nyatura and Mai-Mai were the
main perpetrators among armed groups. Cases of conflict-related sexual violence
have also been attributed to NDC-R factions and Mai-Mai Malaika in Maniema.
Among State actors, FARDC accounted for 30 per cent and the Congolese National
Police for 12 per cent of conflict-related sexual violence.

X. Exit strategy
54. On 19 October, the Mission and the Government agreed on a jo int strategy on
the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO, as described in the letter of the
Secretary-General dated 26 October to the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/1041).
55. In accordance with the directive of the Secretary-General for the development
of consistent and coherent United Nations transitions, the Deputy Special
Representative (Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator) will ensure that
there is an inclusive process for the operationalization and implementation of the joint
strategy through engagement with the United Nations country team, humanitarian
partners and international financial institutions, including the World Bank, in line
with the humanitarian-development-peace nexus approach. MONUSCO and the
United Nations country team will develop a joint operational plan outlining their
relevant roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the Mission’s transition
plan.
56. The transition is well under way in Kasai and Kasai Central. On 17 September,
an integrated transition task force for the Kasai region was established to strategically
reposition the United Nations system’s presence in the two Kasai provinces, in
preparation for the Mission’s withdrawal by June 2021 , and support the provincial

12/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

authorities in key peacebuilding areas. To this end, the task force will: (a) update the
mapping of humanitarian and development programmes; (b) conduct an analysis of
comparative advantages of agencies, funds and programmes with respect to the
peacebuilding priorities identified; and (c) coordinate a joint communications
strategy. In order to mitigate the risk of a security gap, since 19 September, the United
Nations police has deployed seven additional individual police office rs to Kananga
and a further six to Tshikapa. Furthermore, two formed police unit platoons were also
redeployed to Kananga early in November and will remain there until the closure of
the MONUSCO field office. In Kananga and Tshikapa, the United Nations pol ice,
UNDP, the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) launched a
project, financed by the Peacebuilding Fund, on proximity policing. An additional
project was launched by the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office and
UN-Women in Tshikapa on inclusive governance. In line with the humanitarian development-peace nexus approach, MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team have finalized a joint programme on agricultural development and food security.
57. MONUSCO and the United Nations country team initiated joint programmes to
support the implementation of national reform plans and reinforce the capacities of
national institutions in the justice and police sectors. MO NUSCO and UNDP are also
jointly developing a stabilization programme focused on sustainable conflict
transformation and the enhancement of community resilience within the framework
of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy.
58. The United Nations police, in partnership with MONUSCO and the Mine Action
Service, developed a joint plan to support the Congolese National Police in improving
the safety of State-owned weapons and prevent their misuse. This plan has
incorporated monitoring mechanisms, including joint field assessment missions to
track and assess the impact of the initiative.

XI. Mission effectiveness
A.

Mission performance

1.

Assessment of the performance of the force and police components
59. In line with the Action for Peacekeeping commitments, MONUSCO focused on
ensuring a high level of performance of its uniformed components, while at the same
time taking steps to enhance force protection procedures, including in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic. Inspections of military units, which were suspended owing
to the pandemic, resumed on 14 September. Four units were inspected, including three
in the Intervention Brigade and one in Central Sector. Two units were assessed as
satisfactory and two assessments have not been approved yet. In accordance with the
new inspection standard operating procedure, several critical indicators have been
included in the inspections aimed at measuring the impact of unit operations in their
relevant area of responsibility, including defence plans, patrolling, protection of
civilian plans and activities, convoy escorts, mortar drills and communications. A new
matrix system was developed for monitoring recommendations and actions to be
implemented at the unit, sector headquarters and force headquarters levels. In
addition, the integration of female engagement teams in major units has contributed
to an improvement in the performance of the force, esp ecially in the areas of civilianmilitary cooperation and medical services. Women represent 4.1 per cent of the
Mission’s total contingent strength. The tempo of operations has reached levels
similar to those prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, with 15,039 patrols conducted by
the force and the launch of 11 standing combat deployments.

20-15795

13/17

S/2020/1150

60. The 2020–2021 performance evaluation of four of the six formed police units
was planned for the end of November, in Bukavu, Goma, Bunia and Kinshasa. One
formed police unit was not operational until 12 October because it was put in
quarantine owing to diagnosed cases of COVID-19 within its ranks. The sixth formed
police unit conducted its rotation on 13 November and is expected to be operational
on 10 December, while its first performance evaluation is due on 10 February 2021.
Steps were taken to enhance the effectiveness of formed police units through the
provision of additional contingent-owned equipment, armoured personnel carriers,
crowd-control equipment, water cannon trucks and unmanned aerial system
equipment with night vision. To further enhance operational readiness, MONUSCO
organized 533 dedicated training sessions for formed police units, including joint
MONUSCO police and force scenario-based sessions, awareness-raising sessions on
the prevention of misconduct and sessions on public order management. The key
deficiencies that were identified and are being addressed related to inadequate
accommodation, the need to enhance safety measures, including perimeter defenc es
in three camps in Beni and Kinshasa, and outdated contingent -owned equipment.
61. Women officers constitute 16.8 per cent of MONUSCO formed police unit
personnel. The Mission continues its advocacy to encourage police-contributing
countries to increase the number of female personnel and commanding staff within
formed police units, with the aim of achieving 25 per cent women officers by the end
of 2020.
62. MONUSCO conducted a quarterly performance evaluation for 255 individual
police officers, including 75 women officers. Evaluation criteria included
professionalism, a commitment to addressing protection challenges, identifying
security threats, productivity, and information-gathering and analysis. The overall
performance assessment saw an increase from 81.81 to 81.90 per cent. MONUSCO
also reviewed key skill sets of individual police officers regarding current operational
needs in the context of transition planning and conducted 40 redeployments within
the mission area.
2.

Progress in the implementation of the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System
63. The Mission made further progress towards the implementation of the
Comprehensive Performance Assessment System with the refinement of its results
framework. The framework was reviewed in the light of the joint strategy and further
expanded in line with the development of the Mission’s operational plans for the
provincial strategies, which mapped the Mission’s outputs at the field level. The
mapping of indicators and outputs provided input to several planning work streams,
including the formulation of the results-based budget for the coming fiscal year.

3.

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on mandate implementation
64. The suspension of rotations for several months had a negative impact on the
force and police generation processes, authorized by the Security Council in its
resolution 2502 (2019). One formed police unit rotation was postponed from April to
November 2020, while delays in the generation of two new formed police units for
Beni and Kalemie also occurred. The police generation process is expected to be
completed by April 2021. Significant staff officer shortages in the Intervention
Brigade headquarters and the force headquarters occurred as a result of military staff
officers leaving the Mission without the timely arrival of their replacements. Military
observers were given new assignments in order to fill critical gaps. In addition, the
suspension of rotations further delayed the implementation of several recommendations
made by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz in his report, including
the deployment of the Geolocation Threat Analysis Unit.

14/17

20-15795

S/2020/1150

65. As at 25 November, 171 United Nations personnel in the Democratic Republ ic
of the Congo had tested positive for COVID-19, 149 had recovered and 6 MONUSCO
personnel died after contracting the virus.

B.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
66. Between 1 September and 31 October, no allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse involving personnel were recorded by the Mission. However, two allegations
of serious misconduct that did not relate to sexual exploitation and abuse were
recorded and are under investigation.
67. Reflecting the Action for Peacekeeping commitment to accountability of
peacekeepers, MONUSCO sustained its implementation of robust preventive
measures against misconduct, including training, risk assessments and the
enforcement of curfews and out-of-bounds areas. In the context of COVID-19,
community outreach on the United Nations “zero tolerance” policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse continues to be pursued predominantly through radio
broadcasts and text messages.

XII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
68. Ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel and facilities
remained a priority, in line with the Action for Peacekeeping commitments. A total of
158 incidents against United Nations personnel and facilities were recorded,
including 12 incidents related to armed conflict, 50 to crime, 81 to civil unrest and 15
to hazards. Of the personnel affected, 14 were international staff (9 men and 5 women)
and 25 national staff (20 men and 5 women). This represents a 107.8 per cent increase
from the 76 incidents recorded in the previous reporting period. The increase in the
number of incidents could be attributed to the socioeconomic impact of COVID -19
on the local population, which resulted in increased incidents of criminality and civil
unrest. All cases were referred to the judicial authorities, and MONUSCO is
supporting relevant investigations and trials.
69. On 20 October, the trial in the murder case of the two United Nations experts in
Kasai and Kasai Central in 2017 recommenced before the military court of Kananga.
Owing to the large number of defendants in the case, hearings had been postponed
for several months because of the COVID-19 pandemic. On 17 October, the
Operational Military Court acquitted 18 members of the Congolese National Police
for various crimes in relation to the attack on the MONUSCO office in Boikene, Beni,
on 25 November 2019. However, charges are now expected to also be brought against
the National Police commander at the time. The second trial related to that incident,
involving civilians, remains adjourned.

XIII. Observations and recommendations
70. I remain concerned by the rising political tensions within the ruling coalition,
which could undermine the fragile political stability, reverse the gains made since the
2018 elections and the resulting peaceful transfer of power, and divert efforts to
address security challenges in the eastern part of the country. While Parliament is
working and receiving bills from the Government, the indefinite suspension of the
Council of Ministers illustrates a breakdown of communication within the executive
branch, which is very concerning and could undermine the institutional stability of
the country. I call upon all stakeholders to resolve their differences through dialogue,

20-15795

15/17

S/2020/1150

in accordance with the Constitution and in the greater interest of the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
71. I am encouraged by the constructive dialogue between the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, which has resulted in the
articulation of a joint strategy for the Mission’s progressive drawdown. I reiterate my
commitment to ensuring that the transition and eventual exit of MONUSCO is
sequenced, conditions-based and driven by the situation on the ground in each of the
provinces where MONUSCO is still present. To this end, I call upon international
partners to lend their full support to MONUSCO and the United Nations country team
in helping to create the conditions for the progressive transfer of the Mission’s tasks
to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
72. I remain concerned by the deterioration in the human rights situation in conflict affected provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, m arked by an increasing
number of human rights abuses and violations attributed not only to armed groups,
but also to national defence and security forces. I condemn in the strongest terms the
continued attacks on civilians by armed groups in the eastern pa rt of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and urge them to respond to my call for a global ceasefire and
lay down their weapons.
73. A sustained effort is required to help to foster an enabling environment for the
adoption and implementation of key governance and security reforms. The United
Nations, in conjunction with regional and international partners, remains committed to
supporting the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in strengthening
the core functions of the State, through security sector reform, the implementation of a
new disarmament, demobilization and reintegration framework, the pursuit of a robust
human rights and rule of law agenda and the creation of a protective environment that
will enable the participation of citizens in the decision-making process.
74. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
continues to deteriorate, especially in conflict-affected provinces, is deeply
concerning. I wish to thank international partners for their assista nce and encourage
them to redouble their efforts in this regard. I congratulate the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and international partners for concerted efforts in ending the eleventh
Ebola outbreak in the west. I condemn, in the strongest terms, arme d attacks on
humanitarian actors and call upon the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to bring the perpetrators to justice.
75. Important steps towards the stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been made in the past year, although the Government and people continue to face
significant challenges that require the support of MONUSCO and the country’s key
regional and international partners. I therefore recommend the extension of the mandate
of MONUSCO for one year with its current authorized troop and police strength and
strategic objectives, namely: (a) the protection of civilians; and (b) the stabilization and
the strengthening of State institutions and key governance and security reforms.
76. MONUSCO will continue to deliver on its core mandated responsibilities, as
efficiently and effectively as possible. I continue to count on the full support of
Security Council members, troop- and police-contributing countries and key regional
partners to ensure the timely implementation of the envisaged improvements to the
MONUSCO force, including its Intervention Brigade.
77. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Leila Zerrougui, for her steadfast
leadership and dedication. I also wish to express my sincere gratitude to all
MONUSCO personnel, the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes region
and troop- and police-contributing countries for their continued commitment towards
peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
16/17

20-15795

20-15795

S/2020/1150

17/17
