S/PV.8921

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8921st meeting

Wednesday, 8 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Ndung’u
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 November 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/989)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-37901 (E)
*2137901*

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

As I have previously informed the Council, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability to deploy to the
Syrian Arab Republic remains subject to the evolution of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Despite
continued travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat
continues to undertake its mandated activities related
to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab
Republic in that regard.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 November 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/989)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/989, which contains the text of a letter
dated 30 November 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Council members for
the opportunity to brief the Council again on the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the previous Security Council meeting
on resolution 2118 (2013), held on 11 November, the
Office for Disarmament Affairs has been in regular
contact with its counterparts at the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its
activities related to this matter. Per established practice,
I held a monthly call with the OPCW Director-General
on 3 December to receive an update on developments
and ascertain his views.
Additionally, the Office for Disarmament Affairs
received information from the Permanent Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic concerning chemical
weapons issues for this period. This information was
studied carefully and also forwarded to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat.
2/18

08/12/2021

The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
is persisting with its ongoing efforts to clarify all the
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration
by the Syrian Arab Republic to the OPCW. I want
to highlight that the Technical Secretariat’s role is
to assess whether explanations provided by Syrian
experts for gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
in the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration are
scientifically plausible. Once these assessments are
conducted, the OPCW Technical Secretariat assists
the Syrian Arab Republic in amending its initial
declaration, as required, to ensure an accurate and
complete declaration. I understand that the Syrian
Arab Republic has submitted a total of 17 amendments
and a number of supplements to its initial declaration.
However, out of the 24 outstanding issues opened by
the DAT in 2014, 20 remain unresolved.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains of the
position that the Syrian Arab Republic must declare
all types and quantities of chemical warfare agents
produced and/or weaponized at the former chemical
weapons production facility that was declared by
the Syrian Arab Republic to have never been used to
produce and/or weaponize chemical weapons. I have
been advised that the OPCW Secretariat has not yet
received the requested declarations from the Syrian
Arab Republic.
I have also been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received a response from the
Syrian Arab Republic on requests for information
and documentation regarding the damage caused to
the declared former chemical weapons production
facility during the attack on 8 June, nor has it received
a response to the request for information regarding
the unauthorized movement and remains of the two
destroyed cylinders related to the chemical weapon
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018.
In this regard, I call on the Syrian Arab Republic to
respond to the OPCW Technical Secretariat as soon
as possible.
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Since April, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has attempted to schedule with the Syrian National
Authority the twenty-fifth round of consultations with
the DAT in Damascus. However, I regret to inform
Council members that the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has not been in a position to conduct that deployment,
due to the continued refusal of the Syrian Arab Republic
to issue all the requested visas to members of the DAT.
I also regret to inform the Council that efforts by the
Technical Secretariat to convene a limited meeting
with Syrian experts at the OPCW’s headquarters in The
Hague in late October were unsuccessful.
As a result of the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
I reiterate my call on the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to facilitate arrangements for the DAT’s
deployment as soon as possible. As has been stressed
on numerous occasions, it is only through the complete
cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat that all outstanding issues
related to the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration
can be closed. The confidence of the international
community in the complete elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme depends upon those
issues being finalized.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is planning for inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre (SSRC) in December. However,
the inspections of those facilities remain subject to
the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I am also
advised that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to
provide sufficient technical information or explanations
that would enable the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
close the issue related to the detection of a Schedule
2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC in
November 2018.
With regard to the in-person meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
note that the officials in charge of preparations continue
discussing the date, location, agenda and composition
of the delegations.

S/PV. 8921

Consistent with previous updates to the Council,
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains in the
process of studying all available information related
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic and continues to engage with the
Syrian Arab Republic and other States parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention with regard to a variety
of incidents. Further FFM deployments will be subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I understand that, following the issuance of its second
report in April, the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to once again reiterate my full support for
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
As I previously informed the Council (see
S/PV.8872), on 21 April the Conference of the States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, at its
twenty-fifth session, adopted the decision C-25/DEC.9,
entitled “Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical
Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”, suspending
the rights and privileges of the Syrian Arab Republic
under the Convention. According to paragraph 8 of that
decision, the rights and privileges of the Syrian Arab
Republic will be reinstated by the Conference of the
States Parties once the OPCW Director-General has
reported to the Executive Council that the Syrian Arab
Republic has completed all of the measures contained
in paragraph 5 of Executive Council decision EC94/DEC.2. I have been advised that the Syrian Arab
Republic has yet to complete all those measures. I urge
the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat in that regard.
Before closing, I wish to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s message on the Day of Remembrance for
all Victims of Chemical Warfare, commemorated on
30 November:
“Any use of chemical weapons is unacceptable and
a clear violation of international law. Identifying
those responsible and holding them to account is of
paramount importance. We have a responsibility,
particularly to the victims, to ensure accountability
for the use of these heinous weapons.

21-379013/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

“The United Nations supports all efforts to uphold
the norm against chemical weapons, and to relegate
these dreadful weapons to history.”
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As this is the last meeting of the Security
Council on the Syrian chemical weapons issue this year,
it is time to take stock. Unfortunately, the situation is far
from encouraging and the root of the ongoing and newly
emerging problems is not actually in Syria. The main
source of disappointment is the constant attempts to
politicize the work of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which is leading us
ever closer to destroying one of the most important
pillars of the regime of non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. That is not at all what we are trying
to achieve, but the erosion of confidence in the OPCW
has taken on alarming proportions, no matter how much
our Western counterparts try to convince us otherwise.
It is no longer possible to hide the fact that the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, at the behest of certain States, is
rubber-stamping one politically motivated report after
another. Based on those reports, the governing bodies of
the OPCW are pushing through discriminatory decisions
against responsible member States, while the OPCW
leadership plays along with those violations, avoiding a
serious dialogue with member States that truly care
about the fate and the reputation of the organization.
The recently concluded twenty-sixth session of
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention was, unfortunately, a clear
confirmation of these unseemly trends. Its culmination
and main outcome was the fact that, for the first time in the
history of the OPCW, a sovereign State that scrupulously
complied with its obligations under the Convention lost
its rights in the organization. That is a tremendous blow
to the reputation of the OPCW and the entire chemical
weapons non-proliferation regime. Its long-term
consequences have yet to be understood, but the
erosion of international confidence in the OPCW is
already apparent.
In the light of the many significant and systemic
violations, it is pointless to talk about the current
report of the Director-General on the implementation
4/18

08/12/2021

of resolution 2118 (2013) (see S/2021/989). Its main
objective is to do whatever it takes, in spite of the facts
and common sense, to make Damascus look bad. In that
respect, it is not much different from all the previous
reports of Mr. Arias.
Frankly, the situation at the OPCW has deteriorated
so much that there is no guarantee that we will ever be
able to get back to any kind of starting point in order to
rectify the situation. For that to happen, the leadership
of that organization would have to show the courage
to acknowledge and correct the mistakes it has made.
So far, however, it has not shown such willingness,
only making matters worse. That is why, in the
re-election of Mr. Arias, we distanced ourselves
from consensus. However, we are continuing to work
with him. We would like to hope that the OPCW
leadership will draw the necessary conclusions
from what is happening. In particular, we are counting
on a reasonable and conscientious response to the
concerns we have expressed in the Security Council.
Specifically, exactly one year ago, we issued a list of
eight questions about irregularities in the work of the
Technical Secretariat (see S/2020/1202). At the time,
the Director-General refused to answer them in an
open session. We also did not receive any responses in
closed consultations.
Six months later, in June, during another briefing
by Fernando Arias (see S/PV.8785), we asked additional
questions. Once again, we heard no answers on the
substance. Instead, we received blatant disinformation
and an outright distortion of the facts. For example,
as we all recall, Mr. Arias deliberately distorted
the essence of the note correspondence between the
Permanent Mission of Russia to the OPCW and the
Technical Secretariat with regard to the investigation
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) to Douma,
omitting the main conclusion reached in our note — that
Russia insists on the staged nature of the incident in
question because the findings presented in the FFM
report (S/1731/2019) did not allow us to conclude that
toxic chemicals were used as weapons. That is just one
example. There were so many glaring inconsistencies
and direct distortions in his responses that we were
forced to respond by circulating our arguments as an
official Security Council document. It should be no
surprise, then, for me to note that it would be impolite
to refuse to answer such questions, and we are going to
insist on that.
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8921

Our primary concern, but not the only one, is the
notorious FFM report on the April 2018 incident in
Douma. As confirmed by various sources, including
former inspectors of the OPCW who were directly
involved in that investigation, the final version of the
report was radically different from the original version,
due to pressure from certain delegations. In other
words, there was fraud. Attempts by those inspectors
for the OPCW to investigate what happened came to
naught. Instead, they were harassed for their search for
the truth.

has been singled out. Other countries with similar issues
have not been targets of such a barrage of criticism. I note
that despite joining the CWC under extremely difficult
conditions of military and political instability and
terrorism fuelled from abroad, Syria has nevertheless
fulfilled all its obligations in good faith, as reported by
the Director-General to the Security Council in June
2014 (see S/1191/2014). The final elimination of Syria’s
military chemical capabilities was confirmed in 2016
by the OPCW Executive Council and the Conference of
the States Parties.

We know that the current leadership of the OPCW
is fed up with this issue and is trying to hush up the
matter in every possible way. Further evidence of that
is the Director-General’s refusal to involve the OPWC’s
Scientific Advisory Board to examine the Douma report
matter. We are not convinced by references to the need
for a new decision by the governing bodies of the OPCW
for that to happen. The ability of CWC member States
to ask the Scientific Advisory Board for an adequate
explanation on issues related to the implementation of
the Convention is stipulated in article VIII.

Contrary to Mr. Arias’ claims, under the CWC, the
Technical Secretariat has no right to apply complicated
and politically motivated verification requirements
to Syria. The very nature of the mandate of the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) does not envision
any investigative powers; its task is merely to assist
Syria in preparing its initial declaration. Nevertheless,
in reality, the DAT, with a nod from the Technical
Secretariat, has become a full-fledged inspection team,
with self-appointed intrusive mandates. And dialogue
with the DAT to assess the initial declaration is part of
bilateral commitments undertaken voluntarily by Syria.
I think our Syrian colleagues will be able to elaborate
on their vision of engagement with the DAT and I urge
one and all to listen carefully to what they have to say.

And yet, evidence of blatant manipulation and
fraud in the preparation of the FFM report on Douma
is only increasing. In particular, a number of media
outlets have recently reported on a meeting between
four representatives of the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and leading German experts on chemical weapons in
Germany in June 2018. It only took those experts one
hour to conclude that the nature of the evidence and
the symptoms of the victims in Douma did not fit the
typical pattern resulting from the use of chlorine as a
chemical warfare agent. Why were the conclusions of
those German experts not included in the Technical
Secretariat’s final report on Douma? The answer is
obvious — they did not fit with the version of events
fabricated by the Technical Secretariat. The same fate
befell many other opinions and evidence. The Douma
report and its falsifications alone is a scandalous
episode that some of our colleagues in the Security
Council and the OPCW Technical Secretariat wish to
forget, but it is just the tip of the iceberg. Those kinds
of glaring inconsistencies and manipulations were
characteristic of all previous reports on other episodes
of the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria — in
Khan Shaykhun, Saraqib, Ltamenah and elsewhere.
We have also been unable to get clarification on
Syria’s initial declaration under the CWC. We have
repeatedly asked Mr. Arias to explain why Damascus

We remain very concerned about the Technical
Secretariat’s use of flawed methodology based on
information collected remotely from biased sources,
primarily the notorious White Helmets. That is a direct
violation of the CWC, which has a chain-of-custody
requirement to ensure that evidence is preserved.
There are other questions. For example, why has
Mr. Arias never visited the Syrian Arab Republic to
see the situation on the ground that he so confidently
references in his reports? Such a visit is not only long
overdue, but also an obligation of the head of the
Technical Secretariat. Syria has extended an open
invitation, and we do not understand what is preventing
him from visiting the country, despite the explanation
provided today by Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Unfortunately, all our attempts to engage in dialogue
with the leadership of the Technical Secretariat have
been stonewalled, and not only on the Syrian chemical
dossier. We have also sought — in vain — answers from
the Technical Secretariat on a number of key issues
that are important for clarifying the events regarding

21-379015/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Navalny. So far, the Director-General of the OPCW
has sidestepped us, just like our Western colleagues.
Overall, in view of the above, I believe that the
Security Council has sufficient grounds to propose a
dialogue with Mr. Arias in the near future, and we hope
that he will be better prepared than in previous meetings.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I would
like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
informative briefing, as always. Let me say up front that
the United States appreciates her efforts and the work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in dealing with this extremely
important issue.
Our Russian friend has thrown a lot of allegations
and claims against the wall, many of which we have heard
multiple times. I agree with our Russian friends that it
is perhaps a good time to take stock. It has been eight
years since the Security Council adopted resolution 2118
(2013), requiring the destruction of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme. In the years since that adoption,
the Government of the United States and the majority of
Council members have deeply regretted Syria’s failure
to uphold its obligations. We have regretted Syria’s
serious continuous and egregious disregard for calls
from all of us and from the international community to
cease the use of chemical weapons and fully disclose
and verifiably eliminate its programme.
However, I sometimes think that our message of
condemnation and outrage, although it is consistent
and clear, often gets lost in the details. What gets lost
is highlighting the impact of the violations on human
beings — those who are victimized by such weapons
and the lives that are lost as a result.
On 1 February 2018, the Al-Assad regime dropped
chemical barrel bombs on its own people in the eastern
Ghouta district of Damascus as part of a barbaric siege.
On 7 April, that was followed by another attack, using at
least two chlorine bombs, in which dozens of civilians
were killed. Chlorine attacks such as those, as I think
everyone around this table knows, burn the skin of their
victims and cause fluid to fill the lungs as though the
victim is drowning in the open air.
That forces us to consider for a moment the audacity
of the Al-Assad regime — the repeated substantiated
use of chemical weapons against the Syrian people, the
retention of chemical weapons to conduct such attacks
and the abject refusal to comply with its obligations
6/18

08/12/2021

under the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013), but all while steadfastly denying the clear
truth and, instead, trying to portray itself as a victim.
The United States sanctioned Tawfiq Muhammad
Khadour, the commander of the 30th Brigade of the
Syrian Air Force at Douma air base, for his role in those
two attacks. Both the Al-Assad regime and its enablers,
notably Russia, which tried to shield Syria from scrutiny,
should know that the United States will continue to
use all available tools, including sanctions, to promote
accountability for the use of chemical weapons.
The United States estimates that the Al-Assad
regime has used chemical weapons against the Syrian
people at least 50 times since the conflict began.
The use of those weapons is a serious threat not
only to the people of Syria, but also to international
security, However, as the April decision of the OPCW
Conference of the States Parties reflects, and as High
Representative Nakamitsu explained, Syria continues
to flout its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). The Conference
of the States Parties therefore decided to suspend some
of Syria’s rights and privileges under the Convention
until, as we heard, the Director-General reports that
the Al-Assad regime has completed certain measures,
including declaring all its chemical-weapons facilities
and any chemical weapons that it continues to possess.
The decision was clear as to what the Syrian
regime needs to do to retain its rights and its privileges.
However, since then, Syria has made no effort to fulfil
such measures, and the regime’s lack of cooperation
has only worsened. We have seen the regime continue
to deny, and delay, visas for OPCW personnel, resulting
in unprecedented gaps in the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s presence in Damascus, as well as
infinite delays in the work of the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team.
The United States welcomes the extension of OPCW
Director-General Fernando Arias’s appointment to lead
the Organization for another four-year term, as was
approved last week by the most recent Conference of the
States Parties. We believe that, under his able leadership,
the OPCW has continued to carry out its impartial and
independent work despite Syria’s intransigence and
obstruction and Russia’s continued assault, frankly,
on the OPCW in the Security Council. It is troubling
that the Al-Assad regime’s allies, including Russia,
actively sought to block all attempts at accountability.
21-37901

08/12/2021

S/PV. 8921

The situation in the Middle East

As we heard, Russia continues to spread disinformation
about the use of chemical weapons in Syria, attack the
integrity and professional work of the OPCW, impede
ongoing efforts by responsible nations to hold the
Al-Assad regime accountable for its use of chemical
weapons and accuse Member States of politicizing
what, in fact, are heinous atrocities. That pattern of
enablement is both irresponsible and dangerous.
As long as the Al-Assad regime continues to
perpetrate atrocities against its own people, peace in
that country will remain out of reach. The United States
strongly supports all efforts to ensure that resolution
2118 (2013) is implemented and to secure a political
resolution consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).

gaps,
inconsistencies
remain unresolved.

and

discrepancies

that

In conclusion, I reiterate that Kenya remains
convinced that there can be no military solution to
the situation in Syria, and I reaffirm our commitment
to advancing a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing. We take note of the monthly report (see
S/2021/989) of the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).

Kenya reaffirms its principled position that the
use of chemical weapons anywhere and by anyone
constitutes a grave violation of international law. No
cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass
destruction under any circumstances.

We note that, despite the repeated requests of the
OPCW, the Syrian authorities have yet to provide all
the information necessary to clarify the discrepancies
regarding 20 outstanding issues in their initial
declaration. My delegation reiterates that the task
of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) is to
resolve those outstanding inconsistencies, which are
also part of Syria’s obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

Verification of the use of such weapons requires
the institutions responsible for investigating such
attacks, including the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), to diligently fulfil their
role. We therefore reiterate our support for the mandate
of the OPCW and the tremendous responsibility
that it bears as the guardian of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

Given what I have just said, we call on the Damascus
Government to fully cooperate with the DAT, including
in promptly issuing visas, in order to ensure that all
the officials of the Assessment Team can carry out the
relevant on-site inspections. In addition, we recall that
the appointment of experts as members of the OPCW
fact-finding investigative delegations is the prerogative
of the Technical Secretariat.

Kenya also reiterates the need for the States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention to continue to
have confidence in the OPCW as the only technically
competent international authority in its area of work. In
that regard, the States parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention should work together to preserve the
international norm against chemical weapons and the
provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent
and non-discriminatory implementation.

We also urge the Syrian authorities to facilitate
the inspection of the two sites of the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre in Barzah and Jamrayah,
scheduled for December. Moreover, we again urge
the competent authorities — without prejudice to
condemning all violations of the Syrian airspace — to
clarify the reasons why the chlorine cylinders related
to the Douma incident of April 2018 were transferred
without authorization.

Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for her comprehensive briefing.

With regard to today’s briefing, I re-emphasize
Kenya’s conviction that an expeditious closure of the
investigations into the use of chemical weapons in
Syria will allow the Security Council to support the
Syrian people more meaningfully in their quest for
lasting peace. We therefore continue to encourage
cooperation and engagement in good faith between
the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, particularly regarding the identified

We note favourably the extension of the Tripartite
Agreement between the OPCW, the United Nations
Office for Project Services and Syria for a further six
months, although, as the Secretariat itself has stated,
it would be preferable to have more time to effectively
plan the functions and deployment of the teams.
Mexico welcomes the Member States that
contribute financially to the Trust Fund for Syria

21-379017/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

Missions, since without such support the work of the
OPCW investigation teams would not be possible.
I express once again the full confidence and full
support of my country’s delegation to the OPCW,
its organs and officials. I also reaffirm Mexico’s
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by any
actor and in any circumstance.
Before concluding, my delegation once again calls
on the Government of Syria to cooperate with the
OPCW and its investigative bodies. Mexico reiterates
that the solution to the conflict in Syria must adhere
to international law and the relevant resolutions of
this Council.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing on the progress towards the full
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
Once again, the Council is meeting with
regrettably few developments in the Syrian dossier. It
is discouraging that this has been the overwhelming
trend throughout the year. The Syrian Arab Republic
must fulfil its obligations in accordance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). Norway urges Syria to fully cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and provide sufficient technical information
and explanations to close the 20 outstanding issues. It
is critical that Syria complete the necessary measures
in order to lift the suspension of its rights and privileges
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Last week, the Conference of State Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention convened in The Hague.
Fifty-six State parties, including Norway, expressed
their grave concern regarding Syria’s lack of cooperation
with the OPCW and the Technical Secretariat. An
important first step towards cooperation would be
to resume regular deployments of the Declaration
Assessment Team. Norway is concerned that the Team
has not been deployed to Syria since February. Such
consultations are important for ensuring consistent
cooperation, exchange of information and providing
technical assistance to Syria.
We welcome the six-month extension of the
Tripartite Agreement between Syria, the OPCW and
the United Nations Office for Project Services. This
is an improvement compared to the previous extension
of only three months. However, we take note of the
8/18

08/12/2021

Technical Secretariat’s need for a longer time span
to be able to plan and implement its deployments
effectively. We therefore encourage future extensions
of the agreement to be of at least nine months’ duration.
We must ensure that the international prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons is upheld. Norway’s
confidence in the work of Director-General Arias
and the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW remains
steadfast, and we firmly reject any effort to discredit
their important work.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
think Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China has reiterated its position on the Syrian
chemical weapons issue on many occasions and has
called for respect for science and facts, adherence
to the technical attributes of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
avoidance of politicization. The investigation and
handling of the alleged use of chemical weapons must
comply strictly with OPCW requirements so that proper
procedures and reliable evidence are used to reach
credible conclusions.
Based on that position, China has always been
concerned about the establishment and work of the
Investigation and Identification Team. It is hoped that
State parties will strengthen their dialogue, return to
the tradition of making decisions by consensus and
avoid repeatedly pushing for voting, which will further
widen the differences among all parties.
With regard to the initial declaration and the
arrangements for the twenty-fifth round of technical
consultations, China calls on the Technical Secretariat to
maintain constructive communication and cooperation
with the Syrian Government. The most recent monthly
report mentioned that,
“Due to the obstacles produced by the refusal,
several times, to issue the visas requested by the
Secretariat from the Syrian Arab Republic, the DAT
has been unable to deploy to Damascus” (S/2021/989,
para. 16).
That statement is not accurate. The Syrian
Government asked that only one member of the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) be replaced
and issued visas to other members, which should
be objectively reflected in the report. Moreover, the
Technical Secretariat cancelled the entire consultation
because one member did not have a visa and stated that
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

it was not in a position to deploy the DAT. That is not
helpful in resolving the problem and does not reflect
well on the OPCW. We would like to know whether,
in the cooperation between the State party and the
Technical Secretariat, the former has no right to express
concerns over visas? Has the Technical Secretariat
considered the possibility of replacing one member of
the Declaration Assessment Team?
China notes that, in its recent report to the Technical
Secretariat, the Syrian Government reaffirmed its
willingness to conduct technical consultations and
resolve the issue of the initial declaration, which we
welcome. We hope that the Technical Secretariat will
remain open and flexible and work towards narrowing
differences rather than increasing confrontation.
The Syrian chemical weapons issue cannot be
resolved overnight. The relevant discussions are
progressing slowly. Therefore, the Council’s monthly
deliberations is obviously too frequent. Serious
consideration should be given to reducing the frequency
of the deliberations. The monthly reports submitted by
the OPCW are largely the same. China believes that
they could be simplified, as appropriate, by focusing on
providing new trends and information.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing today. During our
two years of membership of the Council, we have very
much appreciated her commitment and persistent calls
for Security Council unity to uphold the norm against
chemical weapons.
It has been eight years and 98 reports on the
progress of the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme. Progress on that file has been
hard to achieve and only a few advances have been
made over the years. As we heard today, out of the 24
issues opened by the Declaration Assessment Team, 20
remain unresolved. Those 20 do not represent minor
issues or pure technicalities but involve the retention
and production of unknown quantities of chemical
weapons, chemical warfare agents and chemical
munitions. As long as those weapons are not fully
declared and destroyed, the possibility remains that
they will be used again.
Those 20 unresolved issues also represent the
Syrian regime’s persistent attempts to obstruct and
stall the work of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its investigative
mechanisms. Failing to issue visas and ignoring

S/PV. 8921

the OPCW’s requests for information and offers of
assistance is a clear demonstration of Syria’s lack of
cooperation, lack of seriousness and lack of good will
to comply with its international norms and obligations.
Unfortunately, that lack of compliance has
sponsors. Over the past two years in the Council, we
have witnessed a systematic disinformation campaign
to discredit and sow distrust against the most competent
organization in dealing with chemical weapons, solely
because the OPCW has come to conclusions that are
inconvenient for Syria and its protectors. Enabling Syria
to retain and use chemical weapons and undermining
the authority of the OPCW has serious consequences.
We are allowing the norm against the use of chemical
weapons to erode. We are allowing for setting in a new
normal where chemical weapons are used to eliminate
political rivals and punish the opposition. An alarming
increase in their use have already taken place over the
past years — in Malaysia, in the United Kingdom and,
most recently, in Russia, with the assassination attempt
of Alexei Navalny.
On 30 November, we commemorated the Day of
Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical Warfare.
According to the Syrian Network for Human Rights,
more than 1,500 Syrians have been killed by chemical
weapons, and more than 12,000 have been injured.
A great majority of those victims were civilians,
including women and children. The Syrian regime
has repeatedly used chemical weapons against its
people to spread terror, suppress opposition and force
people to leave their homes and surrender. That has
happened in Ghouta, Douma, Sarmin, Khan Shaykhun
and elsewhere.
The OPCW’s Investigation and Identification
Team released two well-researched, evidence-based
and impartial reports in 2020 and 2021 that attributed
responsibility to Syrian Government forces for the
use of chemical weapons. The great majority of the
OPCW States parties reacted by condemning those acts
and suspended Syria’s rights and privileges under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. With the exception of
very few Syrian allies, support for the OPCW is strong,
and the message is clear: the use of chemical weapons
has consequences.
The next steps should be to ensure accountability.
Resolution 2118 (2013) states clearly that those
individuals responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be held accountable. The facts are there; the

21-379019/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

evidence is there. What we need is political will, a sense
of responsibility and Council unity. Impunity, tolerance
and inaction cannot be an option when chemical
weapons are used against civilian populations.
In conclusion, the use of chemical weapons
presents a serious security threat to all States. Estonia
condemns the use of chemical weapons in the strongest
terms. We call on members of the Security Council
and those that start their term next month to stand up
for international law. It is important that the Council
continue to discuss this important issue on a monthly
basis until Syria’s chemical weapons are declared and
destroyed and accountability is ensured. Estonia will
continue supporting the OPCW and fight against the
use of chemical weapons, including outside the Council.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing. I welcome the
participation of the representatives of Syria, Iran and
Turkey in today’s meeting.
Tunisia reiterates its steadfast condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere,
in any circumstances and for any motives and
justifications. It is necessary to hold the perpetrators
of such atrocity crimes accountable. In that connection,
we once again express our support for the mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), whose duty is to independently and
impartially investigate and verify issues, including
in the Syrian Arab Republic. The OPCW provides a
forum for consultation and cooperation among States
on related matters.
We took note of the most recent report of the
Director-General of the OPCW (see S/2021/989)
pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013). We deplore the
fact that the Syrian chemical weapons dossier is still
at a stalemate and that there is no sign of the desired
progress. These circumstances make it necessary
for technical dialogue to resume between the Syrian
Government and the Technical Secretariat, and for the
Declaration Assessment Team to resume its mission
in Syria in the context of an agreement between the
two parties. In that regard, we hope to see a meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria as soon as
possible in order to discuss the way forward through
a constructive and transparent dialogue based on
mutual trust.
10/18

08/12/2021

We urge for the definitive settlement of pending
issues so that Syria can fulfil its contractual obligations.
We also urge the OPCW to heed the concerns of the
Syrian Government in its capacity as a sovereign State
and a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), leading to optimal solutions. It is obvious that
that cannot occur without the resumption of direct
dialogue, joint cooperation and coordination. We
hope that forthcoming circumstances will allow for
overcoming the obstacles imposed by the pandemic
that have hindered the OPCW missions and teams in
Syria so that they can resume their activities fully
on Syrian territory, pursuant to their mandate. We
reiterate that it is necessary to address constructively
and comprehensively all obstacles and challenges that
are blocking progress in the OPCW’s investigations
into using toxic chemical as weapons in Syria.
In conclusion, we emphasize once again that the
efforts by the OPCW and the effectiveness of the ban on
chemical weapons, in general, as well as the efforts by
the Syrian Government, can be strongly supported by
the coordinated efforts, constructive cooperation and
consensual solutions of the Security Council and the
international community at large, in order to monitor
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the
CWC, with a view to eliminating the chemical weapons
threat, closing the Syrian chemical dossier and ending
the crisis.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. We
also thank Director-General Arias for his monthly
report (see S/2021/989), and we congratulate him on
his reappointment last week as Director-General,
demonstrating the overwhelming support of the States
parties to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his leadership. We also
welcome the adoption of the OPCW’s budget, which
will ensure the ability of the Technical Secretariat,
including the Investigation and Identification Team, to
carry out its important disarmament functions.
This month’s report demonstrates yet again how the
OPCW has attempted to discharge those functions, while
Syria has again failed to engage on process, let alone
on substance. We regret that, due to Syria’s repeated
refusal to issue visas requested for the Technical
Secretariat, the Declaration Assessment Team has been
unable to deploy to Syria for many months.
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

As the Director-General observes in his report, the
substance of the 20 outstanding issues on Syria’s initial
declaration are a significant cause for concern, among
them the undeclared production and weaponization
of toxic chemicals, including nerve agents, and the
unknown whereabouts of significant quantities of
chemical warfare agents and precursors.
The Syrian regime has been found by both the
United Nations and the OPCW to have used chemical
weapons on at least eight occasions during the
conflict — and the actual number may be much higher,
as we heard from others today. The outstanding issues
therefore constitute an ongoing threat to international
peace and security and a challenge to the Security
Council’s authority.
On 30 November, we commemorated the Day of
Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical Warfare. We
should take this moment to remember the Syrians killed
and affected by chemical weapons attacks perpetrated
by the Syrian regime and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. We cannot undo the damage done, but we
can — and should — ensure accountability for the use of
chemical weapons, and we can — and should — demand
adherence to resolution 2118 (2013) and the verifiable
destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons programme.
Instead, significant energy is expended in the
Security Council in spinning conspiracies and
undermining the OPCW and the Chemical Weapons
Convention, all to protect a regime at the expense
of the Syrian people and international security. If
that energy were expended in upholding Council
resolutions and persuading the Syrian regime to meet
its obligations, progress could perhaps be made towards
resolving this issue. We therefore once again urge the
Syrian authorities to take substantive steps to comply
with its obligations, and we reaffirm our commitment
to a Council united in ending the threat of chemical
weapons in Syria.

S/PV. 8921

Those weapons are indiscriminate and inhumane
and can have long-term effects on human life and the
environment, which can last for generations.
The full implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) is therefore a must. Such
implementation requires, on the one hand, the States
parties to fully abide by their obligations and, on the other
hand, international cooperation, including assistance to
and among those States. The role of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is
pivotal in that regard. As such, its work is also expected
to be carried out in the most comprehensive, objective
and impartial manner.
On the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, my
delegation is concerned about the alleged uses of such
weapons. Moreover, we also share the concern over the
limited progress in the search for a conclusive solution
to the issue. If our goal is to discuss the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), it may seem unfulfilling for
the outgoing elected members of the Security Council.
We believe that the one and only reason for that is the
trust deficit among the relevant parties and the longstanding divergence of the international community
over the issue of chemical weapons in Syria. The most
recent Conference of the States Parties to the CWC also
demonstrated that.
In finding a long-term solution to this issue, it is
important to renew trust in order to improve the working
relationship between Syria and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat. That can be achieved through constructive
efforts and engagement by all sides. We look forward
to the meeting between the Syrian Foreign Minister
and the OPCW Director-General with a view to finding
ways to break the ice.

Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): At the outset, I thank UnderSecretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey at this meeting.

Addressing the 20 remaining issues relating to the
initial declaration, the first obligation of a State party
under the CWC should be a priority. We therefore call
for close, continuous and constructive engagement
between the Declaration Assessment Team and the
Syrian National Authority.

Let me start by reiterating Viet Nam’s consistent
policy of supporting the non-proliferation and
disarmament of weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical weapons. In that vein, my delegation
unequivocally condemns the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.

The full implementation of the CWC and resolution
2118 (2013) can be achieved only once it is supported
by constructive and non-politicized international
cooperation. The unity of the international community
is indispensable to supporting the efforts of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government.

21-3790111/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

08/12/2021

In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to highlight the
importance of investing in a comprehensive political
settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), that is
led and owned by the Syrian themselves, facilitated
by the United Nations, in full accordance with the
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Such a political solution is the main
key to addressing all outstanding issues and the only
path towards sustainable peace and development for the
Syrian people.

also brought out those connections. Such linkages are a
cause for concern and need to be acted upon.

Mr. Mathur (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
update today.

The continuing lack of progress on this file is a
matter of serious concern for us. It is eight years since
the horrific chemical weapons attack at

We have taken note of the contents of the most
recent — the ninety-eighth — monthly report
(see S/2021/989) of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted to the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 2118 (2013). We also note Syria’s submission
of its monthly report. We would like both the OPCW
and Syria to work constructively to resolve the relevant
issues expeditiously.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is a unique,
non-discriminatory disarmament instrument for the
elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass
destruction. India attaches high importance to the CWC
and stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. We support collective efforts by
all to ensure that the credibility and integrity of the
Convention is maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. We have consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective, scrupulously
following the provisions and procedure embedded in the
Convention and in conformity with the delicate balance
of power and responsibility enshrined under it to
establish the facts and reach evidence-based conclusions.
As a member of the Security Council, India has
repeatedly cautioned against the possibility of terrorist
entities and individuals gaining access to chemical
weapons, including entities in the region. The most
recent report of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (S/2021/974)
12/18

Lastly, we believe that technical issues such
as Syria’s chemical weapons file need to be dealt
in an objective manner. Progress on such matters
could potentially help the political track move in a
positive direction.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her informative briefing today.

Ghouta, which killed hundreds of innocent civilians
and caused lasting injury and suffering for thousands.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2118 (2013)
to make clear that the use of chemical weapons is
utterly unacceptable and that no such attack should
ever happen in Syria again. Unfortunately, as we know,
and as the investigations by the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) have confirmed, since then there have been
numerous instances where those terrible weapons were
directed against the Syrian people.
It is essential that the Security Council maintain
its strong and clear message on upholding the
international prohibition on chemical weapons and
ensuring that they are never used again in Syria or
anywhere else. Resolution 2118 (2013) is very clear as
to what is required. No party, whether it be the Syrian
authorities or non-State actors, can be allowed to hold,
use, acquire or develop chemical weapons. Chemical
weapons in Syria must be verifiably destroyed, to be
confirmed by the OPCW. Syria must fully cooperate
with the OPCW, accept personnel designated by the
OPCW in the course of its work and provide immediate
and unfettered access. Those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria should be held accountable.
That is what the international community agreed, and
those are the obligations on us, as well as Syria.
As resolution 2118 (2013) highlights, the OPCW
is an essential partner in achieving those ends. It is
vital that the Council continue to give full backing to
the OPCW in its ongoing work on all aspects of the
Syrian chemical weapons file. We should all respect
the integrity and professionalism that the OPCW has
shown in carrying out its mandate and reject efforts to
undermine that work for political ends.
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

It is in that context that we support the proposed
bilateral meeting between Director-General Arias and
Minister Mekdad. We hope that arrangements for the
meeting will soon be finalized. It is important that
this be a frank and meaningful discussion aimed at
resolving the impasse and ensuring that real progress
can be made on all the outstanding issues.
Let me conclude by underlining that the resolution
of this file ultimately lies in the hands of the
Syrian authorities. As others have said, Syria must
respect its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) and resolution 2118 (2013) and
engage substantively with the OPCW. It should take
immediate steps to lift its blockage of the deployment
of the Declaration Assessment Team and to resolve
the significant outstanding issues with its initial
declaration.
It is only through Syria’s serious and meaningful
cooperation with the OPCW that we can be assured that
its entire stock of chemical weapons is declared and
verifiably destroyed, in line with its obligations under
the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013). All of us want to
see a resolution to this file, and Ireland will continue to
support all efforts to this end.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Syrian regime refuses to cooperate. The
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has been
trying to organize the twenty-fifth round of consultations
in Damascus for more than six months now, without
success. Syria refuses to issue the necessary visas and
is blocking deployments. The Declaration Assessment
Team has still not been able to reach the site on the
ground. The regime is deliberately and resolutely
determined to obstruct. This is not acceptable.
Syria has cooperation obligations, enshrined in the
Chemical Weapons Convention and in resolution 2118
(2013). It must respect them. The Technical Secretariat
called Syria to order on 10 November. We once again
salute the tenacity, professionalism and independence
with which the Technical Secretariat is pursuing
its mission. I take this opportunity to welcome the
reappointment of Director-General Fernando Arias to
his functions for another four years. I assure him of
France’s full support and confidence.

S/PV. 8921

We have yet to receive any explanation for the
relocation and destruction of the chlorine cylinders
linked to the Douma attacks. We once again call on
Syria to respond to the questions posed by the Technical
Secretariat. At the initiative of France, the Conference
of the States Parties took the decision to strip Syria
of some of its rights and privileges. That decision is
reversible, but the regime must cooperate. There is no
other way. The first step for the regime is to finally
shed light on the 20 outstanding issues related to its
initial declaration.
On all these subjects, dialogue must be restored. We
welcome the readiness of the OPCW Director-General
to meet with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Syrian regime. We hope that the designation of contact
points will facilitate the organization of that meeting.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
too thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her
usual informative briefing.
To begin, I will reiterate Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines’ well-established position that the use of
chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances constitutes an abominable violation of
international law. Chemical weapons do not discriminate
between combatants and civilians and their effects
are horrifying. Chemical-weapon atrocities cannot be
ignored, and impunity cannot be encouraged through
inaction. Perpetrators must be held accountable. The
development and use of chemical weapons undoubtedly
remain a threat to international peace and security.
Accordingly, all allegations of the use of these
reprehensible weapons ought to be given immediate
attention and investigations must be comprehensive,
impartial, transparent and in keeping with international
best practices. As such, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) bears a
great responsibility as the implementing body of the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Its findings must be
capable of withstanding rigorous scrutiny to promote
and sustain international cooperation. The Organization
must therefore be free of politicization. Furthermore,
the Conference of the State Parties should pursue, as
far as is possible, consensus-based decisions and make
efforts to prevent polarization and divisiveness among
States parties.
We deeply regret and remain concerned by
the continued long-term lack of movement on this
dossier. For far too long, the gaps, inconsistencies and

21-3790113/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

discrepancies in the initial declaration have remained
unresolved. Yet, we are hopeful that dialogue between
the parties will cultivate a spirit of cooperation to make
much-needed progress on all issues, including those
related to the approval of visas for OPCW personnel.
For this reason, we believe that the in-person meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Syrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates is
necessary and will assist in finding common ground
and a constructive way forward. It should therefore
be prioritized.
We welcome the agreement on the extension of the
Tripartite Agreement between the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian
Arab Republic. This is demonstrative of the type of
cooperation and positive engagement needed in every
aspect of this file.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for the OPCW
mandate. The organization must remain committed
to being a well-functioning multilateral body and to
upholding its own high standards, which merited the
award of the Nobel Peace Prize in 2013. Likewise,
the international community must remain committed
to achieving the collective vision of a world free of
chemical weapons. As such, political quarrels must
be set aside, and we must unite to ensure that applied
science and technology are used only for peace, progress
and prosperity of all humankind.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
the Niger.
I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Adherence to the Convention on the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons is almost universal, with nearly 190
States parties, including my country, the Niger. That is
clearly because we are all aware of the deadly nature
and enormous suffering that these weapons can inflict
on people, especially when they fall into the hands of
malicious individuals.
That is why, in 2013, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2118 (2013). It
is regrettable to note that, since 2013, the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to identify
responsibilities in the multiple cases of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria have not made it possible to
identify, in a way that is acceptable to all, responsibility
for the atrocities committed.
14/18

08/12/2021

My delegation categorically condemns any use
of chemical weapons, whether in the Syrian crisis or
elsewhere. The use of these weapons cannot be justified
under any pretext or circumstance.
Today, as this is the last time my delegation will
take the floor on the issue of chemical weapons in
Syria — which, incidentally, has always reflected the
divergent positions within the Council, I would like to
reiterate the following points.
Only a continued and frank dialogue between the
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Government
of Syria could help to resolve the issue of the initial
declaration and ultimately advance the work of the
Declaration Assessment Team. The Niger takes note
of the continued efforts of the Syrian Government to
shed light on the use of these weapons on its territory
through its communications to the OPCW and the
Security Council.
The issue of the use of chemical weapons is so
crucial that it must be isolated from any unjustified
delays or antagonism. It is also high time for Syria and
the OPCW — and let me be clear, with the Council’s
unanimous support — work together to bring their
positions closer together. If they fail to do so the status
quo will persist and will lead us further away from
ascertaining the truth and, therefore, accountability.
Any interpretation or exploitation of the dossier
that does not seek to lead the Council to the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) must also
be avoided, as these documents could serve as a basis
for attributing responsibility and opening the way to
possible prosecution before the courts. In that regard, it
is important that the OPCW remain a technical body, as
that is the only way for it to maintain its integrity and
enforce its authority.
In addition, as part of the process of establishing
the truth, progress must be made on the continuing
allegations of chemical weapons use in other incidents
that have not yet been fully investigated.
Similarly, my delegation once again calls on the
United Nations and the OPCW Technical Secretariat
to pay special attention to allegations of possession of
chemical materials by non-State entities. For if those
allegations prove to be true, the consequences would
be disastrous, not only for Syria but also for the entire
region and beyond. For countries of the Sahel, like mine,
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8921

that already face the threat of armed terrorist groups,
some of which do not hesitate to pledge allegiance to
Al-Qaida, the consequences would be just as disastrous.

today from the United States delegation when it came
to the elimination of Israeli arsenal, which represents a
threat to the peace and security in the Middle East.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that the
suspension of the rights and privileges of the Syrian
Arab Republic within the OPCW will necessarily
affect the already difficult cooperation between the
Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Government. It is
therefore necessary for the international community to
avoid politicizing this issue and refrain from imposing
further coercive measures on Syria, whose people are
already facing enormous difficulties.

My
country
reiterates
our
unequivocal
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
Despite the prevailing politicization in the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Syria has continued to cooperate with the
OPCW in furtherance of the commitments my country
undertook from the day it acceded to the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Our accession was followed by
my country’s elimination of its entire stock of chemical
weapons and their production facilities in record time.

As we have always emphasized, whether it be the
humanitarian, political or chemical weapons dimension
that is being considered — and one wonders why these
are addressed separately — it is essential that Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity be respected
in the search for any lasting solution to this longstanding conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also thank your predecessor for his efforts
during his presidency of the Council last month.
Last week, the second Conference on the
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction took
place, in which my country participated actively given
its firm belief that it is necessary to eliminate weapons
of mass destruction, which are a threat to regional
and international peace and security. My country also
stressed the importance of the five nuclear-weapon
States participating in the Conference as observers,
because they play a fundamental role in supporting
consultations aimed at creating such a zone.
However, one State, which is a depositary of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and a sponsor of the 1995 decision on the Middle East,
namely, the United States of America, has continued to
boycott the work of that important Conference and has
continued to protect Israel and its enormous arsenal of
various weapons of mass destruction. We would have
liked to have seen the same enthusiasm that we saw

In that regard, I would like to mention some aspects
of cooperation between Syria and the OPCW.
First, my country continues its ongoing
consultations and cooperation with the OPCW in order
to prepare for the planned meeting between the Foreign
Minister of Syria, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, and the OPCW
Director-General, Mr. Fernando Arias.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic presented
the OPCW its ninety-sixth monthly report, in
which it reiterated continuous cooperation with the
organization and expressed its regret with regard to
attempts to undermine that cooperation. Furthermore,
Syria responded to non-positive references about it
contained in the latest report of the Director-General
(see S/2021/989).
Thirdly, my country agreed to extend for six
months the tripartite agreement among the Syrian Arab
Republic, the OPCW and the United Nations Office
for Project Services. That includes the facilitation and
planning of OPCW activities and missions in Syria.
Fourthly, my country has welcomed the visit by
the Declaration Assessment Team to Damascus for the
holding of the twenty-fifth round of consultations as
agreed between the two parties. Visas were delivered to
all but one member of the Team. That member was not
issued a visa because past experience proved him not to
be objective. I stress that only one visa was withheld,
not several, as some countries have claimed in their
statements. The Team can visit Damascus tomorrow, if
it so wishes.
Fifthly, my country welcomed the request of the
Technical Secretariat to send a Fact-Finding Mission
to Syria. We hope that it will finish its investigations

21-3790115/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

and issue its reports regarding incidents reported by
Syria about the use of chemical weapons by terrorist
groups. Those incidents happened more than five years
ago. In her briefing, I would have liked Mrs. Nakamitsu
to have urged the organization’s Team to draw up its
report on the matter.
Sixthly, the Syrian Arab Republic regularly
presents information regarding the possession and use
of toxic chemical weapons and materials by terrorists.
Most recently, that was done through a letter sent
from Syria to the President of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General dated 29 November. That
letter demonstrates the collusion between the Turkish
intelligence services and the terrorist Al-Nusra Front/
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
As far as the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team, my delegation would like to clarify that its
mandate is limited to providing assistance to the
Syrian National Committee on its initial declaration.
Syria voluntarily welcomed work with the Team and
cooperated with it for many years, through 24 rounds
of consultation. Syria stresses that the Team is not
an investigative body. It must therefore respect the
information provided by Syria and present it honestly
to the States parties.
Furthermore, in spite of what was claimed in the latest
report of the Director-General and in Mrs. Nakamitsu’s
briefing today, the Technical Secretariat does not have
a mandate to determine whether that information is
valid from a scientific point of view.
As to the issuance of visas to international officials,
that is a sovereign right of Syria, based purely on the
professionalism and objectivity of the work of those
officials. In that regard, it is important to emphasize
that multilateralism is based not on the work of
individuals but on that of the team as a whole. Syria
showed significant flexibility to facilitate the holding
of the twenty-fifth round of consultations. In fact, we
agreed to send Syrian experts to The Hague. That was
blocked for very unconvincing reasons, which really
mask a sabotage attempt.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that the
information contained in its initial declaration and
subsequent declarations is complete and accurate.
We have always demonstrated openness to working
transparently and objectively with the Declaration
Assessment Team to provide all relevant clarifications.
We therefore categorically reject the questioning of that
16/18

08/12/2021

information. We believe that certain States are guilty
of lies and exaggeration as part of a hostile policy
towards Syria.
While we wish to see the OPCW as the guarantor
of the implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and play its role regarding this important
pillar of disarmament, we regret that it has become
a platform that is exploited by a State, or a group of
States, to target certain States, such as Syria or other
countries. The disgraceful performance of the FactFinding Mission in the investigation of the Douma
incident, whose scandalous repercussions continue to
this day, the illegal establishment of the Investigation
and Identification Team to use it as a sword of Damocles
to undermine the national choices of certain countries
and their rejection to hegemony politics and the
unprecedented decision taken by the Conference of the
States Parties to suspend Syria’s enjoyment of its rights
and privileges, which is not based on any documented
facts or conclusions, amount to hostile practices against
a State party that voluntarily joined the Convention.
That reflects the way in which the United States and
its Western allies dominate the work of the OPCW
and pursue a hegemonic policy to serve their agendas,
which has contributed to widening the divide and
mistrust pertaining to the credibility, professionalism
and impartiality of the work of the OPCW teams,
thereby undermining its role.
In conclusion, those who talk about accountability
in their statements are using the noble values of justice
for political purposes. That happens in the OPCW. The
basic principles of accountability require abandoning a
selective approach that serves the interests of a particular
State. That is why accountability must apply to all war
crimes, including occupation, aggression and support
for terrorism, for which certain States are responsible,
particularly the destruction of a Member State and
the dismantling of its institutions based on lies that
are fabricated and presented in the Security Council
itself or on a biased interpretation of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such States must end their hypocrisy
and their policy of double standards and stop exploiting
such policies for their own political purposes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
21-37901

08/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

on your presidency of the Security Council this month.
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We reiterate our principled position regarding the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic that, in order
to prevent further suffering of its people and the
dire ramifications of this conflict for regional peace
and security, efforts must be redoubled to end this
unfortunate conflict. However, that must be based on
certain basic principles, in particular full respect for
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and the withdrawal of all uninvited and occupying
forces from all parts of Syria, as well as combating
terrorist groups there in an effective manner. Many
of those terrorists must be held accountable for the
use of chemical weapons and chemical agents during
the conflict.
We once again express our full support for
the realization of the objectives of the Chemical
Weapons Convention through its full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation. We also strongly
call for the Convention’s universality. Only through
universal adherence to the Convention can the world feel
safe and nations be assured that all chemical arsenals
have been declared and destroyed. To achieve that
noble objective, the Israeli regime must be compelled
to join the Convention without any precondition or
further delay.
As a major victim in contemporary history of
the most systematic use of chemical weapons, Iran
strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances. The
Islamic Republic of Iran also underlines the essential
importance of ensuring the Convention’s authority, as
well as the independent, impartial and professional
work performed by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). That is particularly
important for issues related to the use of chemical
agents in Syria.
We once again acknowledge the significant
efforts made by the Syrian Government to implement
its obligations under the Convention, including the
complete destruction, in the least possible time and
under severe conditions, of all its 27 chemical-weapons
production facilities, as verified by the OPCW.
We welcome the submission by Syria of its ninetysixth monthly report on its activities related to the
destruction of chemical weapons and their production
facilities. We also positively note the ongoing

S/PV. 8921

preparations for the meeting between the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister,
and we hope that it will lead to the resolution of the
remaining issues.
It is extremely disappointing that the Syrian
chemical file has been politicized by certain countries,
undermining the Convention’s authority and the
OPCW’s credibility. Putting an end to that trend is,
indeed, in the interest of the Convention, the OPCW,
the rule of law and the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Niger’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
December. I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu
for her briefing.
As the ninety-eighth monthly report (see S/2021/989)
of the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) clearly
demonstrates, the Syrian regime continues to flout its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
in the Syrian regime’s chemical weapons declaration
persist. As a result, the OPCW still cannot confirm that
the declaration is accurate and complete. The regime
consistently fails to provide the information needed in
order to reveal the true nature and scope of its chemical
weapons programme. We continue to be seriously
concerned about the discovery of an undeclared
chemical-weapons production facility in Syria and the
regime’s refusal to declare the chemical warfare agents
produced and/or weaponized at that site.
The fact that the Al-Assad regime moved two
chlorine cylinders related to the Douma chemical
attack without prior notification or the approval of
the Technical Secretariat only increases our concerns.
Furthermore, the regime has abused the visa issue in
order to hinder the OPCW officials’ mandated activities
on the ground. What we hear today is too little, too late.
We would like to underline once again that it
is the obligation of the regime to provide immediate
and unfettered access to personnel designated by the
OPCW, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013)
and the Chemical Weapons Convention. We call on

21-3790117/18

S/PV.8921

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council members to act in unity and enforce
the Council’s own resolution — resolution 2118 (2013).
Turkey firmly supports efforts to ensure
accountability for the gruesome crimes committed in
Syria for more than a decade, including chemical attacks.
That is why we co-sponsored the OPCW Executive
Council decision of July 2020, and the decision adopted
during the second part of the twenty-fifth Conference
of the State Parties in April. The Security Council must
live up to its responsibility and uphold the authority of
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Turkey strongly condemns the repeated use of
chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime against
innocent civilians. As of now, the regime’s culpability
in at least eight heinous chemical weapons attacks
has been established by the reports of investigative
bodies mandated by the United Nations and the OPCW.
Turkey looks forward to the completion of the current
investigations by the Investigation and Identification
Team and the issuance of its next report. We reiterate

18/18

08/12/2021

our support for the objective, impartial and professional
work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its
investigative bodies.
Just last week, we commemorated the Day of
Remembrance for All Victims of Chemical Warfare.
This is a sobering reminder of the need to act urgently
to ensure full accountability for the chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. Ending impunity and honouring the
victims of chemical attacks is imperative to achieve
lasting peace in that country. The key responsibility
lies with those who embolden the Al-Assad regime in
its non-compliance with its obligations.
As to the statement made by the representative of
the Syrian regime, I will only reiterate that his presence
here is an affront to the millions of Syrians who have
suffered countless crimes at the hands of the regime.
Therefore, I will not honour his baseless allegations
with a response.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

21-37901
