S/2016/722

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 August 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 18 August 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As requested by the Security Council in paragraph 13 of its resolution 2286
(2016), I have the honour to submit my recommendations on measures to enhance
the protection of, and prevent acts of violence against, the wounded and sick,
medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties, and their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities, and to better ensure accountability for such acts.
The recommendations aim to enhance the practical application of protections
afforded under international law; they do not aim to modify existing international
obligations or create any new ones. The recommendations and a brief introductory
note are annexed hereto.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council. I remain at their disposal should
they wish to be briefed on these recommendations.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-14350 (E)

260816

*1614350*

S/2016/722

Annex
Recommendations of the Secretary-General, submitted pursuant
to paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 2286 (2016), on
measures to prevent acts of violence, attacks and threats against
the wounded and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical
facilities, and to better ensure accountability and enhance
their protection
Introduction
1.
The growing insecurity of medical care in armed conflict a is part of a broader
trend of blatant disregard for the fundamental norms that safeguard humanity. In a
number of ongoing armed conflicts, all too often, medical facilities and transports
are bombed, shelled or looted, medical workers are threatened, kidnapped, injured
or killed, fighting occurs within or near medical facilities and access to medical care
is arbitrarily obstructed. Although consistent, worldwide data on such violations is
still lacking, the reality on the ground is unequivocal. According to secondary data
consolidated by the World Health Organization, in 2014 and 2015, there we re
594 records of attacks against medical care in 19 countries. In 2015, Doctors
without Borders reported attacks on 75 medical facilities that it managed or
supported. From 2012 to 2014, the International Committee of the Red Cross
reported that 2,400 attacks against patients and medical personnel, facilities and
transports had occurred in 11 conflict-affected countries. The immediate
consequences of such violence are loss of life, injury, destruction and deprivation of
vital care. In the long term, it results in disruption to the provision of medical care
for thousands of patients, sometimes lasting even after the fighting has stopped.
2.
On 3 May 2016, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286
(2016) in response to its deep concern about the acts of violence, attacks and threats
against medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and
other medical facilities, being perpetrated in armed confl ict. I warmly welcome the
Security Council’s determination to strengthen the protection of medical care in
armed conflict.
3.
In its resolution 2286 (2016), the Security Council underlines the continued
and critical importance of international humanitaria n law. It calls on Member States
and all parties to armed conflict to comply with their long -standing obligations and
to adopt practical measures to prevent and end violence against medical care and
ensure accountability for violations. All State and non -State parties to armed
conflict are bound by a strict obligation to respect and protect medical workers and
__________________
a

2/10

Throughout these recommendations, the expression “medical care in armed conflict”
encompasses “the wounded and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities”, as reflected in Security Council resolution 2286 (2016). The expression
“medical care in armed conflict” is solely intended as shorthand and does not alter the scope of
the resolution.

16-14350

S/2016/722

facilities, as well as the wounded and sick. As I have urged in recent reports, the
enactment and enforcement of domestic laws and regulations, educa tion and
training, cooperation with local communities, the systematic collection and
reporting of data on alleged violations and the investigation and prosecution of
alleged violations are all essential to enhance the protection of medical care in
armed conflict.
4.
In paragraph 13 of resolution 2286 (2016), the Security Council requests me to
promptly provide it with recommendations on measures to prevent acts of violence,
attacks and threats against the wounded and sick, medical personnel and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of
transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities and to
better ensure accountability and enhance their protection.
5.
Following consultations with relevant United Nations and non-governmental
entities, including humanitarian and medical organizations operating in situations of
armed conflict, I present a number of key recommendations to respond to the
request by the Security Council. These recommendations set out pra ctical measures
that all States should implement to prevent acts of violence, attacks and threats
against medical care in armed conflict, enhance the protection of medical care and
ensure the documentation of acts of violence, attacks and threats against medical
care, as well as accountability and redress.
6.
In order to establish an adequate preventive framework, recommended
measures include adhering to relevant international treaties; reinforcing national
legislative frameworks; ensuring legal protection for medical ethics; promoting
regular cooperation and the sharing of best practices; enhancing the role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations; exerting influence to ensure respect for the law;
and promoting awareness of the law and a culture of respect. The practical
implementation of precautionary measures throughout military operations is also
important in order to enhance the protection of medical care in armed conflict. To
ensure the documentation of acts of violence, attacks and threats against me dical
care in armed conflict, as well as accountability and redress, recommended
approaches include regular data collection, analysis and reporting on incidents; full,
prompt, impartial, independent and effective investigations into alleged serious
violations against medical care in armed conflict; the prosecution of alleged serious
violations; and the provision of assistance and reparations to victims and the
restoration of essential services.
7.
In its resolution 2286 (2016), the Security Council has demo nstrated its
determination to strengthen the protection of medical care in armed conflict. We
must now heed the Council’s demands and take concrete action.

16-14350

3/10

S/2016/722

Recommendations of the Secretary-General on measures to
prevent acts of violence, attacks and threats against the wounded
and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties, their means of transport
and equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities,
and to better ensure accountability and enhance their protection
A.

Establishing or reinforcing a framework of respect for, and protection of, the
wounded and sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel exclusively
engaged in medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as
hospitals and other medical facilities in armed conflict
Recommendation 1. Adhering to relevant international treaties
8.
Member States should ratify or accede to, as the case may be, all international
treaties that are relevant to the protection of medical care in armed conflict,
including the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the
Arms Trade Treaty, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized
Agencies.
Recommendation 2. Reinforcing national legislative frameworks
9.
Member States should undertake comprehensive reviews of their domestic
laws and adopt the necessary reforms to ensure that they fully incorporate
international legal obligations relevant to the protection of medical care in armed
conflict. In particular, Member States should ensure that their domestic legal
frameworks provide for, at a minimum:
(a) An unconditional, non-derogable right for individuals under their
jurisdiction to access, on a non-discriminatory basis, goods and services necessary
to meet their basic needs, including medical care, essential drugs, safe and potable
water, the minimum essential food which is nutritionally adequate and safe to
ensure freedom from hunger, and basic shelter, housing and sanitation;
(b) An obligation for Member States to respect the inviolability of United
Nations premises, as laid out in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of
the United Nations of 1946, and in the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the Specialized Agencies of 1947;
(c)

Obligations for parties to armed conflict to:

(i) Search for, collect, evacuate and treat the wounded and sick, as far as
practicable, with the least possible delay and without any distinction other than
on medical grounds;
(ii) Protect and facilitate the search for, collection, evacuation and treatment
of the wounded and sick by impartial humanitarian organizations as well as
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, includ ing first aid
responders;

4/10

16-14350

S/2016/722

(iii) Respect and protect personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties;
(iv) Respect and protect hospitals and other medical facilities and means of
transportation exclusively used for medical purposes;
(v) Protect and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of medical and
other humanitarian relief, including into territory and across conflict lines.
Recommendation 3. Guaranteeing the ability of personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties to act in line with medical ethics, without incurring sanctions or
punishment for doing so
10. Member States should adopt specific legal and practical measures to guarantee
the ability of personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties to treat patients
without any distinction other than on medical grounds, in line with their ethical
obligations, in all circumstances, without incurring any form of harassment,
sanctions or punishment, including measures to guarantee respect for the
confidentiality of information obtained in connection with the treatment of patients.
Exceptions should be in full conformity with medical ethics, international
humanitarian law and human rights standards, which implies, inter alia, that they
should be: (a) strictly limited in time and subject to regu lar review; (b) precisely and
exhaustively defined by domestic legislation; and (c) necessary and proportionate in
light of a legitimate objective of general interest, in accordance with international
human rights standards.
11. Member States should put in place measures to ensure that personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties and security sector personnel have a broad
understanding of international humanitarian and human rights law and of the
obligations of medical personnel under medical ethics, inc luding the obligation to
act in the patient’s best interest, the obligation to guarantee medical confidentiality
and the obligation to preserve life.
Recommendation 4. Promoting regular cooperation, including exchanges of
information, analysis and best practices, among all stakeholders
12. Member States should establish, at the national level, a multi -stakeholder
forum, including representatives of communities affected by attacks on medical care
in armed conflict, which would meet regularly to share challenges and good
practices on preventing and addressing acts of violence impacting the delivery of
medical care and other forms of obstruction to its delivery in situations of armed
conflict.
Recommendation 5. Enhancing the role of United Nations peace operations
13. As appropriate, taking into account the country-specific situation with regard
to attacks against medical care in armed conflict, the role of United Nations peace
operations in contributing to the creation of an environment conducive to the safe
delivery of medical care in armed conflict should be strengthened. This includes
capacity-building and support to security sector reform and accountability processes
when reviewing or establishing mandates, and ensuring that the resources of peace
operations are commensurate with their mandates.

16-14350

5/10

S/2016/722

Recommendation 6. Using available means of influence vis-à-vis parties to a
conflict in order to ensure respect for, and prevent violations of, international law
relating to the protection of medical care in armed conflict
14. States should use tools and means of leverage at their disposal, such as
diplomatic, political and economic means, to ensure that parties to armed conflict
respect their obligations under international law in relation to the prote ction of
medical care in armed conflict, including by opening channels of dialogue or
dedicating budgets to bilateral and multilateral assistance in the form of training,
judicial and legislative reform, and support to relevant civil society initiatives.
15. In keeping with the spirit of the Arms Trade Treaty and similar regional
instruments, Member States that export conventional weapons should assess the
likelihood that they could be used to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian or human rights law and refrain from exporting them if there is a
substantial risk of such serious violations. Member States should give particular
consideration to violations of the right to health, as well as violations of rules of
international humanitarian law regarding medical care in armed conflict.
16. The Security Council should consider adopting measures, including under
article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations, against individuals or entities
determined by relevant subsidiary bodies of the Security Council as being
responsible for, or complicit in, acts of violence or other acts affecting medical care
in armed conflict in violation of international law.
Recommendation 7. Promoting awareness and compliance
17. All Member States, as well as parties to armed conflicts, with support from the
United Nations and other relevant organizations, should promote a culture of respect
for international humanitarian and human rights law, with a particular focus on the
right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health and the protection of medical care in armed conflict. To that effect, all
Member States and parties to conflict, with support from the United Nations and
relevant organizations, should undertake training progra mmes for military personnel
and members of non-State armed groups on the protection of medical care in armed
conflict. All Member States, with support from the United Nations and relevant
organizations, should undertake general public awareness campaigns o n the subject.
Recommendation 8. Reporting on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016)
18. Member States should, on a voluntary basis, report to the Secretary -General on
measures they have taken to implement relevant provisions of Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016). The shared information will contribute, as appropriate, to
the reports mentioned in paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2286 (2016)
and to the elaboration of a United Nations compendium of best practices.
B.

Enhancing the protection of medical care in armed conflict
Recommendation 9. Adopting, reviewing, revising and implementing operational
precautionary measures
19. Parties to armed conflicts should review rules of engagement, military
manuals, tactical directives, standard operating procedures and other similar

6/10

16-14350

S/2016/722

operational rules or guidelines, and take the necessary steps to ensure that such
materials prohibit the targeting of protected medical staff, facilities and transports
and include precautionary measures on the planning and conduct of military
operations, in order to prevent and minimize the consequences of hostilities on
medical care in armed conflict. This might include measures such as:
(a) Specific measures to guarantee respect for the exclusively humanitarian
character of hospitals and other medical facilities, such as: (i) prohibiting the use of
hospitals and other medical facilities and transports in support of the military effort;
(ii) prohibiting the conduct of hostilities and law enforcement operations within
such facilities and adopting specific measures to prevent and minimize their
potential negative consequences on the delivery of medical care; and
(iii) prohibiting a military presence and the stockpiling of military materiel in, or in
the vicinity of, hospitals and other medical facilities;
(b) Recording and mapping the presence of personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties, their means of transport and equipment, as well as hospitals and
other medical facilities, and regularly updating this information, including through
enhanced information exchanges and real-time coordination with medical and
humanitarian actors on the ground and the use of appropriate technology;
(c) Providing for the exceptional character of attacks aga inst a medical
facility that has lost its protection under international humanitarian law or against a
military objective located in the vicinity of a medical facility. If such attacks must
be conducted:
(i) Advance warning with a reasonable time-limit to heed the warning
should always be issued, taking into particular consideration children,
pregnant women, persons with disabilities, elderly persons and technology dependent and/or critically ill patients, who may require special assistance and
care for evacuation;
(ii) Personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties and patients should be
provided with information on areas to which patients can be safely evacuated
and where medical care can be delivered;
(iii) For all parties, the safe passage of personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties and patients to such safe areas should be facilitated;
(iv) All other feasible precautions should be taken to avoid and minimize
civilian casualties and damage to the medical facility in question, and the
presence of medical personnel and patients within the facility should continue
to be taken into account when undertaking proportionality assessments, even
when an advance warning is not heeded.
20. Throughout the military chain of command and other appropriate ch annels,
parties to armed conflicts should ensure the dissemination and implementation of
applicable rules of engagement, military manuals, tactical directives, standard
operating procedures and other similar operational documents or guidelines, with
specific attention to precautionary measures aimed at minimizing the consequences
of hostilities on medical care.
21. As part of these efforts, parties to armed conflicts should issue and
disseminate a military order or directive stating: (a) the obligations und er
international law related to the protection of medical care in armed conflict; (b) the

16-14350

7/10

S/2016/722

roles, responsibilities and practical measures set out in applicable rules of
engagement, military manuals, tactical directives, standard operating procedures and
other similar operational documents or guidelines on the protection of medical care
in armed conflict; (c) sanctions for breaches; and (d) a requirement to report any act
that could constitute such a breach to appropriate authorities through the chain of
command.
22. Parties to armed conflicts should establish oversight bodies to monitor
compliance by their forces with the operational rules in place for the protection of
civilians, with specific attention to the protection of medical care in armed conflict,
and assess incidents in order to propose specific remedial action through the
appropriate chain of command, including, when appropriate, revisions of applicable
rules and procedures.
23. In consultation with personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties,
administrators of hospitals and other medical facilities, and relevant local, national
and international organizations, parties to armed conflicts should adopt contingency
plans, including relocation plans, in anticipation of situations that could jeopardiz e
the organization and provision of medical care to the wounded and sick, and take
steps and institute security measures to protect patients and ensure that hospitals and
other medical facilities, their means of transportation and their supplies, remain
safe.
C.

Enhancing the documentation of, and accountability for, acts of violence against
medical care in armed conflict and providing redress and assistance
Recommendation 10. Contributing to regular data collection, analysis and
reporting on incidents
24. As part of broader efforts to track and collect data and report on trends and
gaps in compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law, and
building upon existing tools such as the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict, relevant human
rights special procedures and in-country humanitarian coordination mechanisms, the
United Nations, in collaboration with humanitarian and other relevant actors, should
enhance its efforts to ensure that data on the protection of medical care in armed
conflict, including the direct impact of hostilities on medical care and the indirect
consequences on the general civilian population, is systematically collected, verified
and analysed. Except in cases where disclosure would risk endangering the safety or
security of current or former personnel of the United Nations, victims, witnesses or
sources, or otherwise prejudicing the security or proper conduct of any operation or
activity of the United Nations, such data should made publicly available in order to
inform response at the national, regional and global levels.
25. Member States should enhance their support to United Nations monitoring,
data collection and analysis efforts, including through support to existing
independent monitoring and reporting mechanisms such as the Security Council mandated monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations against children
in situations of armed conflict and relevant human rights special procedures, as well
as their support to relevant entities such as United Nations peace operations, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund or the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

8/10

16-14350

S/2016/722

26. Member States should establish national data collection and analysis systems
on medical care in armed conflict and actively engage in and support the regular
sharing of analysis and lessons learned at the regional and international levels, in
order to develop global coordinated strategies to enhance the protection of medical
care in armed conflict.
27. Member States should ensure that the collected information is shared with
independent monitors and independent monitoring and reporting mechanisms and
allow for full and unhindered access of independent monitors to affected locations
and persons.
Recommendation 11. Ensuring full, prompt, impartial, independent and effective
investigations into serious violations of international law relating to the
protection of medical care in armed conflict
28. Member States, with the support of the United Nations, should strengthen the
capacity of national institutions to carry out and develop protocols and processes to
ensure full, prompt, impartial, independent and effective investigation s into
allegations of serious violations of international law relating to the protection of
medical care in armed conflict, with a view to reinforcing preventive measures,
ensuring accountability and providing reparations to victims.
29. Member States should ensure that effective investigations are systematically
conducted into allegations of serious violations of international law relating to the
protection of medical care in armed conflict, including by requesting and consenting
to inquiries by the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission established
pursuant to article 90 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions.
30. When Member States fail to carry out such investigations, the Security
Council should consider establishing international fact-finding missions or
commissions of inquiry, or have recourse to the International Humanitarian Fact Finding Commission established pursuant to article 90 of Additional Protocol I to
the Geneva Conventions, to investigate allegations of serious viol ations of
international law relating to the protection of medical care in armed conflict.
31. Member States and parties to armed conflicts should provide support to, and
facilitate the work of, fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry established
by the Secretary-General or United Nations bodies, including the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council.
Recommendation 12. Ensuring that individuals suspected of perpetrating serious
violations of international law relating to the protection of medical care in armed
conflict are prosecuted
32. Member States should ensure that, in domestic jurisdictions, all serious
violations of international law relating to the protection of medical care in armed
conflict constitute crimes and that suspected perpetrators are prosecuted, including
through the establishment and exercise of universal jurisdiction over international
crimes.
33. Member States should also ensure that, in national jurisdictions, all violations
of existing rules of engagement or standard operating procedures relating to the
protection of medical care in armed conflict are subject to sanctions that are

16-14350

9/10

S/2016/722

graduated and combinable to ensure that the penalty is commensurate with the
seriousness of the violation.
34. Member States, with the support of the United Nations, should strengthen the
capacity of national law enforcement and judicial authorities to enforce such
sanctions in line with human rights obligations, including through the provision of
training for judges and prosecutors.
35. Where national accountability mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate to
address serious violations, Member States and the Security Council should ensure
that appropriate international accountability mechanisms are established, or existing
international accountability mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, are resorted to, and provided with adequate cooperation and support to fulfil
their mandates.
Recommendation 13. Providing reparations and assistance to victims and
restoring essential services
36. Member States should ensure adequate, effective and prompt reparations to
victims of attacks against medical care in armed conflict.
37. Member States should commit to providing assistance to victims, including
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties and affected communities, notably
in the form of medical care, rehabilitation and psychological support, and measures
to support their social and economic inclusion.
38. Member States, with the assistance of the United Nations and other r elevant
organizations, should ensure the restoration of essential services, including by
rebuilding hospitals and other medical facilities destroyed or damaged in attacks,
clearing explosive remnants of war, providing emergency medical care and
establishing safe routes and alternative hospitals and other medical facilities, as well
as safe environments for the delivery of preventive medical services such as
vaccination campaigns.

10/10

16-14350
