UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/817
22 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 22 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to inform you that on 3 October 1997, the fourth
Ministerial Meeting of the ad hoc Special Conference on Liberia (previously
known as the ad hoc Special Conference to Support the Peace Process in Liberia)
was convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York. The meeting was
organized in consultation with the Government of the United States of America on
behalf of the International Contact Group for Liberia, the Government of Nigeria
on behalf of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Government of the Netherlands. In addition to those Governments, the meeting
brought together the members of the International Contact Group on Liberia, the
European Union and ECOWAS, as well as the Bretton Woods Institutions, the
African Development Bank, and relevant United Nations departments, programmes
and specialized agencies. The Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity and the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS also participated in the meeting.
The purpose of the meeting was to build upon the momentum generated by the
successful completion of the Liberian peace process, with a view towards
supporting efforts to consolidate the peace in Liberia, including the
establishment of a viable framework for the mobilization of resources for
reconstruction and development. In this regard, the Government of Liberia
prepared for presentation at the Special Conference, a paper outlining its
vision for a new Liberia, entitled "An Agenda for Rebuilding Liberia".
In my opening statement to the Special Conference I urged the members of
the international community to support peace-building efforts in Liberia and to
help ensure that the conditions for conflict did not again materialize in that
country. In particular, I noted the difficulties that still remained, including
the fact that economic activity remained modest, that much of the population
continued to be displaced, that most of the demobilized fighters had yet to be
absorbed into reintegration programmes, that basic institutions and services
were not yet fully operational and that the situation in Sierra Leone remained a
source of concern.
Despite these obstacles, however, I noted the very positive steps that
President Taylor had taken towards reconciliation and national unity, and noted
the formation in Liberia of a broad-based and inclusive Government, together
with the President's expressed commitment to promoting the protection of human
97-28267 (E)

221097

/...

S/1997/817
English
Page 2

rights and respect for the rule of law. I informed participants that the
proposed United Nations Peace-building Support Office would soon be established
in Liberia, and that the Head of the Office would be the focal point for the
Organization's post-conflict peace-building activities in Liberia and have
overall responsibility for harmonizing the efforts of the United Nations system
in the country. I called upon the members of the international community to
show the same generosity and goodwill in supporting the peace-building process
as they did in supporting the peace process.
I am pleased to report that the meeting successfully accomplished the
objectives for which it had been convened. In addition to focusing
international attention on the need to provide continued support to Liberia
following the successful completion of the peace process, the meeting was
notable for:
-

The strong support expressed by participants for the establishment of
a United Nations Peace-building Support Office in Liberia;

-

The broad political support expressed by participants for President
Taylor's efforts to establish an inclusive administration, and for the
various actions taken by the new Government to promote reconciliation
and national unity (although some participants expressed concern
regarding certain recent actions taken by the Liberian police);

-

The continued assurances given by the Government of Liberia regarding
its commitment to reconciliation, national unity and respect for human
rights;

-

The very positive reaction of participants to the Government's plans
for rebuilding Liberia, as set out in the "Agenda for Rebuilding
Liberia", which was prepared by the Government for the Conference;

-

The supportive attitude adopted by the Bretton Woods Institutions
towards the new Government's economic and political initiatives,
specifically including the framework outlined in the "Agenda for
Rebuilding Liberia", the economic and customs reforms instituted thus
far and the presentation to the Legislature of a balanced cash-based
budget;

-

The support expressed by participants for a donor's conference for
Liberia, which would most likely take place early next year.

In view of the difficult peace consolidation and reconstruction challenges
that Liberia continues to confront, it is my intention to continue to move as
expeditiously as possible with the establishment of a United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Liberia, as requested by the Government of Liberia.
I am encouraged in this undertaking by the very broad support expressed by the
international community for this initiative and by the positive cooperation
demonstrated by all parts of the United Nations system, in keeping with the
spirit of my reform proposals.

/...

S/1997/817
English
Page 3

The Secretariat will be consulting with the Government of Liberia and the
principal bilateral and multilateral donors on the most effective means of
following up on the positive outcome of the meeting, including the timing of the
anticipated donor's conference on reconstruction and development.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
