United Nations

S/PV.4238

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4238

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 November 2000, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Herfkens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ward
Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Harrison
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-77015 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4238

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique and Senegal, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I welcome the Vice-Prime Minister of GuineaBissau.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Imbali
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jagne
(Gambia), Mr. Fall (Guinea), Mr. Gouveia
(Mozambique) and Mr. Ka (Senegal) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Callisto Madavo, Vice-President of
the World Bank, Africa Region.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Madavo to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 27 November 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the
United Nations, in which Mozambique, in its capacity
as President of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, requests that an invitation be extended to
Mrs. Dulce Maria Pereira, Executive Secretary of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, under

2

rule 39 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
That letter
S/2000/1130.

will

be

issued

as

document

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mrs. Pereira.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I now call on the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by saying
that I am very pleased to join the Council today for this
important meeting on Guinea-Bissau, which could not
be more timely. Last week’s armed showdown between
the head of the former military junta and the elected
President, which nearly plunged the country back into
turmoil, underscores the precariousness of the stability
in that country, as in many others which are recovering
from conflict.
In this connection, I should like to thank the
Council for taking a firm and timely stand last week, as
well as those leaders in and outside the subregion who
have contributed to the peaceful end of the crisis. I
wish also to commend my Representative, Mr. NanaSinkam, for his tireless peacemaking efforts. The
situation has improved, but requires close monitoring.
I would like to take this opportunity, however, to
urge the Government to manage the aftermath of the
latest crisis within the rule of law and with due regard
to democratic principles and national reconciliation.
Let me now turn to the main subject of my
remarks, which is the challenge of post-conflict peacebuilding and some of the lessons to be drawn from the
United Nations experience in Guinea-Bissau. Postconflict peace-building includes a range of measures
intended to prevent a relapse into a cycle of conflict
and instability. To be effective, it needs to address the
root causes of conflict, not just the symptoms. In the
case of Guinea-Bissau, these causes include weak State
institutions, a disgruntled and highly politicized army,
endemic poverty, a crippling debt and an insecure
internal and external environment.

S/PV.4238

Addressing such a grave range of causes requires,
on the part of the Government and the international
community, not only difficult political decisions, but
also a serious and long-term commitment, supported by
the timely deployment of resources. Regrettably, as the
case of Guinea-Bissau amply demonstrates, neither the
Government nor the international community is always
fully prepared or able to play an effective role. A
number of institutional and political lessons can be
drawn here. I will mention just a few of them.
First, the political nature of many post-conflict
crises requires action of the type which should
normally be undertaken by a sovereign Government,
but which the post-conflict Government may not
always be in a position to undertake, owing to
challenges from undemocratic forces. Ideally, of
course, the newly elected Government should be in the
driver’s seat. But this is not always the case and may
not be possible, particularly if State institutions are
weak, the coffers are empty and the legitimacy of the
Government is seriously challenged. This situation
should, therefore, be taken into account when devising
mandates for new peace-building missions or when
revising the mandates or considering exit strategies for
existing ones.
Secondly, because of its multi-disciplinary nature,
post-conflict peace-building often falls between relief
and traditional development assistance, and therefore
its needs go largely unmet because it falls between
these two. Although both the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Bretton
Woods institutions — and I am happy that our
colleague from the World Bank is here with us — have
developed new and flexible financial instruments
dedicated to post-conflict recovery, these instruments
remain modest and under-funded. The donor
community, including the international financial
institutions, must find a way to strike a balance
between the need for macroeconomic stability on the
one hand, and peace-related priorities which require
greater tolerance for public sector expenditures and
budget deficits, on the other.
Thirdly, the representative of the SecretaryGeneral is increasingly being asked to take on
responsibilities for which his office is not funded or
mandated. In the case of the United Nations Office in
Guinea-Bissau, during the most recent crisis, my
Representative was called upon by the Government and

other political forces to play a “frontline” mediation
role.
Such a role tends to be especially prominent in
the early stages of a post-conflict situation, when State
institutions are weakest, the legitimacy of a new
Government is challenged and the distrust and
animosity between the political and military forces are
highest. But that role cannot be carried out without
resources. I intend, therefore, to seek the legislative
bodies’ approval for one of the recommendations in the
Brahimi report.
I refer to the recommendation, and I quote, that:
“A small percentage of a mission’s first year
budget should be made available to the
representative or special representative of the
Secretary-General leading the mission in order to
fund quick impact projects in its area of
operations, with the advice of the United Nations
country
team’s
resident
coordinator”.
(S/2000/809, para. 47 (a))
I hope I can count on the support of Council members.
Peace-building is a multidimensional process. Its
objective is not merely to dismantle the structures of
violence but also to assist in building the structures of
lasting peace and in laying the foundations of
sustainable development. It requires comprehensive
strategies involving all relevant actors and embracing
multiple sectors of activity, including political,
military, diplomatic, development, human rights,
humanitarian and many others. In essence, peacebuilding is simply conflict prevention, but with the
additional challenges of an immediate, fragile
transitional situation. If we needed a reminder of this
lesson, Guinea-Bissau provided it last week.
I am glad that you will continue to devote your
efforts to making the Organization more effective in
this crucial area of our mission for peace and security,
and I look forward to the results of your deliberations.
The President: Mr. Secretary-General, that was a
very important and profound statement. Because I think
you touched upon all the important aspects of the case
we discussed today, also reminding us of some of the
lessons learned in earlier post-conflict situations, some
of which, you reminded us, still have to be
implemented, and it was important to draw our
attention to that.

3

S/PV.4238

I now welcome and call on Mr. Callisto Madavo.
Mr. Madavo: Madam President, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, we are indeed honoured and very pleased to
be invited to participate in the discussion on this
occasion.
As the Council knows, the World Bank has been
supporting the Government of Guinea-Bissau in its
reconstruction efforts. Our Board approved an
economic rehabilitation and recovery credit in May that
provides financial and technical assistance to
reconstruction, including the demobilization of former
combatants. The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
has also provided support through its emergency postconflict facility.
World Bank staff are in frequent contact with the
national authorities and with our multilateral and
bilateral partners. We believe that, while the overall
situation remains fragile because of tense relations
within the existing coalition and the visible influence
of the military in a generally unstable neighbourhood,
the overall situation has improved in recent months on
both the political and economic fronts.
Despite the recent instability in Guinea-Bissau,
we are reassured by the elected Government’s
commitment to dialogue as an approach to resolve
problems. We have also been impressed by the progress
made in the preparation of new projects proposed for
World Bank support and by the Government’s overall
reconstruction efforts.
While progress has been made in the abovementioned areas, much remains to be done to restore
normalcy. The energy situation is desperate; the
financial sector is very weak; landmines pose a danger
and, in addition, basic social services such as education
and health have yet to be fully restored. The World
Bank stands ready to assist the Government in those
key sectors, but Guinea-Bissau will need to rely on the
continued and expanded assistance of the international
community if it is to overcome some of these
challenges.
The World Bank has been working closely with
the IMF, the African Development Bank, the European
Union, the West African Development Bank and other
multilateral partners in Guinea-Bissau, including the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Health

4

Organization (WHO) and the World Food Programme
(WFP).
We appreciate, in particular, the generous
assistance of the Government of the Netherlands,
with which we have been collaborating on
the demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration
programme. The Netherlands has been instrumental in
financing the preparation of the programme, which is
critical to complement the technical assistance being
provided by the International Organization for
Migration (IOM). While programme preparation has
been moving somewhat more slowly than initially
expected, after the deployment of technical assistance
by the IOM, the situation has improved considerably.
A census of combatants has been under way, and
we expect that in January a pilot programme will be
launched, with a demobilization programme moving to
full implementation immediately afterwards.
To mobilize financing for the programme, a
multi-donor trust fund was recently set up in the World
Bank at the request of the Government. Though the
Netherlands has made an important initial contribution
of six million guilders, this falls short of what is
needed and assistance will be required from other
partners.
The Council is aware that Guinea-Bissau is a
highly indebted country which is being considered for
debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative The staff of the World Bank and
the IMF are currently preparing a HIPC decision-point
document which will be presented to our Board on
14 December. Accompanying the analysis of our staff
will be the Government’s interim poverty reduction
strategy paper, which it has recently completed after
broad consultations with domestic stakeholders and
external partners.
The interim poverty reduction strategy paper
constitutes a serious initial effort to put together a
package to promote sustained growth and poverty
reduction. It highlights selected areas such as
governance, demobilization, education, health and, no
less important, the fight against HIV/AIDS.
The Government has already
mobilized
significant support from other donors but will require
additional financial help to achieve its objectives. The
proposed HIPC debt relief would give Guinea-Bissau a
reduction of 85 per cent in net present value terms on

S/PV.4238

its multilateral and bilateral official debt. This would
be the deepest debt relief granted to date. The debt
relief would help Guinea-Bissau to keep up progress
towards national reconciliation and to lay the
foundations of sustained growth and poverty reduction.
It would also contribute to paving the way for easing
the tensions in the subregion, which has seen its share
of violence, instability and growing poverty.
At a recent discussion of a HIPC preliminary
document, the directors of the World Bank
acknowledged Guinea-Bissau’s track record in
implementing macroeconomic reforms since 1998, and
commended the country for its progress in
reconciliation and reconstruction after the violent
conflict that erupted in June 1998. They noted that,
despite improvements achieved so far, Guinea-Bissau
faces considerable challenges under the reform agenda.
These include maintaining sound macroeconomic
policies, improving governance, carrying out
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
developing the private sector and reallocating public
expenditures towards activities that promote growth,
reduce poverty and enhance access to social services.
The executive directors of the World Bank further
reconfirmed their preliminary determination that
Guinea-Bissau is eligible for assistance under the HIPC
Initiative, as I have already mentioned, on the basis of
its high debt burden and the track record of
performance under programmes supported by both the
World Bank and the IMF.
To summarize, progress is being made to bring
peace and stability, so necessary for Guinea-Bissau’s
development and the reduction of poverty among its
people. We believe that the international community
should take a risk for peace and accompany this
process. The World Bank and the IMF are prepared to
do their part in coalition with other partners and in
support of the Government’s own efforts.
The President: I hope that members will allow
me to say that many of us very much welcome the
increased involvement of the international financial
institutions in post-conflict peace-building. I am not
sure if I can say that beyond my national capacity, but
many of us, I think, do.
I understand that you are talking today here also
on behalf of the International Monetary Fund. If that is
so, I warmly welcome it, because one voice from 19th
Street, Washington, is a very good first step towards

more coherence in the international development
architecture that I think everybody would welcome
here — I may again go beyond my national capacity; I
am not sure how often I can do this.
I hope everybody will agree that it would be a
good idea if I now give the floor to the Vice-Prime
Minister
of
Guinea-Bissau,
His
Excellency
Mr. Faustino Imbali.
in
Mr.
Imbali
(Guinea-Bissau)
(spoke
Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): I
feel particularly honoured to have the privilege to take
the floor on behalf of my country in the Council
gathered today for a special meeting on Guinea-Bissau.
Allow me first, Madam President, to convey to
you the warmest greetings from His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Kumba Yalá, who cannot be with us today,
although he is with us in spirit.
The broad-based coalition Government — made
up of the Party for Social Renewal and the Resistance
of Guinea-Bissau-Bafatá Movement — resulting from
the last elections assumed the responsibility for the
destinies of our people in a most unique situation. The
bloody political and military conflict of 7 June 1998
worsened the structural difficulties that have marked
our country throughout the last 25 years.
The historical origins of these difficulties are
linked to the adoption, immediately following
independence, of a strategy of growth based on the
central management of the economy. The strong
governmental intervention in economic life distorted
the allocation of resources and obstructed the adequate
development of the farming potential of the country.
Accordingly, the economy grew slowly and the country
became dependent on international aid, aggravating the
level of poverty of our population.
To correct internal and external imbalances at the
end of the 1980s, Guinea-Bissau initiated its first
structural adjustment programme, supported by two
Structural Adjustment Facility agreements and two
Structural Adjustment credits from the International
Development Association. The results of these reforms
were unsatisfactory, causing social indicators to
continue to decline and relegating Guinea-Bissau to the
group of the poorest countries in the world, with an
extremely low human development index.

5

S/PV.4238

However, between 1997 and 1998, with the
deepening of the reform process and the adoption of
the African Financial Community Franc (FCFA) after
the accession of the country to the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) on 2 May
1997, the largest macroeconomic imbalances were
reduced, internal production accelerated, primarily in
the agricultural sector, inflation was reduced and the
private sector began to grow and play a more dynamic
role in the economy. Having been able to achieve an
important economic performance in the short period of
time allowed the country to regain the confidence of its
development partners, the country saw a significant
impact on its social indicators. The successful
conclusion of the implementation of the triennial
agreement with the Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility (ESAF) at the beginning of 1998 created the
necessary conditions for the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) to consider
Guinea-Bissau eligible for the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative in April 1998.
Guinea-Bissau was three months from the HIPC
decision point when the conflict of 7 June 1998 broke
out. The conflict’s deep-rooted causes were: the
inadequate management of the demobilization and
reintegration process of ex-combatants from the war of
independence; the incapacity of the democratic process
to gain roots and the frequent and unpunished
violations of the Constitution; the blocking of the
institutions that maintain the balance of power and of
the mechanisms that guarantee transparent public
management; the personalization of power, its
exclusive service in the interest of groups and chronic
internal instability with subregional repercussions; the
postponement of local elections foreseen to complete
the cycle of democratic consultations, which would
have given the citizens greater participation in the
management of the country; and the serious social
crisis aggravated by the growing gaps between the rich
minority, who took advantage of the opportunities
created by their government positions, and the rest of
the nation, impoverished and with lessening prospects
of ameliorating their situation.
The consequences of this conflict were
catastrophic, since, besides the loss of human life, the
people of Guinea-Bissau were deeply traumatized by
this civil war in a country with low population density
and complex family ties. The level of poverty was
further exacerbated. The use of heavy artillery caused

6

the massive destruction of the socio-economic
infrastructures, provoking the collapse of such essential
services as health care and education. The destruction
of the economic infrastructures and the decapitalization
of the private sector are today considered to be sources
of social ills linked to the decline of employment and
the reduction of purchasing power.
One of the major effects of the armed conflict
was undoubtedly the increase in the number of people
living in poverty, the planting of an estimated 15,000
mines throughout the territory and the distribution of
an undetermined number of light weapons within civil
society.
To face the grim situation resulting from the war,
the Government of National Unity, whose mandate was
short-term, concentrated its efforts on the social and
economic recovery of the country, the reconciliation of
the people of Guinea-Bissau and the creation of
conditions for the return of democracy through free and
transparent elections. The round-table conference that
took place in Geneva from 4 to 5 May 1999 was a way
for the Government of National Unity to mobilize
resources for its emergency programme.
The international community’s pledge to donate
an estimated $200 million to Guinea-Bissau has not
materialized to this day. Nevertheless, the good
intentions of some development partners have enabled
the partial financing of the programme to demobilize
combatants, the efforts to revitalize the private sector
and the holding of free elections, allowing GuineaBissau to return to democracy with the creation of
democratic institutions.
The broad-based coalition Government has a
solid parliamentary base and, conscious of the
challenges and difficulties posed in the light of the
post-conflict situation and the high expectations of the
people of Guinea-Bissau who voted massively for
change, has elaborated a legislative programme based
on earlier efforts at post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, choosing as its primary objectives good
governance and the fight against poverty.
During the nine months of its rule, the
Government has given priority to the following: the
creation of institutional conditions for the transparent
management of state
affairs,
including
the
establishment of an office for public tenders; the
international auditing process of state accounts; a
diagnostic of public finances that was undertaken in

S/PV.4238

October this year by an independent consultancy; the
reorganization and strengthening of the Court of
Accounts and of the High-Level Inspection Against
Corruption and the development of a national
programme of good governance; the reorganization of
the armed forces through the adoption of a series of
laws and a programme on the demobilization and
reintegration of combatants; the implementation of the
necessary reforms for the re-establishment of
macroeconomic stability, with customs and fiscal
reforms in line with efforts for regional integration
converging with the West African Monetary Union and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union; the
ad referendum agreement on a triennial programme
(2000-2003) with the International Monetary Fund; the
elaboration of an interim document on the National
Strategy for Poverty Reduction on the basis of
consultations with representatives of civil society, the
private sector of the armed forces and development
partners; and the reorientation of public spending,
investing in social sectors and focusing on the need to
guarantee stability, justice and public order.
I have the pleasure to announce that human rights
are respected in Guinea-Bissau, a fact that can be
confirmed by the President of the League of Human
Rights of Guinea-Bissau, who is present in this room
today. That institution has, in the past few months,
developed joint actions with the Government for the
promotion and protection of the rights and fundamental
liberties of citizens. An example of such action is the
training by the League of 250 police officers in human
rights and citizenship.
A true separation of power exists in GuineaBissau, evident in the recent election of the President
of the Supreme Court. There is also freedom of the
press. However, government efforts have been
overshadowed by two major factors: the insufficiency
of financial resources to address the country’s postconflict problems; and the constant interference by a
military group led by Brigadier Ansumane Mane, who
has never hidden his intentions against the formation of
democratic armed forces, but did conceal his intentions
to overthrow the constitutional power, in complicity
with some political parties, which culminated in the
unsuccessful coup d’état of 22 November 2000. During
this attempted coup, our armed forces mobilized
themselves in defence of democracy, returned freedom
to our people and submitted to constitutional order and
the rule of law, in a rare example of stability in Africa.

Today more than ever, we are determined to fight
for the development of our country. It is in this light
that we appeal to the international community for help
in overcoming the following challenges. First, our
armed forces require reorganization. An important step
has already been taken in this regard with the
previously mentioned legislative package on the armed
forces and national defence. However, the root of the
problem concerns the current number of military
personnel. The conflict of 7 June caused their numbers
to triple, weighing heavily on the national budget. To
face this situation, the Government is implementing,
with funds from the World Bank, a programme for the
demobilization and reintegration of combatants.
Unfortunately, the credit provided by the Bank does not
cover the more delicate issues of the programme,
requiring the mobilization of additional financial
resources. If this complex problem is not resolved, it
will affect the Government’s ability to mobilize
resources for the social and productive areas.
The second challenge is the crippling debt
burden, now exceeding $800 million, with debtservicing costs at close to $34 million. A recent
analysis of the sustainability of Guinea-Bissau’s
external debt, made in consultation with the technical
bodies of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, indicates that, even with favourable
levels projected for exports, the relation between the
updated level of debt and Guinea-Bissau’s exports,
after the application of the traditional debt-relief
measures, remains, in the medium term, substantially
above the levels of debt sustainability in the context of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative.
The Council will agree that, in the face of this grave
situation, and without special treatment and the
exemption of the traditional conditionalities of this
debt, all efforts in the fight against poverty will be
futile. It is in this light that we are working on a
package of reforms and are making intense contacts
with our bilateral and multilateral partners, hoping to
receive from them the necessary assistance for that
debt relief, within the context of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative.
The final challenge is peace and security at the
subregional level, in particular in Casamance. The
President of the Republic, Mr. Kumba Yalá, has always
said, “Guinea-Bissau is not and will never be part of
this conflict, but it will be part of its solution”. I would

7

S/PV.4238

like once again to reaffirm to the Council my country’s
firm position in that regard.
The painful experiences of the war of
independence and the recent political and military
conflict of 7 June 1998, and its collateral effects, have
taught us that war is not the best way to resolve a
conflict. Bearing this in mind and respectful of the
principle of good-neighbourliness, we are certain that
true stability in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion
will not be possible without peace in neighbouring
Casamance. We therefore make ourselves available to
participate in a peaceful search for peace in the
subregion, fully respecting the principles of national
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the United
Nations Charter. The contacts made by His Excellency
the President of the Republic during his trips to
Senegal, Gambia, Nigeria, Libya and the Republic of
Guinea testify to his desire for peace.
Today, my country is considered the most stable
in the subregion. For that reason, and because of its
history, Guinea-Bissau intends to play a front-line role
in the search for peaceful solutions regarding the
resolution of conflicts and guarantees of stability in the
subregion.
We sincerely believe we are following the right
path. The challenges ahead are great, but they can be
faced realistically. The Government and the people of
Guinea-Bissau appeal to the international community
to help us in the fight against poverty, in the
consolidation of democracy and in assuring sustainable
development for our country. Allow me to reaffirm our
intention to continue to focus our efforts on
guaranteeing the transparent management of the State
and the rational and careful use of the resources placed
at our disposal.
In closing, I would like, on behalf of the people
of Guinea-Bissau, to express our most sincere thanks
and our greatest appreciation for all that has been done
for my country by the international community.
The President: I thank the Vice-Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau for his very comprehensive and
informative statement, which will greatly enhance the
quality of our debate. I think that one of the lessons
learned in post-conflict situations is that for postconflict peace-building to be successful it has to be
inclusive. I commend the Vice-Prime Minister on the
fact that his delegation is indeed very inclusive: it
includes representatives from the private sector — both

8

for-profit and non-profit — and from parliament;
I think that is a very good sign that post-conflict peacebuilding will be successful, because it will be
inclusive.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome to this important meeting the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to thank him
for his opening remarks, which were, as usual, most
lucid. I wish also to welcome the high-level delegation
of Guinea-Bissau led by the Vice-Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Faustino Imbali, as well as Mr. Callisto
Madavo, Vice-President of the World Bank, Africa
Region.
I must not fail also to thank the delegation of the
Netherlands which, throughout its presidency, and
building on the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, has involved the Council in a
most useful consideration of how to deal with crisis
situations. Today’s meeting, on the situation in GuineaBissau, is consistent with that approach.
Both the Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau
and Mr. Madavo admirably described the highly
precarious situation, to which I shall refer solely to
express my delegation’s satisfaction at the political
strides made and to censure the former military junta
for its irresponsible actions taken, inter alia, through
the events of last week. Mali is delighted also at the
improvement in Guinea-Bissau’s relations with Senegal
and with Guinea.
Let me focus now on problems with regard to
post-conflict peace-building in Guinea-Bissau. Here,
I have three comments to make. The first bears on the
domestic and external context for Guinea-Bissau. In
the domestic sphere, it is clear that a legitimate,
democratic regime is in place, but is unable to
implement its policies. The determination of the people
to bring about change, as reflected in President Kumba
Yalá’s decisive victory, is powerful, which defines the
short-term and medium-term post-election policies of
the new Guinea-Bissau authorities. It is key, first and
foremost, to strengthen the spirit of national
reconciliation, consolidate the rule of law, ensure the
sound management of public affairs, restructure the
economy, restructure the armed forces, implement a
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and combat the illicit circulation of light
weapons.

S/PV.4238

Furthermore, on the international level, GuineaBissau must continue to improve relations with
neighbouring States and to revive cooperation with the
international community at large.
My second comment proceeds from what I have
just said, and concerns the need to support the
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau. In the view of my
delegation, two measures could prove useful here. The
first would be to adopt an integrated joint approach
involving the United Nations system and the
international financial institutions, including the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Earlier,
Mr. Madavo made encouraging commitments along
those lines. Such synergy is essential as we pursue the
process
of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration and the proper unfolding of the peace
process in Guinea-Bissau. In the same vein, more
closely concerted action by bilateral and multilateral
partners would also help consolidate peace in GuineaBissau. In that regard, the round table to be held at
Geneva in February 2001 will be a test.
I must also stress the adverse effect of
conditionalities, of the debt burden and of unfulfilled
pledges for assistance to the economic and social
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau, and hence to peacebuilding. Here, we call upon the donor community to
make substantial contributions to the three-year
programme scheduled to begin next year.
My third comment relates to efforts by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and by the United Nations to build peace
in Guinea-Bissau. Their activities in that regard have
been most complementary, which has made it possible
to achieve some good results; now, those results must
be consolidated. For its part, ECOWAS will continue to
play its full part in this enterprise. We were pleased at
the establishment of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and we hail the very
active role played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau.
My delegation fully supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
meeting because it fully reflects our concerns.
The President: In terms of logistics, when I flew
in last night I first thought that we could do this in the
morning. But I think members will agree with me that,
if we are a little bit realistic, I should actually suspend
the meeting for lunch and then we should return in the

afternoon. I am actually planning to do that around
1.15 p.m., and then we could come back at 3 p.m. I
thought it would be useful to announce that I have
given up in terms of trying to finish our debate before
lunch.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a special
pleasure for Bangladesh to see you, Madam President,
presiding over the Council’s meeting this morning. I
agree with the Secretary-General that we should have
women presidents more often.
The presence in the Council today of the VicePrime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Faustino Imbali,
is very much welcomed by us, as is his statement.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and his specific recommendations relating to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
In his last report, the Secretary-General identified
the progress made towards post-conflict peace-building
in that country, as well as the challenges to that
process. Those challenges were quite apparent during
the past week, when the former military junta — or at
least a part of it led by General Ansumane Mane —
challenged the democratically elected Government,
flouting constitutional order and threatening to plunge
the country back into chaos and violence.
We are happy that the moves orchestrated by
General Mane and his supporters have failed.
Democracy and constitutional order have been upheld
in Guinea-Bissau. This has to be consolidated by
furthering cooperation and reconciliation in the country
so that a smooth transition from conflict management
to post-conflict peace-building can take place. We are
encouraged by the statement made by the VicePresident of the World Bank that covered this and
related areas. We would like to highlight five critical
areas among the urgent tasks facing Guinea-Bissau in
this transition.
First, strengthening democratic institutions and
practices would prevent any relapse into violence. All
parties concerned, and especially the former military
junta in Guinea-Bissau, must therefore continue to
uphold the results of the elections held last December
and respect civilian rule in the country.
Secondly, without a successful process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
permanent peace will elude Guinea-Bissau. The
Secretary-General has noted in his report that a pilot

9

S/PV.4238

DDR project is to start in January 2001. This matter
needs urgent attention. All constraints on successful
DDR have to be addressed — not least of which is the
question of timely funding — for there to be successful
implementation of the peace process in Guinea-Bissau.
Thirdly, during the recent incidents a large
number of people were internally displaced. They need
the urgent attention of the international community.
Fourthly, sustainable development makes peace
sustainable. Lasting peace in Guinea-Bissau depends
on economic regeneration. The efforts of the
Government can be successful only with significant
international assistance. We hope that the resources
needed will be forthcoming at the next round table,
scheduled for February 2001 in Geneva.
Fifthly, and finally, peace in Guinea-Bissau
depends on peace in the region. Bangladesh welcomes
the timely initiatives towards stabilization of the border
region between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal. We also
welcome the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States and its Chairman, President
Konaré, to achieve peace and stability in the region and
in Guinea-Bissau. Our special appreciation also goes to
the
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for his continuing efforts in
Guinea-Bissau on behalf of the United Nations.
The President: I want to thank Ambassador
Chowdhury for his call for more women presidents,
particularly as it comes from him, as Bangladesh is, of
course, one of the few countries of the world that can
credibly make such a call.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): It is
certainly a pleasure to be able to say “Madam
President”. I wish there were more madams around the
table. I want to express our great appreciation for your
presence here today. We also want to let you know how
ably you have been represented by Ambassador van
Walsum and his team during a very difficult month in
the Council. We are grateful for you Government’s
leadership during this month. I think today’s meeting is
a testament to your Government’s commitment to
international intervention and the importance of
resolving conflict and restoring order. The commitment
of the Government of the Netherlands to post-conflict
assistance to civil society in Guinea-Bissau is
commendable, as is its support for economic recovery.
I think it sets an example for all of us.

10

We are also very grateful to have Vice-Prime
Minister Imbali and the delegation from Guinea-Bissau
here. We also welcome the presence of the
representative of the World Bank, Mr. Madavo, as a
welcome testament to the importance of development
in conflict prevention.
The United States commends the people of
Guinea-Bissau for their commitment to peace and for
their sustained efforts to work together to build a
stronger society. We also applaud the work of United
Nations personnel serving with the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau under
the
leadership
of
Secretary-General
Annan’s
Representative, Mr. Samuel Nana-Sinkam, for their
efforts to strengthen democratic values, promote the
rule of law and encourage the protection of human
rights in Guinea-Bissau. The United Nations Office
represents a good example of the critical role the
Organization can play in conflict resolution and postconflict institution-building. A continued United
Nations presence will serve to promote the continued
viability of Guinea-Bissau’s democratic institutions
and to turn its attention to reconstruction and economic
development. The United States support for the United
Nations operation remains strong. We are pleased that
the Council has given it a continuing mandate through
March 2001.
While we applaud these signs of progress, recent
disturbing developments in Guinea-Bissau have
sounded some alarms. The fractious and ambiguous
role played by General Mane and his loyalists has
posed a major obstacle to reconstruction efforts since
President Yala’s inauguration last February. We call on
General Mane and his entourage to refrain from
interfering with the legitimate, popularly elected
Government of President Yala.
We encourage the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to develop a plan for the integration of former soldiers
into the national economy, within the framework of the
rule of law.
The international community would react
negatively should Guinea-Bissau return to military rule
under any guise. Guinea-Bissau is just beginning to
recover from civil conflict. It needs peace,
reconstruction and development. Nothing could hinder
that more than renewed military intervention in
governance. To that end, the people of Guinea-Bissau

S/PV.4238

need and deserve the support of the international
community.
We should also take note of the fact that the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are
represented here today as an expression of their
willingness to do their part. Thanks to international
encouragement and intervention, Guinea-Bissau has
taken the first critical steps towards the reestablishment of a society based on national
reconciliation and democratic values. We must
continue to support those efforts.
The United States remains committed to
supporting Guinea-Bissau’s recovery from two years of
upheaval and disruption. We will continue to engage
President Yala’s Government to support the ongoing
process of civil and economic reconstruction. As a
member of the Group of Friends for Guinea-Bissau, the
United States stands ready to do what it can to help. In
a subregion fraught with many challenges and
interlocking crises, the United Nations must likewise
continue to do its part in assisting the Government and
the people of Guinea-Bissau to build a strong
foundation for peace.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words she addressed to me,
to my mission and to the Ambassador.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated
countries Cyprus and Malta align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union would like at the outset to
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
debate, which is a concrete and dynamic illustration of
the challenges related to the consolidation of peace and
the management of post-conflict situations. We listened
with great interest to the comprehensive and detailed
briefing given by the Vice-Prime Minister, Mr.
Faustino Fudut Imbali, for which we express our deep
appreciation.
With the return of democracy, the people of
Guinea-Bissau had many high expectations: the
restoration of civil peace and good governance,
economic and social reconstruction, secure borders and

the gradual strengthening of civil institutions vis-à-vis
the former military junta. At this stage, however, we
cannot but acknowledge that these objectives have
been only partially achieved. In spite of the successful
holding of legislative and presidential elections at the
beginning of the year, which gave the new institutions
unarguable legitimacy, the multidimensional nature of
the crisis situation affecting Guinea-Bissau has
magnified its complexity and has made it imperative
that it be managed in a coordinated and truly integrated
manner by all the partners concerned.
The return to peace and sustainable development
requires that a solution be found to structural problems.
These problems are not only of a political nature —
such as the relationship between the civil and the
military authorities, which has up to now been
sensitive and complex, and the differences that exist
within the Government; they are also of an institutional
nature — such as issues related to the coordination of
the Government team, the general lack of public
services, and the dubious management of public
finances; and of an international nature.
The European Union acknowledges in this respect
that the support of the donors, be they multilateral or
bilateral, has lacked a consistent and coordinated
strategy. Specifically, the disbursement of the promised
funds was probably too slow to promote the
stabilization of the post-conflict situation and the
success of the democratic experience resulting from the
elections of November 1999 and January 2000. The
security situation in Guinea-Bissau today is facing
serious risks of internal destabilization, as last week’s
events showed once again, and possibly even of
regional destabilization.
The appointment of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the establishment of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in June 1999 played a
decisive role in the successful conclusion of the
electoral process, which could not have taken place
without the personal and sustained involvement of Mr.
Nana Sinkam. His work, his courage and his
determination also indisputably helped to achieve a
successful holding last week in dealing with the threats
of the destabilization of democracy.
While it is useful to begin considering right now
the extension of UNOGBIS’s mandate beyond March
2001, inter alia to promote the successful conclusion of

11

S/PV.4238

the demobilization process, there must also be a
massive and determined commitment on the part of the
donors in order to meet the upcoming deadlines, which
are decisive.
For the European Union, this commitment
cannot — at least provisionally — be based on the
usual financial criteria and on classic ratios.
Conditionalities must take account of the post-conflict
situation. We must not lose sight of the fact that
Guinea-Bissau’s gross domestic product fell by 28 per
cent in 1998, and that remunerated public or private
employment has become scarce. The restoration of
democratic sovereignty against a background of
destroyed
or
pillaged
facilities,
failing
telecommunications
systems,
depopulated
administrations and public finances drained by the cost
of maintaining the armed forces is a challenge that is
almost impossible to meet without adequate
international support. We must therefore consider and
provide qualitatively and quantitatively appropriate
assistance as soon as possible, with adjusted
conditionalities.
The European Union believes that this assistance
must include debt forgiveness and budgetary support,
which would enable the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to finance basic social services and ensure that salaries
can be paid for a period of several months. Projects
aimed at relaunching economic activities could also be
implemented. For its part, the Government of GuineaBissau must, as soon as possible, determine what its
requirements are in terms of technical assistance in
order to ensure that this international assistance is
properly managed. The European Union hopes to see a
national effort aimed at remedying dysfunctions such
as excessive per diems, overly numerous administrative
missions and too many non-budgeted expenses.
Changes in leadership and an in-depth reorganization
of current practices must be accompanied at all levels
by this necessary effort at recovery.
The new civil authorities in Guinea-Bissau had to
cope last week with irresponsible behaviour on the part
of some of the military forces. This was not entirely
unforeseeable. The self-proclaimed military junta, led
by General Mane, had not actually completed the
process of its dissolution, in spite of the holding of
legislative and presidential elections. The European
Union welcomes the fact that the great majority of the
military forces have sides with the democratically

12

elected Government of President Kumba Yalá, as well
as the support expressed by the people.
The European Union believes that in this new
context, priority must be given to ensuring that such
events do not recur and that Guinea-Bissau and the
international community relaunch as soon as possible
the process of demobilization, disarmament and, above
all, reintegration of military and paramilitary forces
and of former combatants. Now that a census has been
completed of the former combatants and the
paramilitary forces, a census of the armed forces must
be taken expeditiously and transparently, so as to
include in the 2001 budget a ceiling for troop strength
that is realistic and financially viable. This is a
prerequisite for the early conclusion of the
demobilization programme.
The European Union calls on the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to pursue a policy of open, inclusive
dialogue allowing for the establishment of real national
reconciliation. Guinea-Bissau needs peace. GuineaBissau also needs unity. We hope that this message can
be heard by all. In this respect, the European Union
will be particularly sensitive to priority actions
intended to ensure respect for human rights and public
freedoms. It also stresses the need to accept and
preserve political, cultural and religious diversity.
In conclusion, I wish to return to the regional
dimension of the Guinea-Bissau crisis. The European
Union notes with interest the initiatives taken by the
Senegalese and Guinea-Bissau Governments to limit
the border incidents that occurred between June and
September 2000. The European Union greatly
welcomes the appointment by the Government of
Guinea (Conakry) of a resident ambassador and the
appointment by Senegal of a chargé d’affaires. The
European Union hopes to see greater understanding
among all the countries of the region and, in this
context, the implementation of more efficient
monitoring of trafficking in small arms, in keeping
with the spirit and the letter of the Moratorium on the
Import, Export and Manufacturing of Small Arms
adopted by all the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States in Bamako.
The President: Of course, Mr. Ambassador, in
my national capacity I can say I agree with every word
you said. But I also noted that the delegation of
Guinea-Bissau and the World Bank were taking down
with enthusiasm some of the things you said about the

S/PV.4238

massive commitment of donors, the need for debt relief
and budget support, and although this is not a pledging
session, we will take that with us towards that
particular session.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): We
welcome your presence among us today, Madam
President, at this timely meeting on Guinea-Bissau.
The events of last week showed how important it is for
the Council to maintain its commitment to the efforts
being made by Guinea-Bissau to strengthen peace and
consolidate democracy.
(spoke in English)
Canada is pleased with the return to peace in
Guinea-Bissau, and we welcome the Vice-Prime
Minister and his delegation to our consultations today
and the opportunity to discuss the situation directly
with him.
Canada joins other members of the Council in
reiterating support for the democratically elected
Government of Guinea-Bissau. We urge the
Government to continue its efforts to strengthen
democratic institutions, including the subordination of
the military to civilian rule. Military challenges to
Government authority only destabilize Guinea-Bissau
and the region more generally. Further, the continuing
commitment of the international donor community and
the viability of its efforts depend on maintaining
stability in Guinea-Bissau.
In this regard, Canada agrees fully with the point
of the draft presidential statement that stresses the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration as a key element for promoting
sustainable democracy and stability, and we commend
particularly the efforts of the Bretton Woods
institutions, especially the World Bank, in this
connection.
We support the work of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau for the
consolidation of peace and democracy and the
promotion of respect for human rights and the rule of
law.
We commend the President of Senegal, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for their
contributions. We urge all the parties to work together
to address the root causes of unrest in order to restore

lasting peace for the benefit of the people of GuineaBissau and stability for the region.
With respect to the Secretary-General’s requests
for Council members’ support for the implementation
of the Brahimi report, particularly as regards quick
impact project funds for his special representatives
abroad, he can count on Canadian agreement.
The President: I think I can say, on behalf of the
Secretary-General — I shall pass on the good news —
that you reacted promptly indeed to his question on this
particular recommendation, and he will be very pleased
to hear that within two hours, at least your country is
behind him.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): My delegation
would like to thank you, Madam President, and your
Mission for taking the initiative of holding this debate
today. It is important not just for Guinea-Bissau, but
also for demonstrating how this Council can take a
holistic approach to the problems of conflict. My
delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very thoughtful introduction to today’s
debate.
The Permanent Representative of France has just
spoken on behalf of the European Union, and my
delegation endorses everything he has said. I would
just therefore like to make three brief points.
First, we were very grateful for the speech made
by the Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, in which
he reiterated his Government’s intentions to restore
political and economic stability to the country, which
we welcome. We believe that the recent stand-off
between the Government and the junta leader, General
Mane, has shown that the military is prepared to
support a democratically elected civilian president.
That said, we believe that the demobilization of
Guinea-Bissau’s very large post-conflict army, which
has as many as 25,000 men, is a very high priority and
a political and economic necessity.
Finally, I think this debate has shown, as we
believe, that now is the right time for the international
community to demonstrate its support for GuineaBissau.
The President: Thank you very much,
Mr. Ambassador for that short and focused statement.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Madam Minister, for presiding over our

13

S/PV.4238

deliberations, your delegation for its initiative to
convene this debate and the Secretary-General for the
information and comments he has shared with us on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. I also wish to welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister of that country and the important
delegation that accompanies him this morning at this
Security Council meeting.
We believe that the political developments of this
past week in Guinea-Bissau make even more relevant
our debate on the transition processes towards peacebuilding activities in those countries that, like GuineaBissau, are emerging from conflict situations. This
shows the critical importance of transition periods and
the need to strengthen them with all the necessary
support of the Security Council and other United
Nations organs.
We also believe that lessons can be drawn from
the situation of Guinea-Bissau and applied to other
transition processes.
In our view, the situation in Guinea-Bissau cannot
be analysed in isolation; rather it should be considered
within a subregional context. It cannot be separated
from the political, military, economic and social
situations prevailing in other West African countries,
and particularly from the growing instability on the
common border between Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia.
Guinea-Bissau entered a period of relative calm
following the presidential elections held at the
beginning of this year. However, the Security Council
must closely follow the transition process even if the
conflict appears to have ended. Factors of instability
endure, as the recent insubordination of General Mane
shows. In this case, as in others, post-conflict
democratic institutions are often weak and must be
supported by the international community concretely
and effectively.
A multidimensional conflict such as that in
Guinea-Bissau reinforces the need for a coordinated
and integrated approach involving the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the relevant
specialized agencies, the Bretton Woods institutions
and the community of donor countries. In this context,
we believe that we should be considering ways of
making more operational and effective Article 65 of the
Charter on cooperation between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council.

14

This coordinated and holistic approach must be
adopted not just during the peace-building phase, but
earlier, as the conflict is developing. That is why we
believe that in the case of Guinea-Bissau, as with other
conflicts since the end of the cold war, it is not possible
to draw a clear-cut and definitive dividing line between
peacekeeping and peace-building activities. They can,
and often must, begin at the same time.
The humanitarian, institutional and economic
consequences of the conflict in Guinea-Bissau have
shown that bringing about lasting peace and
reconciliation requires far more than a ceasefire. The
conditions necessary for sustainable development
within democracy must be created.
The United Nations agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions and the developed countries can, and must,
play a fundamental role in building peace in GuineaBissau. Reducing or forgiving its external debt,
granting preferential credit, opening markets to its
products and increasing official development assistance
and private investment will help to create a climate of
stability and enable the people to enjoy the benefits of
peace.
At the same time, it is clear that the primary
responsibility for the resolution of the conflict rests
with the leadership of Guinea-Bissau. It must be
motivated by the political will to overcome the root
causes of the conflict, accept the conditions imposed
by the rule of law and embrace the goals of
reconstruction. The Security Council and the
international community must, of course, support this
process, but they cannot be a substitute for the political
will of the parties to make peace and to live in peace.
I would not want to conclude without expressing
Argentina’s appreciation for the tireless work carried
out by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Samuel
Nana-Sinkam. We should also like to express our
appreciation to the Economic Community of West
African States and the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries for their constant support for the
people of Guinea-Bissau as they move towards peace,
progress and national reconciliation.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We endorse the words of gratitude expressed
to you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We are pleased to welcome the participation in

S/PV.4238

our discussion of the Vice-Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Faustino
Imbali. We listened very carefully to his statement,
which provided an in-depth analysis of the situation in
the country, the Government’s policy and the tasks
facing the people of Guinea-Bissau. We should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement.
It is remarkable that today we are discussing not
only the problems of Guinea-Bissau, but the broader
problem of ensuring stable post-conflict peacebuilding. Finding a way to resolve these problems is
extremely important from the perspective of a longterm political settlement, including all the main
elements, ranging from the demobilization of former
combatants to the social and economic aspects, as well
as from the practical point of view, particularly as
regards the role of the United Nations in GuineaBissau. In this connection, I should like to stress the
particular importance of coordinating activities within
the United Nations system. Such activities must be

directed towards the targeted resolution of social
problems so as to overcome the consequences of the
crisis.
The development of events in Guinea-Bissau
provides a good illustration of the ideas that I have just
expressed. We share the concern of the international
community about the recent political crisis in the
country and, together with other members of the
Council, we appeal to all the social and political forces
in Guinea-Bissau to act solely within the bounds of the
Constitution.
With regard to the continued presence of the
United Nations in this African country, we believe that
the presence of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau is particularly
important. We believe that that Office should continue
to play its important initiating role of coordinator.
The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, if there is no objection, I propose to suspend the
meeting now.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

15
