6. Further declares that, in the, event of South Africa
committing further acts of violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zambia, the Security Council will
meet again to consider the adoption of effective measures,

in accordance with the appropriat~ provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Adopted at tire 1948th meeting by
14 votes to none, with I abstention
(United States of America).

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa
Co11sideri11g that the decision of Lesotho constitutes an
important contribution to the realization of United Nations
objectives in southern Africa in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Taking note of the urgent and special economic needs of
Lesotho arising from the closure of the border posts,
l. Endorses General Assembly resolution 31 /6 A, which,
i11ter alia, calls upon all Governments to deny any form of
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and to
refrain from having any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or other bantustans;
1. Commends the Government of Lesotho for its decision not to recognize the so-called independence of the
Transkei:
3. Condemns any action by South Africa intended to
coerce Lesotho into according recognition to the bantustan
Transkei;
4. Calls upon South Africa to take immediately all
necessary steps to reopen the border posts;
5. Appeals to all States to provide immediate financial,
technical and material assistance to Lesotho so that it can
carry out its economic development programmes and
enhance its capacity to implement fully the United Nations
resolutions on apartheid and bantustans;
6. Requests the United Nations and the organizations
and programmes concerned, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme and all the United Nations specialized agencies, to
assist Lesotho in the present situation and to consider
periodically the question of economic assistance to Lesotho
as envisaged in the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with
the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system,
to organize, with immediate effect, all forms of financial,
technical and material assistance to the Kingdom of
Lesotho to enable it to overcome the economic difficulties
arising from the closure of the border posts by South Africa
owing to the refusal of Lesotho to recognize the so-called
independence of the Transkei;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the
situation under constant review, to maintain close liaison
with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and international
financial institutions, and to report to the Security Council
at its subsequent meeting on the question;
9. Decides to remain seized of the question.

Decisions

At its 1981st meeting, on 21 December 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Lesotho and
Madagascar to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled "Complaint by Lesotho against South
Africa: letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Lesotho to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12257)" .4 4

At its 1982nd meeting, on 11 December 1976. the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Botswana
and Mauritius to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

Resolution 402 ( 1976)
of 22 December 1976

17u: Security Council,
Having heard the statement of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of Lesotho on 21 December
1976,4 ~
Grave/v concerned at the serious situation created by
South Africa's closure of certain border posts between
South Africa and Lesotho aimed at coercing Lesotho into
accordir.g recognition to the bantustan Transkei,
Recalling relevant General Assembly resolutions, in particular resolution 341 l D (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
condemning the establishment of bantustans and calling on
all Governments to deny recognition to the bantustans,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 31/6 A of
26 October 1976, on the so-called independent Transkei
and other bantustans, which, inter alia, calls upon all
Governments to deny any form of recognition to the
so-called independent Transkei and to refrain from having
any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or
other bantustans,
Noting with appreciation the decision of the Government
of Lesotho aot to recognize the bantustan Transkei in
compliance with United Nations decisions,
44 Ibid., Thirty-first Year, Supplement for October, November
and December I 9 76.
45 /bid.. Thirty-first Year, 1981st meeting.

Adopted at the 1982nd meeting by consensus.

13
