S/PV.8306

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8306th meeting

Tuesday, 10 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wallström. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soría
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Djedje
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-21810 (E)
*1821810*

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Chad to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bineta
Diop, African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, to
whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by thanking the President of the Security Council
for convening today’s meeting on women and peace
and security in the Sahel, as well as for Sweden’s
leadership on this issue during the country’s time in the
Security Council.
Yesterday I returned from a joint United NationsAfrican Union mission to three countries — South
Sudan, the Niger and Chad. That mission was the
second of its kind, following last year’s high-level visit
to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
When I reported back to the Security Council at that time
(see S/PV.8022) — marking the first time the Security
Council heard a briefing on women and peace and
security in relation to a country situation — members
of the Council requested further trips of this nature, a
request that I am pleased to report we took forward. I
would like to thank the people and the Governments of
South Sudan, Chad and the Niger.
We were joined in the Niger and Chad by Foreign
Minister Wallström in her capacity as President of
the Security Council for July. At various points on
the trip, we were also joined by senior United Nations
colleagues, including the Executive Directors of UNWomen and the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and his Special
2/25

10/07/2018

Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
representatives of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative. We were also joined by the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel and the Special Adviser on the
Sahel. I was very proud to lead a delegation in which
women made up the majority.
Our purpose was to highlight issues of women
and peace and security and development. Throughout
the trip, we met with women civil society leaders,
community representatives and religious and traditional
chiefs. We visited many development projects, and then
met with local authorities, senior Government officials
and Heads of State to discuss the key challenges and
opportunities that exist and to convey the voices and
messages that we had heard from women. Four issues
resonated most dramatically.
The first was the need to address the stark cost that
women and girls pay for conflict. That was particularly
evident in South Sudan, where we visited women in
protection-of-civilian sites who spoke of the violence
they face both inside and outside the camps. It was
also borne out in the stories of women in rural areas of
Chad, where the impact of Boko Haram has resulted in
insecurity, loss of family members and the increased
use of female suicide bombers.
Secondly, we heard a universal and increasingly
frustrated call by women for greater inclusion,
representation and participation in all areas of society.
They demand greater participation in decision-making.
In Juba in South Sudan, in Addis Ababa and in
Khartoum they asked that their voices be heard in the
peace process. In Chad and the Niger they advocated
for the implementation of legislation on a quota for
political participation and the recognition of their role
in the economy and in preventing violent extremism.
Greater representation at the community level is
a further imperative. The women religious leaders we
met in Chad are a very powerful voice against gender
inequality and against the attacks on women’s rights
that are such a core part of terrorist groups’ strategy
and identity. By teaching the Qur’an, they are sending a
message that the Qur’an and Islam are for both men and
women and that Islam is a religion of peace.
Women are also seeking greater inclusion in the
economy. In the Bol region of the Lake Chad basin
we saw the multiple roles fisherwomen were playing
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

in maintaining livelihoods in the absence of men who
had been killed and in building community resilience
in the face of environmental degradation and insecurity
caused by the Boko Haram insurgency. Such models,
if scaled up, have the potential to generate economic
dividends for the country. We reminded leaders that
inclusion is not a woman’s issue; it is, rather, a whole-ofsociety issue.
Thirdly, there is a clear need to keep countries
experiencing fragility today from becoming failed
States tomorrow. Chad and the Niger are dealing
with challenges that are largely not of their making,
including insecurity that originated beyond their
borders and climate change, which respects no borders
at all. Despite their own constraints, they are among
the world’s most generous hosts of refugees. But the
impact on their economies and development aspirations
has been profound. The President of the Niger, for
example, presented to us his renaissance plan to meet
the basic needs of the country’s population, but it has
been hampered by the fall in uranium and oil prices
and the expenditures on security. Security therefore
comes at a price; all too often it comes at the expense
of development.
In that context, it is critical that we all step up,
which means urgently increasing our budget support
for development in those and other fragile countries.
It is a matter, first and foremost, of human dignity. But
it is also a matter of peace and security. Investment in
development must be transformative: it must support
scaled-up, integrated projects such as we saw in the
Niger when we visited the United Nations programme
that brought together health, nutrition, agriculture,
water and sanitation, alongside women’s empowerment,
recognizing the context of climate change. I am
confident that the reforms that we are pursuing in the
United Nations will provide the necessary space to
scale up such interventions.
With today’s conflicts being greater in both number
and complexity, it is more important than ever to find
the path to peacebuilding and sustainable development
for all. Across the three countries we visited, it is evident
that women can be the agents of a new and necessary
approach — a new narrative, a new paradigm.
We sensed during our visit an increasingly pressing
need to operationalize the policies, frameworks and
agendas that we have in place. For 18 years, the Security
Council has discussed the agenda item of women and

S/PV. 8306

peace and security in annual thematic debates. Once a
year we assert that gender equality is foundational to
stability and peace. But rarely have we moved beyond
the principles. We believe that now is the time to move
from frameworks to action. Investing in peace now in
this region will bring lasting global dividends for all.
With resolution 1325 (2000) and the seven
resolutions that build on it we have the necessary
commitments. We have tools such as a recalibrated
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We
must now bring these tools and commitments to life,
while encouraging further alignment among the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063 and, most
important, national plans.
The cost of inaction is high. Poverty, weak
institutions and gender inequality, including the
abhorrent practices such as child marriage, are creating
an environment ripe for extremism. I thank members of
the Council again for supporting such joint missions,
which we believe contribute greatly to advancing the
work of the Council. We look forward to working
together to draw the appropriate lessons towards
building lives of peace, security and equality for all.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop (spoke in French): Allow me to echo
Ms. Amina Mohammed in congratulating you, Madam
Minister, on Sweden’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I wish you every success during
your term.
I would also like to seize this opportunity to
thank His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
wholeheartedly lent his support to the joint mission of
the United Nations, the African Union and Sweden that
has just concluded under the leadership of Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General, with the
effective participation of Ms. Wallström.
The mission is at the heart of our meeting this
morning. It fits perfectly alongside the call for action
of the African Women Leaders Network, which is a
movement of women working in all sectors of society,
including among young women and women from rural
areas. It is a movement that aims to mobilize efforts to
transform Africa and thereby contribute to a prosperous

18-218103/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

and peaceful Africa. The Network is supported by the
United Nations and the African Union through the
Office of the Special Envoy and UN-Women, as well as
the Federal Republic of Germany.
It is often said that there is no peace and security
without development, and no development without
peace. But it can also be said that there is no peace,
security and development without the effective
participation of women. If further proof of that
were needed, the mission of solidarity that we have
just carried out in South Sudan, Chad and the Niger
highlighted once again the poignant realities of women
and girls who suffer the effects of deprivation that
arise from the abundance of attention that States must
pay to military security to combat radicalization and
violent extremism.
As members of the Council know, the Lake Chad
and Sahel regions are being hit by the full force of
the extremists of Boko Haram and other radicalized
groups. Faced with that threat, which is so grave that
it can endanger a State, such as Маli, the States of the
region have mobilized to fight that evil, which strikes
indiscriminately and across borders. For those States,
the resources of which are already among the most
meagre in the world, security efforts have no impact
on investments in social structures, and consequently
there is a weak response in meeting the needs of their
people. In the Lake Chad region, success against Boko
Haram has led to the return of many young people who
now, unfortunately, find themselves unemployed, feel
abandoned and, as such, fall easy prey to the return of
radicalized groups.
In the Niger, we have seen the devastating effects
of poverty and the lack of opportunity for families,
and their impact on young people, especially young
women and, may I say, on children becoming child
brides, which leads not just to physical but also to
mental trauma. I have long travelled through conflict
zones. I have seen atrocities committed by armed
groups — girls and young boys raped, for example.
Nevertheless, in the region that we visited, an issue
that particularly marked me was that of child marriage,
with its consequences of bodies completely battered
by fistulas, as well as the ostracization, stigmatization
and abandonment of those children. The only clinic
available in the entire region, where the majority of
the people are women and the majority of those women
are under 18 years old, had only one doctor to attend
to the harm done to the bodies of those young girls.
4/25

10/07/2018

It is true that the practice of early marriage existed
before the rise of radicalization, but the exacerbation
of poverty among families displaced by conflict seems
to have pushed them to give their daughters away to
arranged marriages, the consequences of which include
the girls giving birth far too early and them suffering
from broken bodies and spirits. They are abandoned by
society. Is that not a recipe for them to turn towards
radicalization and violent extremism?
Alongside the troubling reality of the effects of
conflicts on women and youth, our mission was also
saw the resilience of women and their determination
to contribute to the search for solutions. In Chad,
religious women leaders, as Ms. Amina Mohammed
mentioned, shared with us their innovative strategies
at the community level to prevent the radicalization of
young people and to meet the threats posed by armed
groups, such as Boko Haram. They focus their efforts
on the education of children, above all young girls, who
then become active agents against violent extremism.
They seek to convey an inclusive interpretation of the
Koran with a view to promoting dialogue for peace. We
will support Chad as it seeks to implement its national
action plan under resolution 1325 (2000), including on
issues related to the prevention of and fight against
violent extremism through the gender perspective.
In the Niger, women used the national action plan
under resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool for their voices
to be heard in decision-making processes on peace,
security and development in the country. Women
are undeniably victims of violence, whether directly
linked to conflicts or as victims of practices that are
exacerbated by conflicts. Women are also agents of
change in spearheading initiatives to respond to the
challenges facing them. The efforts of those women
in their communities show that the response to the
security challenges faced by the regions that we have
just visited require investment in the development of
individuals so as to prevent radicalization and violent
extremism, which has become the scourge of the
Sahel. That underpins the importance of investing in
education, as well as the need to build the capacities of
women and youth by providing them with employment
opportunities. They called for a more sustained
presence of the State and the international community
to meet the basic needs of health care, water and food,
the lack of which is often harnessed by extremist
groups to attract to their cause certain marginalized
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8306

factions of the population. It is indeed better to prevent
than to cure.

protection of women and young girls and promotion of
their role and leadership in the search for peace.

I welcome the leadership of Senegal in steering
the first Security Council debate on water, peace and
security, which took place in November 2016 (see
S/PV.7818). Our joint mission of the African Union, the
United Nations and Sweden once again underscored the
key role that water plays in our society.

Women should the first partners of choice. Each
woman must be empowered to be able to say “no” to
conflict, “no” to early marriage and “no” to extremism.
Women must be able to read the Qur’an and convey the
message of peace contained therein to their children. I
welcome the fact that the political leaders that we met
during our mission reassured us of their determination
to make women and young people the drivers of
political and economic change in their countries.
Indeed, peace and security efforts will be successful
only when we take robust action to defend the nexus
of peace, security and development and to integrate
the gender perspective in our instruments for conflict
prevention and resolution. That is what women and the
African people are expecting from the Council.

Allow me to take this opportunity to commend,
from this rostrum, the efforts undertaken by Chad and
the Niger in the fight against violent extremism, which,
as I mentioned earlier, leads to exclusion and poverty
in the affected regions and only further entrenches the
cycle of violence. It is important that those efforts be
supported by the international community in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
above all to ensure that security does not come at the
expense of the peoples’ needs.
There are already initiatives, such as the
coordination platform of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which brings together the
majority of stakeholders for the benefit of the
countries and communities in the Sahel to mobilize
resources and define regional priorities. The African
Union also established a strategy for the Sahel region,
which was adopted by the Peace and Security Council.
We have also recently set up another programme,
together with the Economic Community of West
African States and the Lake Chad Basin, which is aimed
at strengthening the capacities of the Multinational
Joint Task Force. However, resources remain limited
and continue to be directed more to military actions
than to meeting the needs of the people.
Before concluding this statement, I would like
to share some recommendations that I believe are
important and that have emerged from our visit to the
Sahel region.
First, the fight for security in the countries
concerned can be won by meeting the needs of the
people, especially women and young people, who
are victims but who have also demonstrated their
determination to address the challenges they face.
But they cannot do it alone. I therefore appeal to the
international community to step up its aid.
Secondly, prevention is needed, including through
sizeable investments in education, the management of
natural resources such as water, job creation and the

The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Yesterday morning, the Deputy Secretary-General;
the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security; and I arrived in New York from Niger.
It was my privilege to join Amina and Bineta on that
joint high-level mission focused on women, peace
and security in the Sahel. It is also now my pleasure
to welcome my travel companions to today’s meeting.
As they have done already, I would like to thank the
Governments of the Niger and Chad for their generous
hospitality, and the inspiring women and men we met
during our mission for sharing their stories with us.
I would like to make three points following our
mission: first, on the overall challenges in the region,
secondly, how we must address the interrelated nature
of these challenges, and thirdly, that all this is not a
women’s issue — it is a peace and security issue.
The countries we visited and the Sahel region are
located between hope and despair. There is hope, because
the Sahel is blessed with abundant human, cultural and
natural resources — for example, solar energy, which
offers tremendous capital for rapid growth. It is also the
most youthful region of the world, with 64.5 per cent of
the population aged less than 25 years.
Hope was inspired also by the women and girls we
met, who had moved from being victims to survivors to
agents of change; by youth, who look to their futures with
confidence despite their difficult circumstances; and by

18-218105/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

the vibrant and determined civil society organizations
working to improve the lives of men, women, girls
and boys across the region. We also heard from the
Governments of Chad and the Niger about their efforts,
undertaken together with other countries in the region,
to promote regional stability and combat terrorism,
including through the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force.
However, there is also despair because of chronic
underdevelopment, terrorism and violent extremism,
a lack of respect for human rights and the negative
effects of climate change. There are 24 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance, and the growing
insecurity has worsened vulnerabilities. Today, the
national budgets are used to finance security concerns,
as we already heard, with less money available for
education and health. Those challenges affect women
and men, boys and girls differently. Women often bear
a disproportionate burden.
In the Lake Chad region, where people are already
facing a food and nutrition crisis, we heard how the
shrinking of the Lake and growing insecurity have had
severe consequences for people who traditionally have
sustained themselves by fishing activities. However,
now, women are learning to fish. They said that before
the fish were this big and men did the fishing; now the
fish are this small and we can fish. The fisherwomen
we met in Bol told us that they wished for only three
things: bigger boats, better nets and to not get raped.
That simple request illustrates the conditions under
which they live, marked by poverty and sexual and
gender-based violence.
In both Chad and the Niger, we met with civil society
representatives who described challenges such as a
lack of female candidates for public offices, inadequate
health care and difficulties in ensuring education for
girls. In the Niger, we heard that three out of four girls
will be married before turning 18, with devastating
consequences, as Ms. Diop has already said. We met
with women religious leaders and discussed efforts to
prevent radicalization and to end the practice of child
marriages. We were encouraged to see that in both
countries, women were coming together in networks
to address the challenges they face, including sexual
and reproductive health and rights and access to basic
social services.
Secondly, this joint mission encompassed all
aspects of the United Nations work — peace and
6/25

10/07/2018

security, human rights, humanitarian assistance and
development. It was once again clear to me, during
our mission, how those areas of work overlap. The
many challenges in the Sahel cannot be dealt with
separately, but rather require joint political strategies
and integrated responses.
The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and its support plan are key tools at our disposal
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063. Gender equality and
women’s empowerment is one of the Strategy’s five
key priorities. We must spare no effort in ensuring
implementation. We need to expand the choices and
opportunities available to women from an early age.
That means ensuring education for girls, addressing
restrictive traditional and related social norms, and
fighting poverty. It means going back to basics, starting
where we can make a difference.
Yet, the resources needed to fully address the
challenges in the region are woefully inadequate. We
need to step up our efforts to mobilize support and
strengthen national capacities to respond to inequalities,
fight impunity, create sustainable livelihoods and
empower and educate women and girls. Aid must be
gender-sensitive and take into account the various
situations in which women and men find themselves, as
well as promoting equality.
Thirdly, our visit also underscored that all of this
taken together is not solely a women’s issue — it is a
peace and security issue. In the Lac region of Chad we
were deeply moved by Halima, who had been married
off as a 15-year-old child and then trained by Boko
Haram to be a suicide bomber. She lost both her legs
when the suicide vests of some of the girls who had
been trained with her exploded as they entered a busy
market. Today Halima is a paralegal and is actively
engaged in the prevention of violent extremism, as well
as being a powerful symbol of the many roles of women
in peace and security.
The increased use of female suicide bombers — two
thirds of suicide attacks in 2017 were carried out by
women or girls — illustrates the cruel way in which
terrorists seek to exploit the perceived goodness of
women to maximize harm, to the victims of suicide
bombings and to communities and families. That is
disastrous given women’s role as pillars of families,
societies and communities. Societies could collapse, but
nonetheless women continue to fight. We must empower
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

and educate girls and women and end child marriage.
To fight terrorism, there is no doubt, we need adopt a
gender-sensitive and human rights-based approach,
whether it pertains to the prevention of radicalization,
counter-terrorism operations or providing support
to victims.
Let me end by answering the question of why this
is a matter for those around this table, a matter for
the Security Council. It is because women’s destiny
is also our destiny. Therefore, what can and must we
do? In two years resolution 1325 (2000) will be 20
years old. I would like to put the following challenge
to the United Nations system and all Member States:
by 2020 ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions fully deliver on the women and
peace and security agenda. The Security Council has a
critical role to play, including by ensuring that women’s
voices are heard around peace negotiation tables and
in the Chamber; mission mandates include a women
and peace and security perspective; gender posts in
missions continue to be funded; women and peace and
security tasks are adequately resourced and prioritized;
and that gender is systematically included in mission
reporting and monitoring.
We must all set the same challenge for ourselves.
Members can count on Sweden to do its part to support
that effort. To start, we will continue to ensure that
civil society perspectives are heard in the Chamber.
For the annual debate on resolution 1325 (2000),
we commit to hosting a civil society forum. We also
commit to supporting the Secretariat to build capacity
for enhanced gender-responsive reporting. Only then
will we gain a full understanding of the challenges and
of the most effective responses.
Let us continue to intensify our efforts to support
the countries of the Sahel on the issues we have
discussed today. I commend the African Union and
the United Nations for joining forces and deepening
their partnership on the issue of women and peace
and security. Missions such as the one undertaken last
week should become annual events, and every Security
Council meeting should consider the women and peace
and security perspective as an essential part of our work
to end conflicts. I have no doubt that, if we were to
do so, our motto of “more women, more peace” would
become a reality.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8306

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
area gratefu for the convening of today’s meeting.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union
Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, for
their important briefings. Similarly, we welcome you,
Madam Minister, and thank you for your valuable
testimony and proposals on the important joint mission,
which underscores the commitment of your country,
Sweden, to the women and peace and security agenda.
Peru remains deeply concerned about the critical
situation in the Sahel region, where women and girls in
particular are affected by food insecurity, poverty, armed
conflict, violent extremism, gender discrimination and
sexual violence. It is estimated that one in 10 women
between the ages of 15 and 49 has been the victim of
sexual violence in Mali. Women and children in the
Niger account for the majority of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Throughout the subregion there is an
increase in the number of women and girls recruited by
terrorists and violent extremist groups. That situation
requires a comprehensive and coordinated strategy
that addresses its root causes, promoting, among other
things, women’s empowerment, gender equality and
access to justice.
Peru is convinced that the participation of women
in political life and decision-making is crucial for
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We must promote greater participation by women in
the processes and mechanisms for implementing peace
and reconciliation agreements. At the same time, their
empowerment must be promoted through education
and the creation of employment opportunities, as
well as when it comes to access to justice and the
fight against impunity for the crimes of which they
are victims. Victims must have confidence in their
national institutions and those responsible for violence
must be held accountable. Women and girls who are
victims of sexual violence are often stigmatized and
ostracized in their communities. They must be able to
count on programmes to promote their rehabilitation
and reintegration.
It is essential that the Council remain united with
regard to the gradual development and implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. That
is because the evidence shows that the protection of

18-218107/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

women and girls during conflict, and, ultimately,
their empowerment, has a direct impact on sustaining
peace. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of promoting work among the various women’s
organizations and the informal group of experts on
women and peace and security, which Peru has the
honour to co-chair with Sweden.
We also believe that it is necessary for the Security
Council to collaborate with and promote the work of
the regional mechanisms involved in the quest for
solutions to the crisis in the Sahel, such as the African
Union, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and
the Economic Community of West African States. We
believe that is important to take into account the gender
perspective when implementing the activities of the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. Similarly, with regard to
the reform of peacekeeping operations, Blue Helmets
must receive adequate training on protecting the human
rights of women and girls.
We welcome the priority that the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel accords to such issues,
with the support of the African Union, with a view to
strengthening governance, security and development in
the region. We emphasize the importance of providing
it with adequate resources.
In conclusion, we wish to stress that the joint
visits by the United Nations and the African Union are
important tools for coordinating efforts in the quest
for peace and stability in the region. We welcome the
recent visit by Ms. Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta
Diop and encourage more such visits in future.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Her Excellency
Ms. Margot Wallström, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, for convening today’s meeting. It is a pleasure
to have you with us again, Madam President.
I would also like to warmly thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the African
Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop, for their insightful briefings on
their joint mission to the countries of the Sahel. I
join others in commending all three women for their
inspirational leadership.
We are heartened by increasing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) in supporting Africa’s steady pursuit of peace,
stability and sustainable development. We encourage
further strengthening of that cooperation, while
8/25

10/07/2018

underscoring the important role of women in reaching
those objectives. The recent high-level joint visit
was another significant step to promote the women
and peace and security agenda and advance gender
empowerment. Such collaborative efforts must continue
so as to achieve the goals of the Joint United NationsAU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security and reach the targets of 2030 Agenda and
Agenda 2063.
Turning to the implementation of the women and
peace and security commitments in the Sahel, we
commend the joint efforts of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
to support the participation of women in conflict
prevention, including through the ECOWAS 2017-2020
action plan for women, peace and security. We also
see the benefits of their convening, last April, a highlevel conference on women, violence and terrorism in
West Africa and the Sahel, which resulted in a call to
action to increase women’s participation in preventing
violent extremism. Our delegation praises the African
Union for progressively gender mainstreaming within
the African Peace and Security Architecture and
greatly appreciates the efforts of the African Women
Leaders Network, which was launched last year by
the AU Commission, UN-Women and Germany to
enhance the leadership of women in the transformation
of Africa. We also acknowledge the important role of
women’s organizations in improving women’s access
to leadership and participation in peace processes
and encourage Member States to strengthen their
engagement with women’s and youth groups.
It nevertheless remains imperative that a conscious
effort be made to bridge the gap between spoken
commitments and actual actions. We need to ensure
a protective environment that will enhance women’s
protection and security, and provide access to justice
and services for survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. We also emphasize the importance of a
gender perspective across all components of operations
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
as set out in resolution 2391 (2017). Much remains to
be done in fulfilling United Nations recommendations
regarding the inclusion of women in peace talks to
resolve the Sahel crisis, while ensuring a 30 per cent
quota for women in decision-making and politics in the
region and allocating 15 per cent of national budgets
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

for development and peacebuilding to promote gender
equality in the Sahel.
There is also an urgent need to focus on the
structural drivers of instability and the root causes
of the conflict that disproportionately affect women
by reducing poverty, strengthening local governance,
providing basic services, creating better opportunities
for education and employment and mitigating the
impact of climate change. The close link between
security and development is very important not only
in one specific country, but also in the region and the
world as a whole. We therefore welcome the recent
launch of the revitalized strategic plan for the Sahel on
the sidelines of the AU Summit in Nouakchott, which
targets six key areas, including the empowerment of
women. We strongly support other subregional and
comprehensive approaches aimed at building resilience
and increasing peace and development in the region,
such as the Alliance for the Sahel initiative.
We welcomed United Nations reform on
repositioning the development system to foster greater
cooperation among various United States agencies
on the ground. Today we must go further and ensure
greater cooperation at the regional level to advance the
development agenda in a comprehensive and effective
manner. However, financing the women and peace and
security agenda remains a concern. We must therefore
provide the funds needed to ensure that peacekeeping
and political missions are provided with sufficient gender
expertise, authority and capacity. That funding gap can
partially be overcome by more substantive reforms,
streamlined and better-coordinated strategies within
the United Nations system and improved cooperation
with other partners in the region and globally. Enhanced
data-collection and reporting are also very important
for the success of the women and peace and security
agenda. What is required is an increased availability
of timely and accurate national gender-disaggregated
data and reports on progress towards implementing and
monitoring those commitments.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Kazakhstan will
always stand for the full contribution of women in all
phases of mediation, conflict resolution, post-conflict
recovery and long-term development through the joint
efforts of the United Nations and the African Union.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour
of the Swedish presidency of the Security Council,
let me try to say “thank you very much” in Swedish:

S/PV. 8306

tack så mycket. We are very grateful to you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate. It is important to
continue to ask that attention be paid to the meaningful
participation of women in matters concerning peace and
security, as we did on 8 March concerning Afghanistan
(see S/PV.8199, and in almost every thematic meeting
of the Security Council, including our discussion on the
Sahel today.
In our view, advocating for the meaningful
participation of women is the right thing to do, as it
has concrete, positive effects on peace and security.
We sincerely thank you, Mada President, the Deputy
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
African Union for briefing the Security Council on
the joint visit. It shows how useful joint African Union
(AU)-United Nations high-level missions are as a
means to deepen the AU-United Nations partnership.
In particular, we were impressed with their meeting
with victims of sexual violence and those who may
easily fall prey to the latter. You touched us, Madam
President, when you spoke of the women in Bol who
wished only not to be raped.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply appalled
by those horrific acts of sexual violence, and the
perpetrators must be brought to justice. This debate
allows us to shed light on the critical role of women
in issues of peace and security in the broader Sahel
region. In that context, I will focus on three issues:
first, the security implications of climate change
on women; secondly, the challenges posed by the
widespread conflict between farmers and herders; and,
thirdly, the importance of women’s participation in
decision-making.
Concerning my first point, the security implications
of climate change, the latter disproportionately affects
women in the Sahel, especially owing to its effects
on stability and security, which was underscored by
the concrete examples that you gave in your briefing,
Madam President. Climate change increases the
number of livelihoods lost as a result of conflict. It
decreases women’s access to essential resources, such
as water, thereby reinforcing the negative consequences
of conflict for women. As elsewhere, those most
vulnerable in the Sahel become even more vulnerable,
and too often that means that women and girls are the
most affected. In that light, our responses to peace and
security challenges in the Sahel must be both climate and
gender sensitive. In that context, we reiterate the need
for adequate risk assessments and risk-management

18-218109/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

strategies. The Council already emphasized that point
in resolution 2349 (2017) and has repeatedly recalled it
since then.
That leads me to my second point. Climate change
intensifies conflicts between farmers and herders
in the Lake Chad region and the wider Sahel region.
Such conflicts have devastating effects for women and
girls. Widows are evicted from their farmland. Women
and girls become even more vulnerable to economic
predation and sexual violence and exploitation. Conflicts
between farmers and herders are reportedly now killing
more women and girls than the Boko Haram crisis, and
Boko Haram by itself was the cause of a staggering
1,000 cases of conflict-related sexual violence last year
in Nigeria alone. Conflicts between farmers and herders
are becoming multidimensional threats affecting the
entire subregion. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Economic Community of West African
States and its States members to develop regional,
long-term and integrated strategies in response. We
feel that the United Nations system should support
that, and it is important to develop those strategies in
consultation with affected communities, in particular
with women’s participation.
Lastly, concerning participation, you, Madam
President, and others rightly spoke of the vital role of
women’s participation in decision-making.
We had an open debate on peacekeeping on
28 March (see S/PV.8218), at which we heard a briefing
by Fatimata Touré of Mali. She spoke of the severe
underrepresentation of women in the mechanisms
set up for the implementation and monitoring of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, in
which currently only 3 per cent of the people involved
are women. That number is way too low. In resolution
2423 (2018), the Security Council rightly urged the
Malian parties to ensure women’s equal and meaningful
participation.
The Deputy Secretary-General visited Nigeria last
year. She was able to obtain an agreement that the food
distribution in refugee camps would be in the hands
of women. We felt that to be an excellent example of
women’s empowerment, an approach that we believe
deserves to be followed up elsewhere, both in the Sahel
and beyond.
In conclusion, women’s empowerment and gender
equality are closely connected to peace and stability
in society. There is overwhelming evidence to that
10/25

10/07/2018

effect. The meaningful participation of women has the
potential to transform societies and build peace. Let
us all work towards that goal. The women and girls
of the Sahel and elsewhere need our support and the
commitment of the Council.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much indeed, Madam President, for being with us
again today. It is fantastic to have you here. I thank
you for all the work Sweden has done on this important
dossier, and particularly for keeping it at the forefront
of our minds in the Security Council and for the way
you have tried to ensure that these issues are properly
integrated and that the Security Council and the United
Nations more generally get out of the silos that we are
all familiar with. I am obviously also hugely grateful to
Ms. Diop and the Deputy Secretary-General for leading
the mission, which in my view was an incredibly
important event. Like other speakers, I think it would
be an excellent thing if it were to be regular. As my
Dutch colleague said, there are many areas of the world
that would benefit from their insights and engagement.
They cannot be everywhere, but I think they have made
an very good start on this occasion.
I was particularly interested in the assessment of
the level of women’s participation in decision-making
and in peace and development processes, and I was
struck by the same comment about preferring not to be
raped as my Dutch colleague. But I think even more
important than that was the interest shown in producing
more female candidates by the people whom the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Diop talked to. I think that if
we had only one thing we could concentrate on in order
to build that pipeline for the future and start changing
behaviours through Governments, it would definitely
be worth thinking further about.
I would like to say that we in the United Kingdom
fully share your goal, Madam, of having full delivery
of resolution 1325 (2000) by 2020. You can count on
Britain to work with you here and at the United Nations
Office in Geneva to realize that.
As other speakers have hinted, the question of
women’s economic empowerment, their enjoyment of
human rights and their role within their families and
communities is something that should be nurtured
and curated. This is not just a moral issue but also an
economic and a prosperity issue. The countries that
make proper use of and develop all the talents of their
people will thrive. I think the Kazakh Ambassador
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

set it out very well when he talked about the link
between security and development. So we do everyone
a favour by intensifying the link between women’s
participation in economic life and the foundation of
peace and security. From our perspective, we would
like to see even more effort dedicated to integrating a
gender perspective in strategies, including those about
countering violent extremism, and we would like to see
more women’s involvement in policy planning, right on
the ground floor. I think that was one of the conclusions
of the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security in June.
We heard a lot yesterday in the open debate on
children in armed conflict (see S/PV.8305) about the
disproportionate stigmatizing of women returnees
when they go back to their communities, and I think
that is worth putting on the table again today. It would
be very good to hear from the countries concerned
about what can be done to address that particular issue.
Turning specifically to the Sahel, the United
Kingdom is increasing its regional presence there. We
opened a mission in Chad in March. As I understand
it, Chad and the Niger, sadly, sit at the bottom of the
gender-equality index and that is why we in the United
Kingdom want to do more to help those colleagues
develop women’s empowerment. I think the efforts
that the Security Council, the United Nations system,
the African Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel
themselves have undertaken so far to ensure that we
can fine-tune adequate measures to empower women
are a very good step forward. From our perspective,
we concentrate a lot on providing reproductive-health
services to displaced populations and refugees, and we
are prioritizing access to voluntary family planning
for future support. We spend a lot of our programme
funds on climate and environment resilience in eastern
Chad, and the Building Resilience and Adaptation to
Climate Extremes and Disasters programme commits
to 50 per cent women beneficiaries and includes a
component on gender-based violence. All those things
are contributing, I hope, to what we are talking about
today.
We also have a partnership with France, arising out
of the Anglo-French summit in January, for working
on gender within the Sahel Alliance, supporting
greater mainstreaming on gender across the work of
the Alliance. If there are other colleagues in the United
Nations who would like to know more about that, or

S/PV. 8306

even contribute with us, we would be very happy to
work with them on that.
You, Madam President, particularly mentioned
education and girls’ education, and that is also a subject
that we spoke about yesterday under the heading of
children in armed conflict. I would just like to highlight
the fact that in the Sahel, millions of children and
young people are out of school, thanks to the presence
of terrorist groups and militias, the conflict between
farmers and herders and the difficult economic situation
that many families are experiencing. Of course, girls are
particularly affected, sometimes because of very basic
issues, such as a lack of hygiene facilities in schools to
accommodate girls’ particular needs. The Sahel region,
as we heard, has one of the highest rates of child, early
and forced marriage in the world. The barriers to girls
enjoying a proper education are very severe, and the
United Kingdom has therefore been concentrating
on what we call the Girls Education Challenge, and
is already working to support 1.5 million girls in
achieving a quality education. We are also one of the
largest donors to Education Cannot Wait, of which
Chad is one of the four initial investment countries.
I just wanted to give a snapshot of some of the
things we have been doing, and also to say how much
we share your view, Madam President, that this is an
absolutely critical part of being able to embed peace,
security and stability in an important region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to welcome you,
Madam, in presiding over this briefing of the Security
Council, and to thank you for organizing it. We listened
with interest to the briefers, Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, on their
recent visit to South Sudan, Chad and the Niger, with a
focus on women’s participation in peace, security and
sustainable development processes.
More than 17 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the role of women in preventing and
resolving armed conflicts and in post-conflict
reconstruction has been expanded. However, the state
of affairs with regard to the protection of women
during armed conflicts is unfortunately very different,
including in this part of Africa, where the level of
threats to security and stability is unprecedentedly
high. We have already expressed our concern about the
fact that the terrorist groups that are entrenched in the

18-2181011/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

Sahel are intensifying their criminal activity and trying
to expand its geographic reach. Women continue to be
the victims of violence, and the atrocities and excesses
inflicted on them by terrorist groups are horrifying.
In that regard, our hopes rest on the initiative of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel to create
a Joint Force to fight terrorism and organized crime.
It will be crucial to continue to coordinate the efforts
to combat extremism in the Sahel-Saharan region. We
believe that it is essential to work to effectively counter
the spread of extremist ideology, find practical solutions
to the social and economic problems of the countries of
the region and strengthen their State institutions. The
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has a
key role to play in resolving these issues.
We firmly believe in the positive role of women’s
participation in various aspects of the resolution of
armed conflicts and post-conflict restoration. In our
view, women’s direct involvement in the prevention of
armed conflict and in post-conflict reconstruction is
an important prerequisite for ending violence against
them. The Security Council’s annual debates on women
and peace and security enable us to monitor the overall
progress in improving the protection of women in
situations of armed conflict and ensuring their full
and effective participation in efforts to prevent and
resolve such situations. However, when we are dealing
with concrete situations, it is important to take their
specifics into account.
We believe that it is national Governments that
should play the primary role in protecting women at
every stage of an armed conflict, while the measures
taken by United Nations bodies and civil society should
be aimed at supporting and supplementing the efforts of
States. In particular, the Security Council can make the
most effective use of its toolkit and resources in matters
directly related to the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security. With regard to
such important topics as ensuring gender equality and
expanding women’s rights and potential, the specialized
United Nations entities and mechanisms continue their
successful and systematic work, which Russia is ready
to continue to assist in every way.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and our briefers.
Throughout my years of public service, I have
encouraged women to use the power of their voice.
I have been inspired by my mother, who went to law
12/25

10/07/2018

school and was offered a judgeship in India but was
unable to take the bench, owing to the challenges that
women faced in these areas at the time. I am inspired
by my daughter, who is inheriting a world in which the
opportunities for women to use the power of their voices
to advance justice, prosperity, peace and security have
never been greater. Here at the United Nations, we have
combined that passion for amplifying women’s voices
with the belief that human rights issues, including those
related to the rights of women and girls, are a critical
element in peace and security. When women’s voices
are silenced, whether through violence or a lack of
political rights or education, entire communities suffer,
and that suffering leads to conflict.
In the Sahel region, the Security Council has
said many times that the only solution to widespread
conflict is a comprehensive approach. And that means
empowering women in both politics and the economy.
The International Peace Institute has found that when
women are involved in brokering and implementing
peace agreements, the agreements are more likely to last.
When women are involved in peacemaking, they enlarge
the scope of agreements to include social priorities such
as children and families. The United States supports
increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping
activities. But understanding the connections between
women’s fundamental rights and international peace
and security means understanding that empowering
women reduces the need for peacekeepers in the first
place. When women participate in all social, political
and economic activities, local and national economies
flourish. When the rights of women and children are
protected, life gets better. Health, well-being and
educational levels improve, and all of those things come
together to protect and reinforce peace and security.
The United States is strongly committed to
empowering women in developing communities from
the ground up. We work to ensure that our assistance
goes directly to the kinds of women I meet on my trips
abroad — the mothers struggling to feed their families,
educate their kids and create a future for their families
and their communities, the women pushing through
barriers in the quest for equal political representation,
and the entrepreneurs, pioneers, goal-setters and other
extraordinary women changing the face of society.
Across Africa, the United States is helping to
build the capacity of the African Union and other
regional organizations to support women’s political
participation. We are honoured to be working with
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Special Envoy Diop on the Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. In the Sahel, the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID) is working to
build stronger connections between the programmes it
funds for food security, health, micro-enterprise and
community development. Ivanka Trump is working
to give more women in emerging markets access to
financing and capital. As she reminds us, women are
the world’s safest borrowers, paying back microloans
at 97 per cent. In addition, women business owners
create a multiplier effect in communities. They are
more likely to hire other women and reinvest in their
families and communities. In the Niger, USAID is
engaging women in community dialogues and local
decision-making in order to prevent violent extremism
in vulnerable communities. Traumatized, uneducated
young boys are prime targets for radicalization, and
nobody understands that better than their mothers. The
thread that runs through all of these efforts is that when
we bring together women with power and resources,
we create deeper, more sustainable prosperity. And
that stability and prosperity protect human rights and
promote security.
I recently spent some time with a woman who
understands better than most the consequences of a
failure to protect the rights of women. Regional United
Nations Women Ambassador for Africa Jaha Dukureh
is an inspiration, because she speaks from personal
experience. When she was a week old, she became a
victim of female genital mutilation. When she was 15,
she was forced into child marriage. But she managed
to escape all of that. She beat almost impossible odds,
got an education and became an advocate for the
world’s most vulnerable girls and women. Ambassador
Dukureh has found the power of her voice. She should
inspire all of us to follow her example and do more than
pay lip service to women’s rights, by seeking out girls
and women and listening to their voices. Protecting
their rights actually creates opportunities that benefit
the cause of international peace and security.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Equatorial Guinea would first like to express
its condemnation of the recent deplorable terrorist
attacks on civil society and the defence and security
forces of the Sahel and on the international forces in
Mali, including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and

S/PV. 8306

Operation Barkhane. Our prayers go out to the victims
of these attacks and to their families and communities,
to whom we offer our deepest condolences. We also
wish a swift recovery for all those who were injured.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea congratulates
the Swedish presidency for its leadership and its choice
of topics for debate this month. Yesterday, under the
presidency of His Excellency the Prime Minister of
Sweden, Mr. Stefan Löfven, we held an open debate on
the very important issue of children and armed conflict,
which led to the unanimous adoption of resolution
2427 (2018) by the Security Council. Today, under the
presidency of Her Excellency the Swedish Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Margot Wallström, we are
participating in a meeting on an equally important
topic, women and peace and security in the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin region. We are very grateful
for the briefings we have heard from the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and from
the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, who provided us with a very
comprehensive and enlightening overview of this issue.
The Boko Haram insurgency continues to be
active in its ninth year and is currently affecting the
entire Diffa region, in the Niger, and the Lake Chad
region. The people of these regions continue to suffer
the devastating impact of terrorist attacks, which
have driven millions from their homes and left them
dependent on humanitarian aid. More than 2 million
people in the region remain displaced today. Some
live in overcrowded facilities, without access to basic
services such as shelter, water and food, and others have
settled in hosting communities, in extreme precarity.
The effect of this crisis is being particularly felt by
women and girls. Women and girls are used as suicide
bombers; they are subject to forced marriage; and, if
they are released or have escaped from the clutches
of Boko Haram terrorists, they face stigmatization. A
study carried out by the Combating Terrorism Center
at West Point in 2017, together with Yale University,
in the United States, found that of the 434 suicide
attacks carried by Boko Haram between 2011 and 2017,
56 per cent were carried out by young women and girls,
including two thirds of the suicide attacks in 2017 alone.
Given this worrisome situation, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea continues to condemn terrorism
in the strongest possible terms and calls on the
international community to support the Governments

18-2181013/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

of the region in making the necessary investments and
strengthening the mechanisms required in order to
promote reconciliation, guarantee accountability and
intensify the combat against terrorism. Also required
will be initiatives aimed at preventing violent extremism
that include the human rights and gender dimensions.
Concerning the Sahel region, where terrorist attacks
are also having a very harmful impact on women and
girls, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to
congratulate the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, which organized a high-level conference
on women, violence and terrorism in West Africa and
the Sahel, in partnership with the Economic Community
of West African States, the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), the Mano River Union, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, UN-Women and the
Working Group on Women, Youth, Peace and Security
in West Africa and the Sahel.
We trust that the outcomes of that high-level
conference will contribute to boosting the level of
participation of women in all social, political and
economic initiatives aimed at fighting and preventing
violent extremism and fighting terrorism. With respect
to the efforts made to address the situation, Equatorial
Guinea also hails the recent recruitment of a gender
adviser to the G-5 Sahel joint force.
We also welcome the joint efforts made by the
African Union and the United Nations, as exemplified
by the recent high-level visit to South Sudan, the Niger
and Chad, in which the briefers we have heard from
today participated, accompanied by Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Bience
Philomena Gawanas, the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on Africa; and Ms. Natalia Kanem, Executive
Director of the United Nations Population Fund. We
would call for more visits of this kind owing to their
importance and impact they could have on the ground.
We also welcome the recent efforts made by the
United Nations and the European Union to better
implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, including the recent drafting of a support
plan for the Strategy, intended to promote investments
in the region. We very much hope that these efforts will
contribute not just to empowering women and young
people, but will also have a positive impact on crossborder cooperation, conflict prevention, sustainable
peace, inclusive economic growth, climate action and
renewable energy.
14/25

10/07/2018

We congratulate the Deputy Secretary-General
and urge her to continue in the same enthusiastic vein
in which she has been leading the efforts made in the
context of the United Nations Strategy.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to underscore the positive work being done by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
support of counterterrorism operations and of stability
in the region. We reiterate our resolute support to the
Governments affected as they tackle the insurgency,
congratulate them on the progress they have made and
encourage them to continue and intensify these efforts
until stability has been achieved in the region.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, China welcomes the fact that
you have travelled to New York to preside over our
meeting. China thanks Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, African
Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
for their briefings.
China welcomes the joint visit by the United
Nations, the African Union and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallström, to
the two countries in the Sahel region, namely, Chad and
the Niger. The Sahel region faces multiple challenges
in the political, security, development and other
fields. The continued spread of terrorism, the growing
severity of cross-border organized crime, poverty and
underdevelopment, as well as the grave humanitarian
situation, have had a negative impact on the peace and
security of the region.
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed has taken
charge of activities related to the Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and has led a mission to the relevant
countries of the region. This has demonstrated the
United Nations emphasis on and commitment to peace
and development in the region.
I would like to make the following points on peace
and security in the Sahel region.
First, it is important to resolve hotspot regional issues
through political means. The international community
should, on the basis of respecting the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, actively support the peace and
reconciliation process of the countries of the region so
as to alleviate and ultimately settle hotspot issues. China
supports the relevant parties in Mali in accelerating the
implementation of the Mali Peace and Reconciliation
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Agreement and in the smooth holding of general
elections. We should help the countries concerned with
their domestic reconciliation on an as-needed basis and
help the women of the region expand their participation
in political processes and peacebuilding. The relevant
political solutions should draw upon the opinions
of women and the general public, while taking into
account their interests and concerns. At the same time,
attention should be given to the spillover effect of such
external issues as the Libya crisis and to preventing
outside factors from affecting the region.
Secondly, regional counter-terrorism cooperation
should be strengthened. Terrorist attacks on civilians,
armed forces and United Nations peacekeeping
operations have occurred frequently in the Sahel region,
resulting in significant casualties. The international
community should support countries of the region in
independently dealing with the threat of terrorism and
help them strengthen security capacity-building and
counter-terror cooperation. The United Nations and the
international community, on the basis of respecting the
sovereignty and will of the countries concerned, should
provide targeted technology, training, equipment,
logistics and financial support to countries of the region.
Thirdly, the relevant agencies of the United Nations
system should actively implement the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and generate synergies.
The Strategy has been in place for five years. The United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, together
with its Special Representative, Mr. Mohammed Ibn
Chambas, has done a great deal of work to implement
the Strategy. China welcomes the launch of the United
Nations Support Plan for implementing the strategy
and hopes that the United Nations will be able to
better coordinate with the countries of the Sahel region
concerned whenimplementing plans and provide
targeted assistance to these countries.
Fourthly, it is important to cooperate with regional
and subregional mechanisms. China appreciates the
positive role of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and relevant African countries and
organizations in settling Sahel issues. The international
community should strengthen communication and
coordination with relevant regional countries and
mechanisms so that country-specific and regional
strategies and the Integrated Strategy of the Sahel can
be organically aligned.

S/PV. 8306

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an important initiative
undertaken by the countries of the region in responding
to security challenges. Resolutions 2359 (2017) and
2391 (2017), adopted unanimously by the Council,
welcomed the deployment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and mandated that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide support to the Joint Force. The international
community should fully respect the leadership of Africa
and allow it to independently solve African issues. We
should support regional countries and organizations
in their efforts to safeguard the peace and security of
the Sahel region, and in particular provide substantive
assistance to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force so as to meet its
funding needs.
Fifthly, assistance should be provided to regional
countries in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and positive conditions
should be created to achieve peace and stability in the
region. There will be no sustainable peace without
sustainable development. Regional countries should
therefore be given sufficient capacity to reduce poverty
for their people, increase employment, better protect
women and children, combat human trafficking and
other cross-border organized crimes, boost the level of
economic and social development and address the root
causes of conflict.
China supports the efforts of African countries and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
peace and security in Africa. We have been supporting
counter-terrorism projects through the China-United
Nations Peace and Development Fund and have been
helping African countries build their capacity to
maintain peace. China is also an important troopcontributor to MINUSMA. China is willing to continue
working with Council members and the international
community and contribute to achieving peace and
stability and common development in the Sahel region.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia) I would like to start by
joining others in commending Sweden for organizing
today’s briefing. We also appreciate Sweden’s
leadership on the women and peace and security agenda
in its capacity as Chair of the Council’s informal expert
group, and we are very pleased to see you, Madam
Minister, presiding over this important meeting. I want
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
and the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, for their briefings on the

18-2181015/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

joint African Union-United Nations high-level mission
to South Sudan, Chad and the Niger.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000,) on
women and peace and security, positive developments
have been noted over the years in advancing this
very major and meaningful agenda, particularly in
ensuring the participation and representation of women
in political processes. That is particularly true in the
context of Africa, where a number of countries on the
continent have taken concrete steps to develop their
own national action plans. In spite of all that, however,
women and girls continue to bear the brunt of the
devastating and dehumanizing impact of conflicts in
Africa and the situation in the Sahel region, particularly
in the three countries recently visited by the high-level
mission, which share more or less similar experiences.
Women continue to be victims of sexual violence
and other forms of abuse and are underrepresented in
peace processes. As indicated in the concept note for
today’s briefing, the peace and security situation in the
Sahel region continues to be exacerbated by climate
change, induced conflicts and displacements. It is in that
context that we commend the very welcome leadership
by the Deputy Secretary-General in efforts aimed at
finding a comprehensive solution to these issues.
As a follow-up to the recent joint high-level mission
to the three countries, addressing the root causes of
conflict in the Sahel region should continue to be of
the utmost importance in addressing the challenges
of protecting women. As such, fighting terrorism and
violent extremism and comprehensively addressing the
impacts of climate change in coordination with relevant
actors are both critical. Such focus would enable us to
chart a path to a strengthened framework for protecting
women in conflict situations and to the enhanced and
effective participation of women in conflict prevention,
mediation and post-conflict reconstruction at all levels.
In that regard, we welcome the new United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel announced in Nouakchott,
which we hope will contribute to the realization
of this objective. The momentum generated by the
Nouakchott process, the creation and authorization
of the deployment of the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force and the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel should certainly be sustained to achieve
tangible progress, including in improving the lives of
the most vulnerable sectors of society, particularly
women and children.
16/25

10/07/2018

Cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations, as demonstrated by the joint mission,
would enable us to integrate a regional approach to the
broader discussion on women and peace and security,
which also provides a very good basis for cooperation
between the two organizations in facilitating greater
implementation and enhanced progress on the agenda
in Africa. Such collaboration could focus, inter alia,
on ensuring the active participation of women and
women’s groups in peace processes, conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding activities, as well as in the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations.
The possibility of undertaking similar joint
missions to other parts of Africa affected by conflict
and which are on the Council’s agenda could be further
explored. Mechanisms to utilize the good offices of the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the Women, Peace and Security could
also be explored with the aim of advancing the agenda
at the African level.
The African Union Peace and Security Council
recently decided to adopt a Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
implementation of the Women, Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa. We believe that that Continental
Results Framework could be one of the areas for
further cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union aimed at further advancing the women
and peace and security agenda in Africa.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the need to continue
building partnerships with various stakeholders,
including regional and subregional organizations,
concerned States, developmental agencies, civil society
organizations, women experts and groups and peace
and security partners within the women and peace and
security agenda. Ethiopia remains firmly committed to
supporting such efforts and to working with all of those
present in advancing the cause of women.
Mrs. Cordova Soría (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Swedish
presidency for organizing this timely meeting on peace
and security in Africa with a focus on the women and
peace and security agenda. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Amina Mohammed, and the African
Union Special Envoy, Bineta Diop, for their briefings
and their commitment drawing attention to this issue.
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Bolivia reiterates the vital importance of
promoting United Nations cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations for the implementation
and follow-up of the agenda on women and peace and
security. In that understanding, we commend the highlevel mission led by the Deputy Secretary-General,
together with the African Union, to the Sahel region,
the Lake Chad basin and South Sudan. We encourage
the continuation of such practices, as they enhance the
importance of women’s participation in peace, security
and development processes and in the fight against
sexual violence in conflict.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 18
years ago, the Security Council has recognized the
fundamental link between respect for gender equality
and international peace and security. Since then, the
United Nations has led great efforts and made significant
progress in implementing Security Council resolutions
to effectively integrate the gender perspective into
peace processes and to ensure the participation of
women in them. However, despite those efforts, the
implementation of the agenda on women and peace
and security continues to face challenges that require
the joint work of States, regional organizations, United
Nations agencies and the international community as
a whole.
With regard to the Sahel, the consequences of
interventionism and regime-change policies in Libya
in 2011 had the direct effect of destabilizing the
region, causing deplorable results still present today,
such as the growing instability and insecurity due
to the presence of terrorist groups and violent armed
groups and transnational crime that affects the entire
population, but especially women and girls, who are
victims of sexual violence. We must remember that
terrorist groups use sexual violence not only as a
weapon of war but also as a source of funding and a
means of recruitment.
We recognize the increase in the participation of
women in the security sector and national counterterrorism bodies. However, the consolidation of a
comprehensive and gender-sensitive approach involving
each and every one of the stakeholders is still a long way
off. We consider it vital to promote the implementation
of the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel 20182022 and the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel and their priorities, which include gender
equality and the empowerment of women to improve
security, governance and resilience in the Sahel.

S/PV. 8306

Moreover, in the Lake Chad basin, the practices of
Boko Haram and Da’esh, such as kidnappings, forced
marriages, rape, prostitution and the use of girls as human
bombs, cannot continue and must not go unpunished.
As resolution 2349 (2017) indicates, a holistic approach
is needed to combat those terrorist groups. We welcome
the efforts of the Joint Multinational Task Force in the
fight against Boko Haram, and especially the efforts of
the countries in the region in creating national action
plans on women and peace and security. It is necessary
to support that type of initiative, encourage cooperation
among the countries that make up the special force
and avoid interference in internal affairs that could
destabilize the region.
We must also express our concern about reports
of the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war by
armed forces or groups in South Sudan. We believe
that to make the needs of women and girls visible, their
participation in the peace process is vital. The role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
as mediator during the Revitalization Forum helps
to ensure an inclusive process that enables women’s
participation through civil society organizations. We
commend IGAD’s efforts and call on the Council to
continue to support the ongoing dialogue process.
In the same vein, we must intensify our efforts
to ensure that women have a relevant place in the
prevention, negotiation, mediation and peacebuilding
processes. The creation of societies that promote gender
equity makes peace processes inclusive and leads to
sustainable peace. As long as women are not primary
actors in the decision-making processes of conflict
resolution, we will not achieve real peace.
We must fight impunity. Sexual violence in conflict
is a war crime, and we must use the mechanisms
available to us to bring the perpetrators to justice. We
must support national authorities in the fight against
sexual violence, in developing capacities for the
prosecution of perpetrators and in ensuring access to
basic services such as health and education. We must
foster economic empowerment, which is necessary
in post-conflict reconstruction. Promoting women’s
economic independence would make it possible
to eliminate existing inequalities and would make
sustainable development possible.
Finally, it is clear that the Organization has an
important system in place to meet the global goals for
gender equality and for the implementation of the agenda

18-2181017/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

on women and peace and security. We must continue
to promote the resolutions adopted by the Council
on this subject with the cooperation of the offices at
our disposal. In that understanding, we commend the
work of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security and, of course, UNWomen, which do a great job in promoting the role of
women in the quest for peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this public meeting of the Security Council
on the issue of women and peace and security in the
Sahel, which is a true priority for us. Your presence,
Madam Minister, attests to that. It is both a privilege
and a pleasure to see you here among us once again
to preside over this important meeting. I would also
like to warmly thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, for their enlightening briefings. The presence
of the Deputy Secretary-General, following an
important mission, shows the special importance of
today’s meeting.
In view of the commitment of the French and
German authorities to promoting peace, security and
development in the Sahel and to strengthening the
women and peace and security agenda, I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of France and
Germany. I would like to welcome my colleague and
friend Christoph Heusgen, who is with us here today.
We welcome the recent joint visit by the Deputy
Secretary-General and the Special Envoy of the
African Union with which you, Madam President,
are associated. That visit is a concrete example of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, which enables us today to address the situation
of women in the Sahel region in a timely manner. We also
welcome the presence in the delegation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, and several
United Nations representatives for gender equality. In
that context, we wish to convey three main messages.
Our first message is based on our belief that only
action that combines politics, security, development
and women’s rights can promote lasting stabilization
18/25

10/07/2018

in the Sahel. That is the shared compass that guides
the efforts of France and Germany, which are firmly
committed to peace and security in the Sahel.
France is first of all politically active through
the role it plays in international mediation in support
of the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. France also plays a role
in security through the deployment of Operation
Barkhane and the support given to the Joint Force of
the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel, which includes
the recent appointment of a gender expert in the G-5
Sahel secretariat in Nouakchott. That appointment will
be decisive in strengthening the protection of women
by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. Germany is also firmly
committed to Mali and the Sahel, namely, through
its important contribution to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and its development and humanitarian assistance.
That commitment to peace and security in the
Sahel is essential to effectively combating the violence
to which women are too often exposed in the region. As
noted by United Nations actors on the ground in Mali,
women are increasingly targeted by groups committing
terrorist acts and promoting violent extremism. In
the Lake Chad basin region, particularly in Chad and
the Niger, we also see that Boko Haram still poses a
serious threat to people, especially women and girls.
Finally, we strongly condemn the systematic use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war in South Sudan,
which is absolutely unacceptable. In that regard, we
thank Special Representative Pramila Patten for all
her efforts to improve the situation. The commitments
made in the communiqués must be implemented and
those efforts should make it possible to effectively
combat impunity, including within the armed forces
and police; to set up units trained to protect women;
and to enable those who survive such abuses to bear
witness in order to better counter the stigmatization of
the victims of sexual violence.
Our second message concerns the fact that our
shared mission is to act together to achieve sustainable
development in the Sahel and among its most vulnerable
populations, especially women, which of course
includes the fight against climate change. The Alliance
for the Sahel, which France and Germany launched
nearly one year ago, on 13 July 2017, in partnership
with the main donors and countries in the region, aims
to promote faster, more coordinated and better targeted
assistance for all disadvantaged groups, especially
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

women. The Alliance is part of the broader framework
established by the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel to coordinate efforts for the development
of the Sahel. I would like to take advantage of the
presence of the Deputy Secretary-General to stress how
much we support and appreciate her work to promote
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. That common framework must
guide all our efforts aimed at generating coordinated
and effective action that will produce tangible results
for the Sahelian people, in particular women.
Our third message deals more specifically with
women’s participation in regional peace processes.
While progress has been made in that regard, women’s
participation in peace processes remains insufficient.
We must be clear-headed enough to acknowledge that
and courageous enough to rectify the situation. In Mali,
for example, we believe that a lasting settlement of the
crisis depends on the involvement of all parts of Malian
society, in particular women, who must be involved
not only in Government, but also in Parliament and
at the local level. That is why France and Germany
stress the importance of the participation of Malian
women’s organizations in the implementation of the
peace agreement. That request was also made by the
Security Council in its resolution 2423 (2018), which
was adopted at the end of June.
In conclusion, I recall that France and Germany
call for the systematic and long-term promotion of the
capacity of women, especially in Africa, to be involved in
peace processes and, more broadly, political processes.
Let me be clear — that objective is not just one element
among others or talking points, but rather a fundamental
priority that is hard-wired in our hard drive in order to
achieve parity and effectiveness. For that reason, our
two countries support the initiative undertaken by the
African Union to establish an African Women Leaders
Network, and we encourage all Member States to join
that initiative by, for example, joining the Group of
Friends of the African Women Leaders Network, of
which Ghana and Germany are co-Chairs. In the same
vein, we commend the commitment of the International
Organization of the Francophonie and its efforts to
support francophone women’s initiatives.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam Minister, for your
presence among us today and for presiding over this
Council meeting in such a brilliant way. My delegation
congratulates Deputy Secretary-General Amina

S/PV. 8306

Mohammed and Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy of the
African Union for Women, Peace and Security, for the
quality of their briefings, which have enlightened us
about women, peace and security issues in Africa, in
particular in the Lake Chad basin and Sahel regions.
We welcome the tripartite United Nations-African
Union-Sweden mission led by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to the Sudan, Chad and the Niger to assess the
role of women in political decision-making and peace
processes with a view to promoting their full participation
in development efforts. That joint visit, which is in line
with the visit organized one year ago to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, illustrates the
validity of the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of peace and
security. Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced of the need
to work collectively to strengthen that partnership, and
welcomes the joint mission, the lessons of which will
enable the Security Council and the United Nations to
strengthen strategies and mechanisms to maximize the
benefits of women’s participation in peace, security and
sustainable development processes.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
significant progress has been made in strengthening
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution.
However, we must recognize that many obstacles
continue to hinder the full participation of women in
peace and post-crisis processes, especially in Africa.
Indeed, new security challenges, such as the rise of
terrorism, violent extremism, radicalization and climate
change, are having a negative impact on women’s
ability to play their full role in peace and security.
The complex and multidimensional crises facing the
Sahel and Lake Chad basin regions are giving rise
to the systematic use of sexual violence as a tactic of
war, specifically by Boko Haram, and to criminal and
terrorist activities in those regions. We deeply regret
the fact that terrorist groups also use women as suicide
bombers and human shields.
In response to that alarming situation, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2349 (2017),
which integrates the three dimensions of security
and humanitarian and long-term development,
thereby addressing the root causes of the crisis,
which are poverty, underdevelopment, inequality and
environmental degradation. Our Council also intends
to contribute to the fight against the depletion of natural
resources, the lack of employment and income, as
well as issues of poor governance. My delegation also

18-2181019/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

welcomes the launch on 30 June by the United Nations of
a support plan, entitled “Sahel: Land of opportunities”,
to promote sustainable peace and inclusive growth in
the Sahel region, as well as to empower women and
young people.
The stabilization of the countries of the region
certainly requires the human, technical and financial
support of the international community, but it also
requires the full involvement of the populations
concerned, in particular women, who should no longer
be considered victims, but as full participants in the
peace-building or post-conflict recovery processes.
In that regard, it is worth recalling the relevance of
resolution 1325 (2000) which, while underscoring the
need for special measures to protect women against
sexual and gender-based violence, highlights the
importance of their participation at all stages of the
peace-building process.
Like the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want identifies gender
equality and the empowerment of women as priority
objectives. The goals of the joint mission are therefore
strengthened and call for, inter alia, a more inclusive
approach to the role of women in peace processes. As
stated in the framework document, the joint mission
provides an opportunity to assess the progress and
opportunities resulting from the implementation of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
which is based on the empowerment of women and
youth, cross-border cooperation, conflict prevention
and peacekeeping, inclusive economic growth, climate
action and renewable energy. My country takes this
opportunity to commend the leadership and work of the
Deputy Secretary-General and supports her efforts to
conduct a delicate mission in a context of instability
and insecurity in the Sahel.
At the subregional level, the women and peace and
security agenda receives special attention from the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), which works closely with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
in particular on promoting the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
In that regard, we welcome the high-level conference
on the theme “Women, violence and terrorism in
West Africa and the Sahel: Building a regional and
international response”, which was held in Dakar on
10 and 11 April. The conference was organized by
UNOWAS, in partnership with ECOWAS, the Group of
20/25

10/07/2018

Five for the Sahel, the Mano River Union and relevant
United Nations agencies. It provided an opportunity
for participants to recall the importance of building the
resilience of communities, and in particular of women,
against the spread of ideologies and networks that
promote violent extremism and terrorism.
Coordinating efforts between the United Nations
and the African Union, through the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, is
crucial in addressing the challenges of the Sahel and
Lake Chad basin region. In that regard, it is important
for the countries of the region and the international
community to ensure the protection of women, who
are most often the primary victims of conflicts. They
must therefore ensure that women participate in all
peacebuilding efforts, given that it is now unanimously
recognized that women’s participation in peace
processes ensures the sustainability and inclusiveness
of those processes.
My country takes this opportunity to welcome
the establishment in June 2017 of the African Women
Leaders Network. The Network’s call for action seeks
to ensure that women help stabilize the continent with
a view to achieving Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030. To that end, it should be
recalled that Côte d’Ivoire, which has always made the
role and future of women a priority, was the second
country in Africa to launch on 26 January, through its
Ministry of Women, Child Protection and Solidarity,
the African Women Leaders Network in Cote d’Ivoire.
The role of women in peace processes must be
encouraged and supported, in particular when women
are from crisis-affected or developing countries. To
support countries, the international community must
continue to ensure that women are increasingly involved
in conflict prevention. It must also support women’s
leadership in the peace, security and development nexus.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to commend you, Madam
President, for participating in today’s important
meeting. We also welcome Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the African Union Special
Envoy for Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, and thank them for their very valuable briefings.
We have heard briefings today on the joint visit
conducted by the United Nations and the African
Union to the Sahel, in particular the south of the
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8306

region — Chad and the Niger – in which you, Madam
President, participated. We welcome this initiative.

supporting and developing national plans related to the
issues of women and peace and security.

Undoubtedly, the Sahel region faces various
challenges, which pose a threat to peace and security,
including environmental issues that lead to tensions
and food insecurity, in addition to economic problems,
such as unemployment and other terrorism-related
challenges. Such challenges all have an adverse impact
on the people in that region. However, women and girls
are particularly vulnerable to them.

We recall that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel has the empowerment of women
as one of its six prioritie, and seeks to promote the
role of women in achieving peace in the Sahel region.
This can be done through the effective participation of
women in the elections and other political processes,
as well as the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. Strategies for fighting terrorism and violent
extremism should be developed and implemented in line
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1889 (2009) and 2242 (2015),
along with relevant international, regional and national
mechanisms and action plans.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
to promote the role of women in achieving peace and
security in the Sahel, which is one of the priorities of
the Secretary-General as he seeks to achieve gender
parity at the various United Nations bodies. We
welcome the fact that women account for 22 per cent of
the contingent of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
participation of women should be further encouraged
throughout peacekeeping missions at all levels — at
the administrative level, as members of peacekeeping
forces and at the leadership level.
The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest terms
the terrorist attacks targeting the Sahel, which seek to
undermine the stability and security of its peoples. We
condemn in particular the terrorist activities of Boko
Haram and the terrorist group Da’esh and its terrorist
cells, which still exist even after its defeat. We support
the efforts of the national Governments as they seek
to withstand economic challenges, as stipulated in
resolution 2349 (2017). Women and girls are the group
most targeted by these terrorist operations because they
are vulnerable to terrorist acts. African women and
their children are often recruited by those terrorist and
extremist groups. That is why we must promote the role
of women in the fight against extremism and terrorism
at all social levels, in particular at the regional and
international levels.
We recall resolution 2242 (2015), which calls for
the integration of the women and peace and security
agenda while boosting the role of women to counter
trafficking of light weapons. We reiterate our support
for the countries of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel so that they can meet their national
needs and address the common challenges faced in the
Sahel region. We commend the participation of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in

We commend the efforts and endeavours to deal
with issues of peace and security in the continent.
African solutions should be related to African problems
while maintaining their national ownership. We stress
that the countries of the African continent must be
conflict-free. The African Union and its competent
organs, such as its Peace and Security Council, are
models for other regional organizations responsible
for maintaining peace and security in the States of
the continent. They work for the development and
prosperity of the societies in the member states of the
African Union. We note the important role played by
the African Union in steering certain peace operations
that have become very important means to address the
African conflicts and crises. We believe that there is an
opportunity to strengthen the role of African women
and their contribution to achieving sustainable peace in
accordance with the regional action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000).
It is appropriate here to mention resolution 2320
(2016), which underscored that partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union Peace
and Security Council should be based on bilateral
consultations and joint strategies as needed. They must
come together through a process of consultation to take
joint decisions, with burden-sharing, joint analysis,
transparency and accountability, in order to address the
common security challenges in Africa.
We reiterate the importance of following up on the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
and statements, particularly those linked to Africa,
cooperation with the African Union and ways to ensure
effective partnership.

18-2181021/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

10/07/2018

It is evident that we have a good normative
framework for involving women in achieving peace and
security around the world, particularly in Africa and
the Sahel. We call for intensive efforts to implement the
relevant United Nations and African Union resolutions
and mechanisms, and for the involvement of women and
youth with all other segments of the society to achieve
peace and security.

Resolution 2349 (2017), of March 2017, adopted
following the Council’s visit to the Lake Chad basin,
is an important step in favour of women’s peace and
security in the region. Also, the call to action adopted
at the high-level conference on women, violence and
terrorism in West Africa and the Sahel, organized in
April in Dakar, constitutes a step in right direction. We
should be building on it further.

To conclude, the State of Kuwait wishes to reiterate
its support for cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union as they seek jointly to achieve
peace, security and stability in the African continent,
and to promote peace and security throughout the world.

We also strongly believe that the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole have to promote
women’s positive role as agents for change in transitions
from stabilization to long-term peacebuilding and
development. With this in mind, over the past 18 years
the Security Council, through its numerous resolutions,
has created a solid normative framework, and good
progress has been made in terms of implementation.
What is needed now is more strategic and consistent
implementation, followed by regular evaluations.
Meetings like this one help to identify gaps between
the framework and the situation on the ground.

Mr. Radomski (Poland): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening and presiding over this
meeting today. We are deeply honoured by your
presence among us.
Let me also join all other members of the Council
in expressing my thanks to Deputy-Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Bineta
Diop, for their comprehensive briefings.
Poland is concerned by the extent to which women,
men, girls and boys are impacted by the interrelated
challenges in the Sahel region. Among the factors
causing unrest and insurgencies in the region are
increased tensions between farmers, food insecurity,
unemployment and, of course, terrorism. These
important issues have dramatic consequences, affecting
women and girls with particular intensity and further
complicating the regional security situation. Not only
are women and girls the victims of terrorist attacks,
but they are also being radicalized by terrorists. As we
have heard, almost two-thirds of the suicide bombings
by Boko Haram in 2017 were carried out by women and
girls. Their desperation demonstrates how crucial it is
to continue efforts to provide peace and security for
women in the Sahel region. Like all other members of
the Council, we are also appalled by the large scale of
sexual violence in the region.
Reflecting on the key challenges to ensuring
women’s security and prospects to participate in
sustainable development processes, I want to stress
the need for the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its recent
recalibration in order to ensure that it is responsive
to the countries of the region and to mobilize greater
resources for the region.
22/25

We fully support initiatives to increase women’s
participation in democratic elections, decision-making
and peace and development processes. We consider
it essential to include gender considerations and the
meaningful participation of women in early warning,
mediation and conflict resolution efforts. Equally
important is the mainstreaming of gender-specific
language and the human rights of women in peace
agreements. A greater role for women also needs
to be ensured in post-conflict peacebuilding and
economic recovery.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that further
cooperation with the African Union and civil society
is vital to increasing women’s participation in peace,
security and sustainable development processes in the
region of Sahel and the Lake Chad basin.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Moustapha (Chad) (spoke in French): His
Excellency Ambassador Cherif Mahamat Zene, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chad should have
liked to take part personally in this important highlevel meeting but could not make the trip for reasons
of timing. He has instructed me to deliver, on behalf of
Chad, the following statement to the Council:
“I would first like to congratulate Sweden on
its accession to the presidency of the Council for
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

the month of July, and to thank it for organizing
this important open debate on a very important
topic. I warmly note the moving testimony offered
by Ms. Wallström on the situation of women in the
Lake Chad region.
“I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her briefing and for the riveting scenario she
painted of the current challenges facing Chad.
I further offer our thanks to Ms. Bineta Diop,
African Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace
and Security, and commend her commitment to
helping Chad to implement its action plan arising
from resolution 1325 (2000).
“Chad was one of the destinations of a joint
United Nations-African Union-Sweden mission
during the Swedish presidency of the Security
Council, which was led by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed. I should like to
thank Ms. Mohammed, and through her the entire
delegation and the United Nations, for having
visited my country, including the city of Bol, the
place in the Lake Chad region most afflicted by the
barbaric terrorist attacks of Boko Haram. The field
visit to the region, where refugees and internally
displaced persons are concentrated, mostly women
and children, allowed the mission to see at first
hand the tragic consequences of the combined
effects of terrorist attacks and climate change on
vulnerable victims of those two phenomena.
“The situation in the region reflects the
precariousness of people’s living conditions,
especially women, exposed to the adverse
consequences of climate change on development
and to the effects of the conflict afflicting the
neighbourhood. The crises and conflicts in Chad’s
vicinity have also given rise to a wave of refugees
and internally displaced persons, most of whom are
women and children, whose numbers are estimated
to exceed 700,000 people on Chad’s territory.
Those refugees and displaced persons share with
their hosts the scarce resources on which they
depend upon for their daily survival. At the same
time, that situation puts pressure on the economic
and environmental conditions in the region.
“Given that very complex and fragile context,
courageous, determined and resilient women are
daily heroically facing every obstacle to ensure the
survival of their families. Given the role and the

S/PV. 8306

status of women in the process of development and
crisis management, the Government of Chad has
undertaken major reforms to address the situation
of women so as to eliminate all the existing
inequalities, discrimination and gender-based
violence by 2030. The momentum generated by that
Government reform dovetails with the goals set out
by resolution 1325 (2000) and provides a sound
foundation for the drafting under way of a plan of
action for the resolution’s full implementation. We
look forward with anticipation to the contribution
of UN-Women in that regard.
“Along the same lines, in addition to the specific
measures undertaken with regard to women,
which include providing microcredit to promote
revenue-generating activity, thereby improving
women’s living standards, the Government is
especially focusing on girls’ education and adult
literacy, without which an awareness of those
reforms as well as their impact will be limited.
“Moreover, by way of a law adopted on
22 May, the Government of Chad has established
phased parity between men and women when it
comes to both elected and appointed office, with
the immediate implementation of a 30 per cent
quota for women. Likewise, a law adopted in 2015
prohibits girls being married before the age of 18,
while a prison sentence of five to 10 years has
been added to the criminal code for any individual
who in any way forces a minor into marriage.
Religious and civil society leaders made their
contributions on that issue and were made aware
of the importance of their participation in the fight
against early marriage.
“The gender issue is a key facet and a priority
for our Government in crafting and implementing
development policies. The joint efforts to that
end by national authorities and United Nations
agencies play an important part. However, the
road ahead is long and strewn with obstacles. The
economic difficulties faced by Chad constrain the
Government’s ability to act, which has already been
significantly limited by our military commitments
in combating terrorism in the Lake Chad basin
and Sahel. Given the mounting terrorist threat,
Chad unfortunately finds itself forced to allocate
its scarce resources to the security of the country
and the subregion, to the detriment of economic
and social development — for there can be no

18-2181023/25

S/PV.8306

Peace and security in Africa

10/07/2018

peace or stability, and much less development,
without security.

to be better coordinated and coherent and really work
towards a joined-up response in terms of investments.

“We therefore launch an appeal to all our
development partners, including the United
Nations, for a shift in approach to partnership
to transition from conventional humanitarian
assistance to pooled efforts focused on sustainable
development and resilience. In that regard, we
commend the envisaged recalibration of the United
Nations Comprehensive Strategy for the Sahel
through the Sahel support plan. We underscore the
need for robust involvement in the review process
by the countries concerned, including taking
their priorities into account. Following decades
of humanitarian and development assistance, we
regret that the impact of the results on the target
populations fall woefully short of expectations.
On its path towards social and economic
development — a guarantor for peace, stability
and security — is drawing the lessons of its past
experience to henceforth measure the efforts of
its development partners against concrete results
that can be measured in terms of improvement in
people’s living conditions.

We also thank the representative of France because,
along with France, Germany and the European Union,
the Alliance for the Sahel has also been incredibly
important in bringing this all together. I think that
many of the Heads of State in the region emphasize the
need for coordination and living up to the commitments
that were made five or six years ago, which have yet to
realize any benefits. Had we done so, we probably would
not be in the position that we are in now. The urgency of
getting behind one strategy is really important. We are
grateful that that is an outcome of the Security Council.

“In conclusion, I hope that the Deputy
Secretary-General’s vision — in which, again,
you participated, Madam President — will open a
new chapter in our partnership so that Chad can
be supported in its efforts aimed at promoting
sustainable development by improving the status of
women in line with our national development plan,
which was the subject of a round table organized last
September in Paris. Honouring the pledges made
by all our partners at that meeting — and we would
like to thank them here — is essential for Chad and
for the empowerment of women and girls.”

It was reflected in many instances. As the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden said, we should not have
been going to fistula clinics and seeing them full of
young girls. We should have been going to classrooms.
Instead, here we were in Niamey, with three centres.
We only saw one, and they had huge demands to
expand. We were really looking to say that we should
be looking at prevention, and prevention meant getting
girls into school and investments in development. I
suppose that the eight-point plan for the Republic of the
Niger did have money for education, but there is just no
fiscal space for it because funding is being taken up by
the responsibilities to care for migrants coming back
across the borders from Lybia, as well as by security
issues related to handling Boko Haram.

The President: I now give the floor to Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed to respond to
the comments made.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank
speakers for their incredibly supportive response to
the opportunity that we have had to share about our
visit — but, more important, about the big issues.
The representative of Chad referred to the
importance of the recalibrated United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which cannot be underscored
enough. While we await the African Union’s review
of the Strategy, one thing we have learned is the need
24/25

I must say that the real concern for me is that
that urgency must come when countries are grappling
with a fragile State and everything that comes with
it — the expectations of people and trying to maintain
a democracy, which is not just about elections. It is
about the three arms of Government, which need to be
supported equally, and that gap is closing as countries
inch towards becoming failed States. That is a very
real concern. We saw that on the ground. We saw the
concerns of Heads of State there.

I think the other concern is that Boko Haram is
becoming much more organized. In its own way, it is
providing an alternative to what Governments cannot
provide for their peoples. There is an urgent need to
stop that trend. It was not just the suicide bombers
that we saw, who obviously in some cases were either
hypnotized or forced into it, but there are many willing
girls who are now following and communities that
are sympathizing with many of these terrorist groups.
18-21810

10/07/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8306

That, I think, is far more dangerous and we need to turn
it back.

The President: I give the floor to Ms. Diop to
respond to the comments made.

We also saw the challenge of the conflicts between
farmers and herders across the region. Again, I would
emphasize that population growth and other dynamics,
such as urbanization, and the stress they put on food
security are something we have not really looked at.
We have gone to the symptoms and looked at them
from the political, ethnic or religious point of view. It is
much more than that, and I think that we need a better,
joined-up response to how we articulate the Sustainable
Development Goal on cities, for instance. This happens
in context and has repercussions on insecurity.

Ms. Diop: I would like to thank the members of the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to brief
them. My special thanks go to you, Madam President,
and to the Deputy Secretary-General for your generosity
in staying so long in the region and listening to African
women. We are very happy that you could come back
and report to the Security Council. I am very glad to
see the entire Security Council fully support the agenda
and our mission, and we hope that we will implement
whatever is decided here.

I would say that we did see a really wonderful
opportunity of getting behind a cross-border initiative
of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to draft its plan,
which really answered a number of the issues we had
and took care of the context of climate and conflict.
But it needs to be urgently supported. There are
frameworks and vehicles, checks and balances that we
can put in there with respect to the areas that we really
worry about or the risks that we think we can mitigate
through a better joined-up partnership of multilateral
system. But it needs to happen now.
I think that reforms in the development system
really do help in bringing about good coordination.
We saw excellent coordination in the humanitarian and
development nexus in Chad and in South Sudan, where
of course the tensions probably helped us to come
together. We also saw it in the Niger, when they got
together with the ruling rural integrated programmes.
I would point to the African Union-United Nations
framework for peace, security and development. The
Secretary-General was there yesterday. They launched
the action plan for development, which includes the
Sahel Strategy. We believe that that represented a solid
step forward. Again, we would plead for support for
that and for the African Women Leaders Network. That
is a strong group. They will manage to put together and
launch the fund for women. It takes a different angle.
This time they are looking at building the capacities of
women fund managers, which means they are looking
to leverage resources that are available in the private
sector and elsewhere. It is not just a case of grants; it is
a case of how we leverage more funding for that. The
work continues.

I need to echo again the concern of the women of
South Sudan. South Sudan needs to get back to where it
was before when there was peace and security. Women
are asking that we restore their dignity. They want to go
back to the peace process. They want to be part of the
governance mechanism to be put in place. They want
to be part of the future elections and the process of
fighting against impunity. We have heard them.
My Office has supported many countries in Africa.
So far, we have 22 national action plans. I want to do
more, with the support of everybody, to make sure
that by 2020 almost half of the countries of Africa
have a national action plan. But national action plans
are not just the end of it. That is why my Office has
also developed a continental results-based framework
to measure progress in implementation. We need to
go beyond resolutions and frameworks to measuring
progress with indicators and targets. The African
Union Chairperson will, through my Office, deliver
an annual report that can be shared with the Security
Council. I hope that, with this, we can measure the
implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda and the development of the continent of Africa.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of of speakers.
I would mention one more thing that we forgot to
to tell the Security Council. The cooperation among
the European Union, the African Union and the United
Nations in a project like the Spotlight project in the
Niger to prevent sexual violence against girls and
women is, I think, a good example of how we have to
continue to take this forward.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

18-2181025/25
