o

UNITED NATIONS

I

NA TIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
orFICIBt RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

811

YEAR

th MEETING: 18 FEBRUARY 1958

I

eme SEANCE: 18 FEVRIER 1958

I"

TREIZIEME

"

,"

j.
"

ANNEE

I!

t:'

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIEts
NEW

I:"

i,

YORK

TABLE

OF

:-

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SjAgendaj811)....................................

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President..........................

1

Adoption of the agenda

2

,..................

Letter dated 13 February 1958 from the representative of Tunisia to the President of the Security Council concerning" Complaint by Tunisia in respect
of an act of aggression committed against it by France on 8 February 1958
at Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef" (5/3952);
Letter dated 14, February 1958 from the representative of France to the President of the Security Council concerning" Situation resulting from the aid
furnished by Tunisia to rebels enabling them to conduct operations from
Tunisian territory directed against the integrity of French territory and
the safety of the persons and property of French nationals (S/3954). . ..

TABLE

i:

2

DES MA TIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/81l).,.............................

1

Remerciements au President sortant

,........................

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

,........................

2

Lettre, en date du 13 fevrier 1958, adressee au President du Conseil de securite
par le representant de la Tunisie, conccrnant la question suivante ;
« Plainte de la Tunisie au sujet de l'acte d'agrcssion commis par la France
contre ellc a Salciet-Sidi-Youssef le 8 fevrier 1958}) (S/3952);
Lettrc, en date du 14, fevrier 1958, adressee au President du Conseil de securite par le representant de la France, concernant la questjon suivante :
« Situation resultant de l'aide apportce par la Tunisie a des rebelles, permettant a ceux-ci de mencr Et partir du territoirc tunisicn des operations
dirigees contre l'integrite du territoire frangais et la securite des personnes
et des biens des ressortissants fralllyais n (S/3954)....................

2

( 12 p )

S/PV,811

Releyant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are publifihed in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

I
,I

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capitalleaers combined
wilh figures. Mention of slich a symbol indicafes u reference fa a United Nations
document.

I

***

I

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans lell
comptcs rendus des seances du Conscil de securite sont pubIies clans des supplements trimestrieIs aux DOcuments ofllciels.

I

Les cofes des documents de l'Organisation de,~ Nations Unies se composent de
leUres majuscules el de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texie signifie
qu'il s'ugil d'un documenl de l'Organisation.

I
I

tl

P

1)
1)

1.
2.

1

3

I

I
I

I

r
I

,
I

i

I

I

I

I

t

EIGHT HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuetlday, 18 Fehruary 1958, at 3 p.m.

HUIT CENT ONzrEME SEANCE
Tenue a New-York, le mardi 18 fevrier 1958, • 15 heUl'e8.

r

I

Presidenl: Mr. A. A. SOBOLEV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

President . M. A. A. SOBOLEV
(Union des Republique8 socialistes sovietiques).

Present: TIle representatives of the following countries: Canada, Chill<l, Colombia, France. Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
United States of America.

Presents : Les representarrts des pays suivants
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, Irak, Japon, Panama,
SuMe, Union des RcpubIiques socialistes sovi6tiques,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et cl' frIande du
Nord, Etats~Unis d' Amerique.

ProviBional agend8 (S/AgendajBl1)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/81l)

1.
2.

3.

1

/

Adoption of the agenda.
Letter dated 13 February 1958 Irom the represen~
tative of Tunisia to the President of the SecUTity
Council concerning "Complaint by Tunisia in
respect of an act of aggression committed against
it by France on 8 February 1958 at S<lkiet~Sidi­
Youssef ".
Letter dated 14 February 1958 from the represen~
tativc of France to the President of the Security
Council concerning "Situation resulting from the
aid furnished by Tunisia to rebels enabling them
to conduct operations from Tunisian territory
directed against tile integrity of French ten'itory
and Lhe s~fety of the persons and property of
French nationals ".

1.
2.

3.

I

~

,

i

I

I
I,

Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
Lettre, en date du 13 fevrier 1958, adressee au President du Conseil de s6curite. par le representant
de la Tunisie, concemant la question suivante
" Plainte de la Tunisic au sujet de I'ade d'agression
commis par la France coutre elle u Sakiet~Sidi­
Youssef le 8 fevrier 1958 H.
Letlre, en date du 14 fevrier 1958, adressee au
President du ConseiI de securit6 par le representant
de la France, concernant la question suivante :
\\ Situation re~ultant de I'aide apportee par la
Tunisie a des rebeIles, permetLant a cellx~ci de
mener a partir du territoire tunisien des operations
dirigees contre I'integrite du territoire fran~ais
et la se.cunte. des personnes et des biens des l'essor~
tissants fran<;ais 11.

Expression of thanks to the retiriDg President

Remercicments an President Bortant

The PRESIDENT (translaled from Russian): Before
proceeding to the adoption of the agenda for today's
meeting of the Security Council, I should 1i\{C la express
my thanks to Mr. Jarring, the representative of Sweden,
who presided over the Council in January. In conducting the Council's deliberations, 1\1r. Jarring once again
demonstrated his impartiality, his tact and his great
ability. I am sure that in saying tills I am expressing
the views or all the members of the Security Council.

1. Le PRESIDENT (lraduit dll russe) : Avanl de
proceder a l'adoption de I'ordre du jour de la scance
d'aujoUL'd'hui, je voudrais exprimer ma reconnaissance
it Y\L Jarring, representant de la Suede, qui a preside
les seances du Conseit pendant le mois de janvier. A
cette occasion, M. Jarring a de notiveau fait pl'euve
de l'impartialite, du tact et de la maitrise que nous
lui connaissons. Je suis certain que ces paroles traduisent
les sentiments de tous les membres du ConseiJ de
securite.

2. l\'lr. CARBONN IER (Sweden): Since ?vir. Jarring is
unfortunately not able to be present at this meeting,
J wish to thank you, Mr. President, on his behalf for
the kind words you have been gracious enough to address
to him. I sllall not fail to communicate them to him.

2, M. CARBONNIER (Suede) [lraduit de l'anglaisJ :
Monsieur le President, comme M. Jarring est malheureus~mellt dans l'impossibilite d'assister a cette seance,
je tiens a vOllS remercier en son nom des aimables
pRroles que vous avez prononcees son egard et que
je ne manquerai pas de lui transmettre.

a

1

Adoptivn of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

3. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (fl'anslaled {mm
French): I wish simply to say that my delegation's
approval of the provisional agenda does not mean that
we can accept the term~ in which the Tunisiiill complaint is drafted. Wc consider, for example, that the
words" aet of aggression" cannot properly be applied
to an act whicll is isolated in time and space, the more
so when regret has been expressed for the civilian
damage caused and stcops have been taken to provide
compensation. Many other things migh t bc said on
this subject, but in view of the circumstances in which
this meeting was called and tIle fact that we have
accepted the good offices of lhe United Kingdom and
the United Scates, 1 shall sas nothing more at this
juncture.

3. M. GEORGES~PICOT (France) : Je voudrais
simplement indiquer que, en apJ-lI'Quvaul I'ordre du
jour provisoire qui nOllS est soumis, la France n'Q pas
entendu donner son UCCaI'd aux termes dans lesqueLs
est redigee la plainte de la Tunisie. Elle estime notamment que 1'011 ne peut parler d'acte d'agression lorsqu'j] s'agit d'un actc isole dans le temps cl dan~ l'espaCe, qUi, de plus, a faill'objd d'cxpressiom de regrets
pour les pertes civiles qu'il a cntrainees d de mesures
pour assurer leur dedonunagement. Bien d'alltres
ehoses pol1I'r~ient etre dites egalement il ce sujet mais,
~t3lit donne lcs condiLions dans lesquellcs a ete convoqu6e cetle reunion et le fait que nous avons accepte
Ies DOllS o[fll;es du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique. je borncl'ui la. man intervention pour
l'instant.

4. Sir Pierson DIXQN (UniLed Kingdom): I should
simply like to make it clear that my Government's
support for the adoption of the agendn does not :dTecL
its well-known view Lh3t, under Article 2, paragrnph 7,
of the Charter, the Security Council is precluded from
dealing with matters c:i>:i>entially within the domestic
jurisdiction of Member States.

4.

1.

tries un<

i

I

The fact
have ele
friends i
of tlteir

8. To
these gc
be wDrll
of the
offices,
affirmat
pel\ceful

9, It i"
the pari
are endl
peaceful
siolls to
hetweel1

Sir PiersOll DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [tradail de
l'a/l.'71uis] : le tiens simplemellt a. preciser que, ell

aPPllyant l'ndoption de l'ordre du jour. mon go llverlleLlHmt ne lIlodifie ell rien son attitude bien connne
selon laqllelle le paragraphe 7 de l'Adicle 2 de la Charte
interdit all Conseil de securite d'intervenir dans des
aITaires qui IeMvent essentiellement de la competence
nalionale des Etals Membres.

The agenda WQ8 adlJpied.

In t]

fuI solut
between

10. Sir
Majesty
been 111
develop

L'/Jrdl'e !lu jour esl adopU.

which I
Leltllr dated 13 February 1958 from the representative
of Tunisia to the President of the Secwity Council
concerning " Complaint by Tuni8ia in respect of an
act of aggl'cssion committeJ against it by France
on 8 Fellruary 195& at Snkict.Sidi.l'oussef" (S{
8952);

Lettre, en date du 13 fevrier 1958. adressee all Prealdent
du Conseil de BeclU.'itc par le representant de la
Tunisic, concernWlt la question suivante : «PJainte
de 10 Tllnhi.., DU I1lljel de I'uete d'agression commis
par in Frllnce tontre eUe il. Sakiet"5idi·YoUBsef le
8 fevrier 1958» (5/3952) ;

Letter dated 14 February 1958 from the representntive
of FrlWce to the PreBident of the Security Council
com:erning <l Situation re8u1ting from the aid flU'.
nished by Tunisia to rebels enabling them to conduct
operations from TunisillD territory directed against
the integrity of French territory and the safety of
the persons und property of French nationals"
(8(3954)

LeUre, en dale du 14 fevrier 1958, adressee all Presi.dent
du Comeil lie eecurite par le representant de la France
concernnnt la question suivante : {( Situntion reau].
tant de I 'aide apportce par la Tnnisie a des rebeUes,
pennettant a. cClIx"ci de mener u partir dn territoire
tunisien des operanoD8 dirigees contre I'integrite du
territoire fran~ais et Ja scenrite des personnes et des
bieDs des res80rrnsnnts fran~ais)) (8/3954)

G. The PRES1DENT (lrulIslu.led {rurn Russian): I
should lilce to draw tile attention of members of tlle
Security Council to a letter from the represenLative
of Tunisia [S/3962j in which he asks permission to
take part in tIle proceedings d the Security Council.
In accordance with the rules of procedure. of the Security
Council and if no member of the Sccllrii:y Council
objects, I sllall invite the representative of Tunisia
to take part in the discussion of these questions.

5. Le pnESIDENT (fraduil da rHsse) : Je voudruis
attirer l'attcntion des membres du Conseil de securile
sur une lettre IS/3952] dans luquelle le representant
de la Tunisie demande a prendre part a la seance elu
Conscil. Conformement au rcglemenL interieur du
Couseil et s'il n'y a pas d'objcction de la part de ses
membrcs, j'illviterai le representant de la Tunisie a
participer a la discussion de ces questions.

/1/ Ihe invitalion ul the President, lvlr. Slim, repusentalivc of Tunisia, look a place al lhe Council table.

Sur l'inuilolioTl du President, M. Slim, represe.ntant
de la Tunisil'., prend place /i la fable du Cumeil.

6, Mr. WADSWODTfI (United States of America):
The GovernmeIlt of the lTniteu States wishes to confIrm
~he decision which it :lnnoulleed yesterday to eXlend
Its good offices in conjunction with the Government
of the Uniled Kingdom in order to assist the Governments of France and Tunisilj to settle outstanding
problems between them. I ·wisb also to state that my
delegation is gratified that this offer has been accepted
by both parties.

o.

M. WADSWORTH (Etots··Unis d'Amcrique) [Ira-

duil de l'anglais] : Le GOllverncment cl!.!s Etats-Unis

d'Amerique tient a ronfJrmer la decision qu'il a rendue
publique hier d'ofTrir. nvcc le Gouvernement du Royaume-"Uni, ses bons offices pOllr aider les Gouvernelllcnts
de la France et de la Tunisie a rcgler les problemes qui
se posent cntl'C cux, Je tiens a dire nussi que ma delegation est heureuse que ceLte oITre ait e.Le ac:ccptee par
les deux parties.

2

interest
disagrel
been de
of tllOSl
clO$CT

Mr. w~
Govern
moreov

certain
membe
to him

11. \\
such a
ments
orrer 0
betwee
ments
lJniLec
agree
Gover;
with 1
enjoin
tioll 0:
choice

I
I

I

12.
which

but i!

task
our e
Franc
some
hope
make

when
and ~

»

f
i
ldrais
'e du

pas.
qun[s
JlalllIOr5I'es:grets
:sures
.utres
mais,
il

COn_

cepte
-Unis
POll]'

it de
e, ell
Uvcrlnnuc
harte
5 des
tenCe

lidenl

ie I.

laint~

mmio

lef le

lidel:lt
ranee
·esu}.

dies,

itoire

te du

It dell

drais
:urittS
ltant
:e du
. cl"
e ses

~ie

~

I

it

ntalll

I

[lra-

·Unis
ndlle
'yaulents
s qui
dele·
~ par

I
,I

!.

7. In the first instance, the responsibility for a peace~
ful solution of the differences which are outstanding
between France a:ld Tunisia lies with those two countries under Article 33 of the United Nations Charter.
The fact that the Governments of these two conntries
have elected to accept the good offices of two mutual
friends is taken by my Government as an indication
of their sincere desire to reach such a solution.

7, La responsabilite d'une solution pacifIquc des
desaccords qui separent la France et la Tunisie incornbe,
en premier hell, a ces deux pays aux termes de l'Article
33 de la Chrtrle des Nations Unies. Le fait que les gOll~
vernements de cc.'! deux ::mys ont decide d'acceptcr
les hons offices de deux amis communs est considere
par man gouvcrnement comme indiquant qu'ils ont le
desir sincere d~ parvenir n une telle solution.

8. To a large extent, the precise manner in which
these good offices are to hc implemented wiII ltave to
be worked out lw the four Powers involved. As one
of the two Pow~rs which are extending their good
offices, the United States hopes to bc able to offer
affirmative suggestions to advance the objective of a
peaceful and ~qllitable solulion of the,~e problems.

8, Duns une grande mesure, la rn2.niere exade dont
seront mis en ccuvre ces bons ofih',es devra ctre determinee par les quatre puissances interessecs. Lcs EtatsUnis d'AmeTique, une des delL"{ puissances a olTrir
lems bO:lS offices, cspercnt pouvoir faire des suggestions
positives pel"mettant de pUJ'venir plus facilement a une
solution paciftquc et equitable de ees prohIemes.

9. It is, we believe, a good augury for the future that
the parties to the proceedings now before this Cotmcil
are endeavouring, as suggested by Article 33, to settle
peacefully the Jif.erenccs noted in their cross-submissions to the CounciL and the other outstanding problems
betw<'.en them by means of their own choice,

9. Il nous semble de bon augnrc que les parties a
l'aJlaire dont l~ Conseil e.<:t saisi s'efforcent, comme le
recommandc. I' Article 33. de chercl18r une solution
pacifique des desaccol'ds evoqnes dans les plailltes
qu'i1s ant deposees devant le Conseil et des autres
problemes qui les separellt par des moyens de le-ur
propre choix.

10. Sir Pierson DIXON (United KL.llgtlOlll): Her
Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom has
been much distressed by the differences which have
developed between France and Tuni~ia, two counlries
which l1ave so many historical ties of sympathy and
interest in commcn. From the .beginning of the recent
disagreements between them we have, as was natural,
been doing our best to reduce the scope and intensity
of those disagreements and to bring the two countries
closer together. We have nul been alune in tllis. As
Mr. Wadsworth has just explained, the United States
Government has been active in the same sense. It is,
moreover, known that the Secretary-General has taken
certain steps to assist in the reduction of tension, and
members of the Council will, I am sure, be grateful
to him for 11is successful efforts.

10. Sir Pier~cn DIXON (RoyuumeUni) llmduil de
l'anglais] : Le Gouvernement de Sa Tlofajeste dans le
Royaurr.e-Uni est. vivement preoccupe par les desaccOl'ds
qui ant surgi entre la Frflllce et ID Tunisie, dwx pays
qui ant tant de liens llistoriques formes par la sym~
pathie et des inlerets communs. Depuis que les recents
desaccords sont apparus entre eux, nous avons, comme
il etait naturel, fait de nolre mieux pour redllirc lellr
portee et leuT intensite et pour rapprocher les deux pays,
Nous n'llvons pa~ ete les seuls en eela. Comm,,_ M.
Wadsworth viellt de l'expliquer. le Gouvernement des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique a agi dans :e meme sens. En
outre, 0;:1 sait que le Secre1aire general a pris cel'taines
mesures en VIle de l'eduire ceUe tensi.m, et les mcmbres
du Conseil de secuTite, j'en suis convaincu, lui scront
reconnaissants du succes de ses efforts.

11. We are happy that matters have developed in
such a way that we felt able to extend to the Governments of France and Tunisia in a more formal way an
offer of good offices on the problems directly at issue
between them. I am glad to say that both Governments have accepted our cffer, as well as that of the
United States GOvernment. I am sure the Council will
agree tllat tlJese ofTers and their acceptance by the
Governments of France and Tunisia are in full accord
with the spirit of Article 33 of the Charter, which
enjoin~ Members of the United Nations to seek a solution of their differences by peaceful means of their own
choice, using, where appropriate, thc help of friends.

11, Nous sommes heureux que l'evdution de la sjtuation DO,lS ait permis d'olfrir plus olfLciellement aux
Gouverr.ements de la France et de la Tunisie nos bans
ofIlces a propos des problemes qui se posent directement
entre eux. Je suis heureux de potlvoir dire que les deux
gouvernements ont accepte notre oJre de memc que
celle des Etats-Unis d'Amel'ique. Je sui:,; convaincu que
le Conseil de secuite conviendra que ces offres et leur
acceptation par les Gouvernements de la France et de
la Tunisie repclldent parfaitement a I'esprit de J'Article 33 de la Chfut.c, qui enjoinl aux Membres de
l'Organisatioll des Nations Unies de chercher a resoudre
lelU's differends par des moyens pacif:ques de leur choix
et avec L'aide d'amis, le cas echeant.

12. It clearly remains to be seen how the good offices
which we have oJIered can in practice best be exercised,
but it is certainly our intention to proceed witl1 this
task with the deepest sense of responSibility. While
our essential object is to bring the Governments of
France and Tuni<;ia together, we roay wish tu DIrer
some positive !!uggestions to them. It is our earnest
hope ttat neither Government will do anything to
make t~e present position more difficult at a time
when ofTers of good offIces have been made and accepted,
and when the Security Council has peen brought in to

12. 11 reste evidemment il determiner comment ces
bOllS orrlces pourront le miclLX s'exercer en pratique,
mais nous avons la ferme intention de poursuivre cette
t!che avec le .'lens le plus prefond de nos responsahilit.es.
Notre :but principal etant de rapprocber les Gouvernellltut5 de la France et de la Tunisie, nous desirerons
peut-~tre leur faire certaines suggestions concretes.
Nous souhaitons vivement qu'aucun des deux gOllver
nements ne fasse rien qui aggrave la situation actuelle
au moment ou des bans offir:.es ont ett oJlerts et acceptCs
et ou l'Oll a demandc au Conseil de S'Qccuper de ccrtains
R

3

deal with certain aspects of the problem. It is our belief
that both Governments realize that they have much
to gain from reaching an understanding.

aspects du probleme. NOllS sommes sfirs que les deuxgouveI'nements comprennent qu'ils ont beaucoup a
gagner de la conclusion d'un accord,

13. Mr. CARBONNIER (Sweden): I have listened with
great attention to the statements just made by the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom. It is a source of great satisfaction to my
Government that the Governments of the United
Kingdom and the Unitcd States have put their good
offices at the disposal of France and Tunisia for the
solution of the problems at issue between them. We
are also greatly heartened by the fact ills t the Governlllents of France and Tunisia have responded favourably
to the offer. We highly appreciate the conciliatory Qnd
constructive spirit in which this offer has been made
and accepted.

13. M. CARBONNIER (Suede) [traduii de l'anglais] ~
J'ai ecoute uvec grondc attention les declarations que
viennent de faire les representants des Etats-Unisd'Amerique et du Royaume-Uni. Mon gouvernement
est tres hellreux que les Gouvernements du RoyaumeUni et des Etats-Unis d'Ameriqlle aicnt offert leurs.
bons offices a la France et a la Tunisie pour la solution
des probJemes qui les separent. No LIS trouvons egalement
tres encourageant le fait que les Gouvernements de
la France et de la Tunisie aient reserve a cetle offre
un acclleil favorable. Nous sommes particulierement
sensibles a I'esprit eonciliant et constructif dans lequel
ceUe olTre de bons offices a He faite et acceptee.

14. I gather fl'om HIe statements we have just heard
that, within the framework of the nlier of good otnces,
discn::isions are now taking place with a view to arriving
at an amicable settlement. In those circnmstances it
would seem to me tllat the Council would be we]]
advised to adjourn in order lo allow these discllssions
to proceed in an atmosphere conducive to their Sllcess~
ful outcome.

14. Je dcduis des deux declarations que no liS venons
d'entendre que, dans le cadre de ceUe olIre de bons
offices, on procede rnaintenant a des echanges de vues
pour aboutir a nn reglement amiable. II semble, dans
ces conditions, qlle le Conseil de securitc serait bien
avise de s'ajourner pour permeHre it ces cchanges de
vues de se poursuivre dans llne atmosphere propice
a leur aboutissement.

15. Mr, SLIM (Tunisia) (lransla!ed trom French): I
wish to thank the Secnrity Council for adopting the
provisional agenda, which includes th2 item submitted
by my country entitled: "Complaint by Tunisia in
respect of an act of aggression committed against it by
France on 8 February Hl58 at Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef"
(S/3959) and the addendum clarifying the object of the
complaint (S/3955).1

15. Ivl. SLIM (Tunisie) :.le tiens tout d'abord a remercier le Conseil de sccurite d'avoir adopte I'ordre du
jour provisoire portant inscription de la requete presentee par mon pays et intitulee : nPlainte de la Tunisie
all sujet de l'acte d'agression commis par la France
contre elle Et Sakiet-Sidi-Yonssef le 8 fevrier 1958"
(8/3952) ainsi que de l'additif portant precision sur la
partie resolutive de ladite requete (S/3955)1.

16. At this stage of the debate, r do not wish to reply
to the comments that have been made regarding the
wording or scope of tIle complaint, but I can do no
less than point out tllat the two documents which
constitute the basis of the Tunisian Government's
complair.t seek to put on record Pon act of aggression
and to elicit a decision to take whatever measures the
Security Council may deem appropriate to pnt an end
to a situation which threatens Tunisia's secnrity, in
particular owing to the presence of French troops in
Tnnisia, and endangers international peace and security
in that part of the world, in particular by the continuation of the war in Algeria.

{G. Je ne veux pas, au stade aetuel de la discussion
des questions soumises a I'examen du COllseil de securite, repondre aux reserves faites quant a la qualiflcation
de la plainte Oll a son etendue, mais je me dois ele preciser
que les denx documents qui forment la base de la plainte
dn Gouvernemcnt tunisien tendent a faire constater
un acte d'agression et it voir prendre telles mesures
que le Conseil de securite estimera appropriees en vue
de mettre fin it une situation qui menace la securitc
propre de la Tunisie, notamment par la presence des
troupes fran~aises en Tunisie, et qui met en danger
la paix et la securite internationales dans ceUe region
du monue, en partieulier par la continuation de la
gucrre d'Algerie.

17. An oITeI' of good oOkes has been extended to my
Government by the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States with a view to their joint
intercession in the two disputes between Tunisia and
France. The offer, coming as it does from two friendly
Governments, has been welcomed by my Government.

17. Dne ofIre de bans offices, de la part des Gouvernements du Royamne-Uni. et des :f:tats-Unis d'Amerique,
n etc faite it mon gouvernement, visant a leur intervention conjointe dans les deux conflits opposant la
Tunisie a la France. Venant de la part de deux gouvernements am is, cette ofIre a trouve nupres de mon
gouvernement un accueil favorable,

18. 1 do not wish to say anything that might hamper
those good offices, but I should Iikc to make it clear
that my Government, anxious as always to encourage
any friendly means of settling disputes, will certainly
spare no effort to ensure that this offer of mediation is
elTcctively and successfully pursued with the least

18. Je m'en voudrais de gener en quoi que ce soit ces
bons offices, mais jc tiens toutefois a souligner que mOll
gouvernement, dans san desir constant de favoriser
tout moyen amiable permettant le reglement des
confli/.s, ne menagera certainement pas ses efIorts
pour voir cette tentative de mediation s'engager

1

See paragrllph 35.

1 Voir le po.ragraphe 35,

e::"

V

deux

possible delay in connexion with all the issues that
have been submitted to the Security Council.

effectivement et aboutil' dnns les meilleurs delais pos~
sibles sur l'ensemble des sujets soumis a l'examen du
Conseil de securite,

19. Mr, GEORGES~PICOT (France) (franslated from
French): I wish merely to observe that documen l
SISj:j55 is not listed in Lllc provisional agenda which was
distributed to us and which we have adopted.

19. M. GEORGEs~prCOT (France) : Je desire simplement faire observer qu'a l'ordre du jour provisoire
qui nous n etc distribue et que nOllS avons adopte
ne figure pas le docul\1ent S/3955.

20. Mr. AL~SHABANDAR (Iraq): My delegation
deplores this tragic act of aggression committed by
the French armed forces against Tunisia. We again
convey to the people and the Government of Tunisia
our deepest sympathy.

20. M, AL-SHABANDAR (Irak) [tra.dllif de /'nnglais] :
Ma delegation deplore le tragique actc d'agrf:ssion commis prJr les forces armees fran~aises contre 10 Tunisie.
Nous exprimolls une fois de plus notre profonde sympathie au pellplc et ::tll Gouvernement tunisiens.

21. We do not wish to comment on this attack which
led to the kllling of many innocent and peaceful men,
women and children and the destruction of an entire
village. World public opinion has nlready declared itself
in unmistakable tenus against this attack. Even French
public opinion was shocked at the act of the French
Government, which was premeditated and u:ljustifled.

21. Je ne veux pas commenter cette attoque qui a
co1'tte la vie a. de nombreux innocents, hommes, femmes
et enfallts paisibles, et qui a cntmtne la destruction
de tout un village. I/opinion publique mondiale s'est
ch'ja prononcee en termes parfaitement clairs contre
cctte attaque. L'opiniolL franQaise elle~meme a etl§.
choqnee de eet acte du Gouvernement fralll;ais, <lccompli
avec premeditation et sans justification.

22. We Silould also like to commend the Tunh;ian
people and their Government for the manner in which
they have dealt with this trngic cvent and for the
restraint and wisdom which they have shown to the
world, even under conditions of foreign assault and
provocation.

22. Ma deiCgation tient a feliciter le Gouvernement
et le peuple tunisiens de l'ntlitudc qu'ils ont observ~e
devant cet evcnement tragique et de la modemtion
et de la sagesse oont ifs ont temoigne devant le mondt:,
alors qu'ils etaient sounds a I'attaqne et a la provocation
d'un pays etranger.

lnCC

23. rvlr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): I should like to speak on a point of order.

23. M. GEORGES~PICOT (France) : Je demande
la parole pour une motion d'ordre.

;58 n
r la

24. The PRESIDENT (Iranslated from Russian):
I beg the representative of Iraq to proceed.

24. Le PRESIDENT (lraduil du russe) : Je prie le
representant de l'Irak de poursuivre.

25. Mr. AL-SHABANDAR (Iraq): The losses suffered
by the Tunisians as a result of this aggression can be
added to the deaths of thousands and thousands of
innocent Algerians who are being killed daily at the
hands of the French Army for no crime except their
right to and their Hght for independence and freedom.

25. M. AL-SHABANDAR (Irak) (traduil de I'anglai.sl:
Les pertes subies par les Tunisiens a la suite de cette
agression vienncnt s'ajouter aux milliers et milliers
d' Algeriens innocents qui tombent tous les jaurs sous
les coups de l'armee franl,;aise, sans avoir commis d'autns crimes que de lutter, comme c'est leur droit, pour
leur independance et leur libcrle."

26.

The. PHESIDENT (translated from Russian):
I call (Hl the representative of France on a point of
order.

26. Le PRESIDENT (traduif du russe) : Je donne
la parole au representant de la France pour une motion
d'ordre.

27. Mr. GEQRGES-PICOT (France) (lranslated from
French): I merely wish to ask whel.ller we are beginning
a discussion of the substance of the question or whether
we are discussing the adjournment of the Council, as
the representative of Sweden proposed.

27. M. GEORGES~PICOT (France) : Je veux sim~
plement demander si nails entrollS dans le fond de la
discussion ou si nou.l; discutons un ajournement de la.
seance du Conseil de scc.urite qui a ete propose par le
rcpresentant de la Su~de.

28. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
We are discussing items which have been adopted for
inclusion in the agenda, and members of the Council
are entitled to express their views on those itl.'.ms. The
representative Q[ Sweden mentioned the possibility of
adjourning tlle meeting, but he made no formal proposal. I therefore see no reason to interrupt the rcpre~
sentative of Iraq.

28. Le PRESIDENT (Lraduil du russe) ; Nous examinons les questions qui ngurent a i'ordre dll jour tel
qu'il a ete adopte, et les membres du Conseil peuvent
parler de ces questions. Le representant de la Suede
a evoque la possibilite d'ajoumer la seance dn Couseil
de securite, Olllb il n'a pas prescntc de proposition
formellc, Je ne vois done llucunc raison d'interromprl:.
le representant de j'lrak.

29. Mr. GEORGES~PICOT (France) (tra.nslated from
French): In these circumstances, I reserve my right
of reply.

29, M, GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Dans ces conditions, je me reserve le droit de rcpondre,

30. Mr. AL-SHABANDAR (Iraq): Thank you, Mr.
President. We note, however, that there is a generous
offer of mediation presented by two friendly Gavern~

30. M. AL-SHABANDAR (Iralt) [(raduil de I'anglais] :
Merci, Monsieur le President. Nous constatons ccpendant
que deux gouvernements nmis ont genereusemcnt ofiert

up

a

ais]

,

i qUCl

,

-Ullis

ment

Ilme~

leurs
tHioH
Illcnt

s de

ofTre
:nent

~qtld

nons

bon.~

VU(lS

dnns.
bien

s do
'pier
ner-

du

SCI1-

lisie

;;ion

icu~

lion
iser

;nte

ltcr
ucs

\'lIe

rite
des

;gcr

:ion

la
lle-

ue,

:er~

la

,u-

i

I

I

I

lOll

ces
Ion
sel'
Jes

rts

lOT

I,

5

ments in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter.
We welcome this orIer on the part of these two Governments, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America, as a sincere effort to help settle this problem
with justice and equity and with due regard to all
tile questions involved which are at the root of these
tragic events. Now that the Tunhinn Government
has accepted this olfer of mediation, my delegation
welcomes it wholehe::ll"tedly.

leur mediation, conformemeni. a l'Article 33 de la Cllflrte.
Nous considerons que cette oIlre du Royaume~Uni
et des Ihats-Unis d'Arnerique constitue un ef!ort
sincere pour aider A resoudre ce problemc d'une fa<;on
juste et equitable et en tenant dument compte de
toutes les questions qui sont it J'origine de ces evenemeuts tragiques. Le Gouvernement tunisien ayant
mainte.nant accepte cette ofire de mediation, ma delegation !'accueille avec le plus grand plaisir.

31. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (lranslflled from Spanish): The afTer of good offices made by the United
States o[ America and the United Kingdom with a
view to the peaceful settlement of the dispute wllicll
has developed lJetweeu France and Tnnisia, in dreumstances which we all regret hecause it involves two
friendly countries, is an excellent move, deserving of
support and approvaL

31. M. ILLUECA (Panama) [traduit de l'espagnolJ :
L'oIrre faite par Ies Etats-Unis d'Amerique et le Royaume-Uui d'employer Ieurs bons offices en vue de la
solution pacifique du conflit qui a surgi entre la France
et la Tunisie, clans des circonstances que nous oeplorons
tous car il s'agit de deux pays amis, constitue une tres
noble initiative, digne d'appui et de louange.

32. My country i5 gratified that both the Tunisian and
Frcncll GovemmenLs have accepted the offer of the
United Slates and United Kingdom Governments,
which is based on the Charter of the United Nations,
the pl'imary objective of which is the peaceful settlement
of international dispuLcs.

32. Mon pays se feIicite qu'aussi bien le Gouvernement
tunisien que le Gouvernemenl fran9ais aient indique
qu'ils acceptaient les demarches des Etats-Unis d'Ame·
rique et du Royaume-Uni inspirees de la Charte des
Nations-Unies qui recommallde avant tout la solution
pacifique des differends internationaux.

33. I should like Lo express my country's €3rnest
hope tl1at, given the good-will of the two countries
which at'e parties to the dispute, ways and means will
be fO\tnd of seWing the present differences between
France and Tunisia, tlms llelping not only to restore
peaceful relEltions hetween two friendly countries but
nlsD to further the development and progress of North
Africa, a very important region.

33. Qu'il me soit permis, au nom du Panama, d'exprimer le ferme espoir que, si les deux pays parties au
differend font preuve de bonne volonte, on ne manquera
pas de trouver les for-mules propres au reglement des
desaccords qui existent actuellement entre la France
et la Tunisie, ce qui non seulement contribuera aretablir
des relations pacifiqucs entre deux peuples amis, mais
servira egalement le progres et le bien-~tre de la region
du monde si importante qu'est l'A!rique du Nord.

34.. The suggestion made by the representative of
Sweden is, r think, very sensible aud we hopc that in
the course of the debate a formula will be found which
will make it possible for us to await the l'CSUltS of
the initiative of which we have been informed,

34. La suggestion faite par le representant de la Suede
me parait plcine de bon sens, et j'espere que, au cams
du debat, il sera possible de nous entendre sur une
formule qui permette d'attcudre le rcsultat des dcmarches ;'!nnoneees.

35. Mr. SLI:Vf (funisia) (translaled from French): I
should like to offer an explanation. In my statement,
I referred to document S/3955. That was a mistake and
I wish to correct it. I meanL document S/3957 which
has been circulated as a Security Coullcil document.
That document does not contain a new item for inclu·
sion in the agenda; it is merely an addendum which
explains the operative part of document S/3952, which
is the core of my complaint. I was anxious to make
that correction so that document S/3957 should be
considered as an addendum to document S/3952.

35. M. SLIM (Tunisie) : .Ie voudrais apporter une
precision. Duns ma declaration, j'ai fait mention du
document S/39S5. C'etait une erreur, que je veux rectiner. 11 s'agit du document S/3fJS7, distribue comme
document du Conseil de securitc. IJ ne s'agit pas, dans
ce document, d'un point nOllveau it inscrire a I'ordre
du jour; il s'<:\git seulement d'un additif explicatif
portant sur la partic resolutive du document S/3952,
qui fait l'objct esscntiel de ma plainte . .I'a! tenu a
apporter cette rectification afin que !e documcnt
S/S957 soit consider{j comme un <ldditif au document
S/S952.

36. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): A few moments ago, I interrupted the repre-

36. M. GEORGES-P ICOT (France) : J'avais intcrrompt!, tout t!l I'heure, le representant de rlrak parce
qu'il entrait dans le fond de la question alors qu'il
semblait que nails nous acheminions vel'S un ajournement dl! Conseil. II s'etait en dIet prononc~ sur des
points qui ne peuvent ~tre sepan\s d'une discussion
sur le fond, parJant, par exemple, de provocations.
n est certain que la question qui a cte inscrite a l'ordre
du jour, a la demande de la delegation tunisiennc, ne
peut etrc scparee, a man ,n·is, de la situation dont
nons avons demandc nOlls-meme I'inscription a l'ordre
du jour: !( Situation resultant de l'aide apportee par
la Tunisie a des rebelles, permettant a ceux-ci de mcner

sentative of Iraq because he was dealing with the substantive issues when the Council appeared to be con·
sidering the question of adjourning. Indeed, he expressed
views on points which cannot be separated from the
substantive issues, as, for example, when he referred
to provocation. The question placed on the agenda
at the request of the Tunisian delegation cannot, in
my opinion, be separated from the question which we
asked to have included in the agenda: "Situation
resulting from the aid furnished by Tunisia to rebels
enabling them to conduct operations from Tunisian

J:

i··~·

Li

6

I

1

I

I

II

I

j

I

rI

rte.
Uni
:ort
,on
de

territory directed again,~t the integrity of French territory and the safety of the persons and p~operty. of
French nationals". I shall not press the pomt untIl I
know what the Coundl intends to do at this stage of
the diSCllSsion.

iI partir du territoirc tllnisien des operations dirigees
contre ]'integritc du territoire fran9ais et la securite
des pcrsonnes et des biens des ressortissants fran.;:ais ".
le ne dCvcloppcrai pas davantage mon intervention
uvant de savoir vel's quoi nous nOllS orientons au stade
nctucl de la discussion du Conseil,

37. The docurnenl to which the representative of
Tunisia referred a moment ago is an "addendum"
to document 3/3952, but it is not listed ill the agenda
we lldopted.

37. Pour ce qui est du document anquel se refel'ait
tout a l'llcllre le representant de la Tunisie, it s'agit
cl'un "additif 11 3U document Sf3952; mais il n'cst
pas mention ne dans I'ordre du jour que nous avons
<tdoptl',

38. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Before I call upon the representative of Tunisia. who
has asked to speak, I should like to explain that document Sf3957, to which the representative of Tunisia
referred, appeared after the provisional agenda was
circulated, It is self-evident, tlHlt during tIle d~scussion
of an agenda item representatives invited to tlte Council
and members of the Council me entitled to refer to all
the documents which have been sllllmittcd ill connexion
with the question under disCLlssion, wlJicll relate directly
to that question and which have been circulated to
members of the Council.

38.

Le PRESIDENT (iraduil dll russe) : Avant de
donner la parole au representant de la Tunisie qui me
l'a demandee, je voudrais preciseI' que le document
S/3957, auquel s'est nifer!! le representant de la Tunisie,
esl sorH 3pres la dislribution de l'ol'dre du jour provisorre, Il V3 desoi que, lors de l'exnmen d'unequestion
inscrile U l'ordre du jour, les representants invites
et les membres dll COlIseil ont le droit de se rMerer a
tOllS les documellts qui se rapporlent directement a
ccttc question et qlli ont 02te dislribucs aux membres
du Conseil,

(translated from Fl'enc1t):

document 5/.3957 wHl be considered as nn addendum
to document 5/3952 in view of the fact that I said in
my letter to tllC Secretary-General:

39. ),1, SLD.[ (Tuuisk) : Si j'ai !lien compris l'explication que le President a bien voulu do.nner, le document
S/3957 sera considcl'c commc un complement clu iloeumellL S/3952 puisque, dans ma lettre au Secretaire general, j'avais dit ccci :

" I have the 11Onour to send yOll herewith a letter
to the President o[ the Security Council in re.~pect
of the request in document Sf3952, I shonld be
grateful if you would transmit it to him" [S/39.57].
In other words, the request itself bears the symbol
5/3952 and is supplemented by the addendum, S/3957,
If I have understood the President's statemcllt COfl'{'.Ctly,
I withdraw my remarks.

«J'ni l'houneur de vous envoyer ci-joint, a I'intention
du President du COllseil de securite, t\ne Jcttre qui
concerne la requete ngurant dans le document S/3952
et que vous voudrez hien lui faire transmeUre)) [Sf
39.57]. J] s'agit done d'unc requHe qui a tite inscrite
sous la cote S/3952 et qlli se trollve compMtee par
I'additif S/3957. Si j'ai bien compris voLre declaration,
Monsieur le President, je retire mon intervention.

'10. The PRESIDENT (lmnslaled fl'(Jnl Russian);
I must repeat that the meaning of my earLicr statement
is that during the discussion of an item which is on
the agenda, all representatives - both members of the
Council and persons invited to the Counei.! tablearc entitled to refer 'lo documents which Ilave been
submitted to the Security Council in connexion with
the discnssion of the lJuesLion and which have been
circulated to members o( the Security CounciL

40. Le PRESIDENT (lraduil du russe) : Je dois
repeter ce que rai vonln dire dans mes interventions
precectentes et qui se l'amene a ceci : pendant la discussion d'une question inscrite a l'ordrc du jour taus
les representants - les membrcs du Conseil ainsi que
les representflnts invilcs ,\ participer au debat - ont
le droit de se rMerer aux documents qui ont ete presentes au Conseil sur cdLe questioll et qui ont 6te d1'1ment
clistrib1H~s nux membres du COllseiL

41. I think that this answers the question which was
raised here.

41. le pcnse avoir rcpondu it la question qui vient
d'er-re soulcvee.

42. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translaled from
French): I believe wc are in complete agreement,
You said, Mr. President, that all the documents regularly submitted to the Council could be used or referred
to in the course of the debate. Under the rules of procedure, documents are considered to be regularly
submitted, so far as the agenda is concerned, only
if they are submitted three days before the Council's
meeting, wllile other documents must, Recording to
ruLe 2G, be submitted "at least forty-eight hours
before the meeting at which they are to be considered".
Consequently, it would not be in order (or us to discuss
these documents today, and, you are, I believe, too
great a champion of the rule~ of procedure not to
support me on this point. As I hope we shall not have

42. M, GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Je erois que nous
SOlllllles tout it fait d'uccorc! ; vous avez dit, Monsieur
le President, que touLc la documentation regulierement
soumise au Conseil pouvait etre utilisee, ou que l'on
pouvait y fairc allusion au cours de la discussion. D'aprcs les termes du reglement interieur, line documentation ll'cst regulierement soumise, en ce qui concerne
l'ordre du jour, que si eUe a ete envoyee trois jours
avant la reunion du Conseil, et, ell cc qui concerne les
autl'CS documents, s'ils ant ete soumis, d'apres l'arlicle
26, (I quarante-ll11it heures au moins uvant la seance
dans laqllelle ils sont examines )l. Par consequent, s'il
s'agissait de discuter ces documents aujourd'hui, c.ela
ne serait pas en ordre d'apres le reglement, et je crois
que vous etes un trop grand dCfenseur du reglement

nc-

ant

~le-

r

IJ ,

I

'u10

.Ice

ms

'cs

l

'fl-

au

I

~ra

I"

,

'"

,lir
ais
on

de

er,

ne
le-

,
I

oe
lu

I

I

li-

!

oe
os

I

":i{

,

2.

"
"
,"'il
,"m

s.

"

"

"

"

"
"

f

I
I
r
I

i

,

"
I

I

3\L

Mr. SLIM (Tunisia)

If I understood Ule President's explanation correctly,

7

to discuss the question today, this aspect of the problem
is obviously of only secondary importance.

pour ne :pas me donner raisQIl sur ce point. Comme
j'espere que nous n'aurons pas a discuter cette que"slion
aujourd'hui, eVidemment, cet aspect du probleme perd
beaucoup de son importance.

43. The PRESIDENT (lransla(ed from Russian):
Before caBing on the rep,'esentative. of Japan, who
has a~kerl for the floor as the last speaker, I should
like to say a few words as tite representative of the

43. Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russc) : Avant de
danner la parole au representant du Japan, qui est le
lIcrnicr orateur inscrit, je 'JuuJrais dire quelques mats
en ma qualite de representant de l'UNION DES RE-

UNIO" OF SOVIET SOCIALIST

PUBLIQUES SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES.

44.

REPUBLICS.

The representatives of the Ullited States and the

44. Le!> representants des Etats-Unis d' Ame.rique
I':t dll ROY:lume-Uni ont fait sllvoir au Conseil de securite qu~ lcurs gOllvernements aVllient offert leurs bons
offices en vue du reglement du c,anflit franco-tunisieu.
De leur ct/te, le representant de la Tunisie et, si j'ai
bien compris, celui de la France, qui sont directement
interess~.g llU rcglcment du eonflit, ant d6dare qu'ils
acceptaient cette {lITre de bans offices. Cette oNre est
conforme cl l'Article 33 de la Charte des Nations Unies.

Unitec Kin~dom have infcrmed the Security Council
thnt their Governncnts h~ve proffered their good
offices:o settling the disputejetween France and Tunisia.
Furthr:rmorc, the representative of Tunisia and, so
far as I undersb\nd, the reprcs-:lltative of France,
who are directly illt.erestf':rl in till' settlement of the
dispute, have stated that they accept the offer of
mediation, which is in accordance with Article 33
of the United Nations Charter.

45.

In the light of these facts, the Soviet delegation
feels oi)liged to state that the Soviet Government's
basic premise in the matter of good offices is that the
good oJTIces of any country in settling any given inter:wtional conflict 01' ~ispute should not be used with
a view to exerting lressure on OIlY c01Jntry filr the
purpose of imposing upon it conditions which may be
prejudicial to its sovereignty, or obtaining any benefits
[or the State acting as mediator.

45. COnl.ptP. tenn de ce qui precede. la dClcgntion
sovietique juge necessaire de declarer que, en ce qui
concl'.rne la question des bans offices, le Gouvernement
sovictique part du principe qu'une telle ofIre. de la
part de n'importe que! pays, en vue du reglement
d'un con flit ou d'un diflcrend international quelcouque
ne doit pas servir EL e."ercer ur.e pression sur un pays,
ailn de lui imposer des conditions contraires it sa souveruineM, ni a procurer des avantages a l':t:tat qui remplit
le role de mediateur.

In setting forth this consideration, I also consider

46. J'estime egalement indispensable de preciser, en
ma quaHte de representant de l'Union sovietique, que
j'aurais fait cette reserve quel que soit le pays qui ullI'ait
assume le rOle de mediateur entre ]0. Tunisie et la
Prance.

46.

it necessary, speaking as :he rep1'0sentative of the
Soviet Union, to point out that I would have made
this reservation irrespective of which country had
undertaken to act as mediatol' between Tlloisia nnn
France.

"!

1,7, The mpresentat;ve of Tuni.~ia has asked me to
give him the floor before tlle representative of Japan
makes [lis statement, As PRESIDENT, I therefore
tall upon the ~epresentative of Tunisia.

47. Le representant de la Tur.isic a demande a prendre la parole avant le representant du Japon, En ma
quali~e de PR£SIDENT. je Ill! clmme la paroLe

dB. Mr. SLIM (Tunisin) (tronslated from French):
The Council appears to have before it a suggestion for
adjourn;nent. At this :>tage, 1 would prefer not to
bhc a definite sLand 011 lhaL maLV.or. I\'Ty Government
would have liked au adjournment until u specific date
because lhe olTel' of good offices which my Goverr.ment
gladly accepted ha!;. not yet taken effect. However,
while I am aware of the need to alIow the good offices
every oppur~ltnity to succeed within the framework
(l( the princi]11es of the Charter and wit:ll regard to the
positions of the pnrties, I wish, [IS I have some reason
to fear that difficulties beyond my Government's
control may render the gO'Jd offices ineITectual, to
state tllnt I reserve rr:y right to request an emergency
rr,eeting of the Security Council for the purpose of
resuming the discussion of the items on our agenda
if in the next few days the goad amccs procedure daes
not seem to my Government to offer reas,)nable prospects of success.

,18. 1\1, SLl!'I'I (Tunbie) : Lc Consei] semble etre saisi
d'une suggestion d'ajomnement. Je pnHcre, en 1'6tat
actuel, ne pas prendre :me position llette a ce sujet.
Mon gouvernement aurait aime que eet ajournement
puisse etre ddlni dans le temps parce que l'aetian
de bons offices que mon gouvcrnement a aeceptee avec
plaisir Il'est pas encore cornmencee. COl1scient toutefois de la ne.cessile de lui re~erver toutes chances [l~
bons resultats dans le cadre des principes de la Charte
et des positions des dem; parties, mais ayant certaines
raison5 de cmilldre que des di[llcultes independantes de
la volonte de mon gOllvernemcnt puissent surgir qui la
rendraient inetncace. jc liens :'1 sign~l~l' qt:e je 1nl.'
reserve le droit de demander la reunion d'urgence
du Conseil (le securite aux fins de reprendre la d:scussion .!!ur les points enumercs a l'ordre du jour de
la presente seUlIce si, dans les prochairs jours, l'actioll
de bom, Offi<'£'.5 ne :>entllle pas a mOll gouverncmcnt
auguret suffisamment de resultats ut:i1es.

49. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT Wranee) (tranSlated from
French); As you said, Mr. President, the French Govern'ment has accepted the good Qffiees of the Governments
,of the UlliLed Kingdom and the United States. We even

49. M. GEOHGES-PICOT (France) : Comme VO'lS
l'avez indique. Monsi{'.ur le Pr€sident, le Gouverneme:J.t
fran<;ais a accepte les bons offices des Gouvernemp.nts
du Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique. Nous
8

-

•

r

me
ion

~rd

de
le

)ls

E-

ue
uns

:0.

ai
nt

ils
st

lS.

m

ui
,t

la

,

"s,
,-

r

,t

l

it

n

le

it
a

thought that in the circumstances a meeting of the
Council was not necessary and we therefore Si'e no
point in making any reservations, so far as we are
concerned, regarding the conditions on which an adjournment might be agreed upon.

aVLons meme estime que, dans ees conditions, une
seance du Conseil n'etait pas nccessaire ; nous ne voyons
donc pas l'utilite de faire aucune reserve, en ce qui
nOllS concerne, sur les conditions dans lesqui:lles un
ajournement scrait decide.

50. Mr. MATSUDAIRA (Japan) (translated from
French): We have discussed the problem before us
at some length today and it is perhaps time to dispose
of it. I believe thal 1 am expressing the feeling of the
Council when I pay a tribute to the commendable
efforts so eITectively made by the Governments of the
United States and the United Kingdom in very difficult
and delicate drcumstances.

50. M. MATSUDAlRA (Japan) : Nous avolls longuement diseute flujounl'hui le probleme dont nous sommes
saisis et il est peut-etre temps d'en disposeI'. Je erois
traduir~ le sentiment du Conseil en rendant hommnge
aux: louahles elTort.s exerces si effectivement par les
deux Gouvernernents des Etats-Unis d'Amerique et
du Royaume~Ulli dans des circonstances fort dilficiles
et delicates.

51. It is also my duty to congratulate the representa tives of Francc and Tunisia and their respective
countries on the spirit of conciliation and co-operation
they have displayed with such dignity in the course
of the present crisis.

51. ]] est aussi de mOll devoir de Wiciter les repr~setl­
tauts de la France et de. la Tunisie, comme lcurs p.lyS
respectifs, pour l'esprit de eOllciliation et de cooperation
dont ils ant temoigne aVec bcClucoup de dignite au
cours de la presente crise.

52. My delegation earnestly hopes that the good
offices will be successful and will, I hope, construclively
safeguard international peace and securiLy in the area.

52. Mu delegation fonne les VCCllX les plus ardents
pour le succes des bons offices qui. je l'espere, sauvegarderont de f[u;on constructive la paix et la securite
internationales dans la region.

53.

I should like to propose lhe immediate adjournment of the mi:i:ting under rule 33 of the Council's
provisional rules (){ procedure.

53. Je me permets de proposer d'ajourner immcdiatemellt la seance en vertu de l'article 33 du reglement
intericnr provisoire du Conseil.

54. The PRESIDENT (franslated from Russian):
The representative of Japan has moved the adjournment of the meeting in accordance with rule 33 of the
rules of procedure. Under this rule, the Council decides
such a motion without debate.

54. Le PIlf.SIDENT (traduil du russe) : Le representant du Japon a propose d'ajourner la seance en
vertH de j'article 33 du reglement interieur. Conformement aux dispositions de cet article, le Conseil dQit
statlter sans debut sur cette proposition.

55. If there are no objections, we shall consider that
the motion of the representative of Japan has been
adopted.

55. S'il n'y a pas d'objection, nous considererons que
la proposition du representant du Japon est adoptee.
It en est ainsi decide..

Il was so decided.

l-

a

I
I

II

ij

I

,t

c

I

,

r

,
,

La seance cs/ leller iJ. l(j h. 15.

The meeting rose al 4.15 p.m.

I
I

I
I

I
I>
l

I

9

SALES AGEN1S FOR UNITED NATiONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLlCATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
"~G[mINA_AU;'NTINE

Edllodol ~udo"",",,~n. ~.A.. AI.;"o saa.
~o.no, Ai,.,.
"'UST~All"'·AU;l~AI!'

H. A. Godoo.d. A.M.P. B10g•• 50 MIIl"r
St .• Norrh S,d.,y,
90 Quo.o SI. M.lboo""
Mo!bo~tn. Unl• .,,;ly P"'" Co,h.n N.J,
Vi"06~.
AUST~lA.AUI~ICti[

fRANeE

Edilioo, A. P'doo., 13,
Pori. IV'i.

'u, ~oulflol,

G~RMAI\lV.ALlEMAGN~

R, ~I .. n"hmidl. KoI,e<1''''''' ~~, f,nnk.
I.,t/Moin.
flwM.!. Mo"'''. !laep'lro".IOJ, Be,lIo_
s,fiilnoLe,o,
AI"ond .. !lo,n, ~pi.9.lg.'" 9, WI.,·
b~Jeo.

Co'old I. Co., G,,,bo. ~l. Wion, l.
B. W.Ii."totlf, Mo"o' SI"I""""",,, 10,
S"I.borO·
JHGltlM.U1G'QUE
Agome., M,,,o~"<I.,~. I" 1',.... SA,
1~.27. 'e. d" P",i1. ~,u""II".
w. H. Sm;'~ l Son. 71·75, boul... ,d
Adolphe.!oIo<. 6,o"Ii••
BOlIVIA_~Ollll,~

lIL,,.,I,, 5,1",,0.0', (o,;n" 972, to p""
b~Alll_BR,m

lI"'o,i,, AgI" ~.io do Jo..I,o. S,;o Poolo
ood B.I" ~otl'O"to.
CAMBOI>IA.·CAMSOPG,
I'op",.tie·lib",;,i. Noev.II., AILMt Po"
tell, I~, "ooe' 80ullo,n., Pno",.Ponh.
CANADA
Ry."oo 1''''', 299 Qu"" SI. WeOl,
Torenlo.
~EY10N-CltYlAN

lQke Hoe," Booklhop, TII. A"od.ted
N .... ,p"!,'" 01 c.ylon, itd., P. O. Bo"
244. Colombo.
CHILE·CHIlI
~<lltotlol d.1 Pedf"", Allumodo 57.
SnnUogo.
L1bro,in I"ns, Co,Hlo 205, 5001;"90.
ClllNA·CHIN'
,ho Wo,'d Boo~ Co" lId., 99 Chun9
Kln9 Ro"d. 1<1 S"tlon, Tolp.h, Tolwoo.
,he Commer"ol Pm, Lld" ~11 Hooon
Rd., SlIoMnol.
COlOMBIA·COLOMBI.
lIh,orlo Am',I,o. M.dellfn.
llb,orlo 8",hllol. Golotlo, Bogola.
lib,.,!o l4ooloo"llt<lo., Bo"ooq"lIIo.
COSTA RICA·cOSTA·RICA
T,ejo, 1'10'"'900', Apo,lodo 1313, Son
Jo.'.
.
CU8A,
to C",n 80Ig", O'R~lIly 4SS, to H"bon••
CUCHOSlOVAKIA·TCHl"COSlOVAQUIE
I':'.,ko<lov.",k~ SI'I'~.nlol, No,odo( T,ido
9, P,oho 1.
DENMAII:K·DAN!"MARK
Eloo, M~"k,goo,d, U~., N."~g.d, 6,
K.. b.eho,/o, K.
DOMINICAN ~EPUBllC_
REPUBUQUE DOMINICAiN~
Llb,.tfo [loml"l,o.o, M.".d., .9, Clu·
d"d T,ujHlo.
KlJADOII-l"QUAT.UR
Lilo,.,lo Cionllfl,n, Ge"y"q"il .nd Q"l,o.
Et SALVADOR·~ALVADOR
Moouo) N"••, Y Clo. 10, A•• nido ,e,
P, SUd Sol"ndo,.
FINlAND·fINlANDE
A~,,'~om;n'o Kl,jokooppo, 2 Ko,ku,~"lu,
Hol>lnki.

W, L Sec,b",II, G."OOlU""" 25.29,
r.~lo (n'l.
(;~HCE_G~ECE

KouHm"M 80.',flop. 2S ~Iod;oo 51,,,,1,
Alh"n""
GUATEMAlA.
So';otf.,1 "ooom'co fine,,".'o. Edlrl,io
B,;'. D"po,h. 207, 6n A"nldo 1~·3J,
Zo." I, Guol.m.lo City.
HAITI
llb,01';6",. I. Co'.".Ii.... loll. po".I.
Ill.n, Po,t.oe·PiI"...
HONDURAS
Ub,.tln Pono,n,,''"o., Togudgnlpo.
HONG KONG·HONG·KONG
Th. S",loclot\ Boek Co" 25 N",I,.n Rond,
Ko"loon.
ICELAND_IsLAND.
80'''v...-zlu" S'9IU'0' I"ymo"d"ooo< H.
F., Au'lu"lr•• !1 1a, Reykj""jk.
INOlA·INDj;
O,io"l IO~9",on', CokoUa, eombay, Mo·
dro, n~d N.w D.II,1.
O'!o,,l Ruok 1\ S'~'lo"ery co., N.w
D.lhl ond Col,ullo.
1', Vo,odo<ho,," 1\ co., Mod,n"
lNDONl"SIA_1NDONESIE
Pomb."g~on", lId.. Gu"un; Soh.,;
84,

PAKISTAN

The Pok'"ton Co.opo""I\,o Book SodaI)',
00«0, Eol! Pokhton (ood 01 ChilloB""9)'
Puhli,h." Unh.d Lld" Lohor•.
Tl,o,"o, & Thomo., Ko,,,,hj, 3.
PANAMA
Jo,6 Moneodo>:, Plozo do A,nn£o, Po·
,no",~.

PARAGUAY
I\goodo do Llh,o,lo, de Soll'<ldo, NI»o,
Coli. 1"0. F,onco No. 39.. 3, A"od60.
p~~U·P~ROU

Ub,odo

Int.,on<1ooo! dol

L1",,, and A,oqu;po.
PHILIPPINES

P.,., SA,

AI.mo,', Book Slo,e, 749 Rlzal Monue,
I.\oolla.
PORTUGAL
ll"'M;a Rnd,19u"" 186 Ruo A"",,,, U.

,-

S!NGAPOR~SINGAPOUR

Tho Cllt Boal< 510'0, Lld., Wln,h.'ler
Hou,o, Colly., Qony,
spAlN·.sp-"GNE
Llb«,ln 60«h, 11 Roodo Uoi""ldod,
6n«010no.
Ub,e,ln Mundi·P,.o,o. log."o ~ •• Non.
d,id,
SWWEN·sUEOE
c. E. F,llz,,'. Kungl. Ho.Lothnod'l A.B,
F,.d'!!olno 2, Slo,~h.lm.
SWnZERlAND·5UIS5E
lib,o;,;o Poyol SA, lou,onoo, G.n'''••
Kom ~oool>o,dl, KI"hgn". 17. Ze,I,~ 1.
THAILAND·THAlLAND.
P<o'auo" MU l'd" 55 Cn.l,n",.' Rood.
Wot Tu•• B.ogkol.
TURKEV·ru~QUIE

Ub,olrle H",hollo. ol69 l'll~loi Codd.,f,
S.yoglu, h'oobul.
UNION Of SOUTH AfnlCA_
"Guily", 482, O"Onu. Ferdo""I, T.h.,na.
UNION SUP.AfRICAlNE
!RAQ_IRAX
V"n S'l>olk', Boo~,'ore (P'y.), lid.• Bo~
Mn,k.n,lo', Boobhop. noglldnd.
724, prolodo.
1.~El
UNITED AIIAB I!EfU6L1C_
Bl"""lelo'. Doob'o,e, lid" 3S Ailooby
REpUBUQUE AIIABE UNIE
Rood. TnI-Avi.,
Lib,oi". "10 Ranu;"nn<. d'.9ypl,". '"
!TALY.1TALl~
Sh. Adly Po,h., e"t,o.
IIb.. rI~ C.mml"looo,l" S"n,ooi, Vlo
lib,oitlo Uolv.".Uo, Do,"."
Gi"o Coppool 26. FI,on.o.
Ut,m~D KINGDOM_ROYAUMo_UNI
JAPAN-JApON
H. M. S'.lIon.'Y Offl,o, P,O. Ho, 569,
Mo,",oo Cotnl"'ny, lid., 6 Ta"·NI,homo,
loo don, 5.E.I (ond ., H.M.S,a. ,oup,l.
Nlhonbo,hl, Tok10.
UNITED STAT~S Of AMERICA_
t!"SANON_lIBAN
HATS_UNIS D'AM.II1QUE
liblOi,ie Unl"e"olle, 6ey'0"".
Inte,oollon,,1 Do,um.ol. 50"ice, Colum.
tl8~RIA
bi" Un;vo"ny P,..., 2960 B<u,,""'.,",
J. Me,"ol" Komo,o, Moo""lo.
N.", '1'0'. 27, N. V.
LUXEMBOURG
URUGUAY
IIb,ol,lo 1. S,hem",.<, Le,embourg.
R"p,.,onlod6" do Edilo".I." p,.r. H.
MfXICO.MEXIQUE
P'El1o, Av. IB d. Jullo 1333, Moot.,..
odllorlol Hormo, SA, Ign",;o Mn,;',ol
vldoo.
4 L M.x«o, D.f.
IIENHUHA
NElHERLAND.·pAVS·nA5
Lib,.,lo dd E,'e, Av. MI'''od", No. 52,
N.V. Mo,tlnu' Nilholl, (nng' Voo,ho~!
<df, G"lip6a, Co,o<",.
9, '"O,n,.nhnIlO.
VIET_NAM
NEW Z~AlAND'NOUYHl~ZElANOE
p"p"',,I•.lib,old. Nouvo!l., Albe,t Por_
Unli.d Nollon, A''''''o,ion 01 Now Zeo·
t"n, So;to po"ol" 283, 50lgon.
lond, C,P.O. 1011. W.llinglon,
YUGOSt.o.VIA_YOUGOSlA VIE
NORWJ..Y_NORVEGE
Con ko'I..,n Zolozbo, lIebljono, 510,."1,,.
Johnn G,uad! Tenem 10tlog, K,. A~·
Drzovoo
p,odu"",,,
Jugo,lovon,k"
Koil~n, T.,n,iie 27/11. 6.08,nd.
!lO"'III. 7.0., Ollo.
(S8 82)
I., 'ommnnd'" ef domnode, do ,.n,.19o.moot, ~moo"ol d.
pay' oit il n'.~I,le po, ""'0<0 de dopa,il";,,, pouv.nf ~I",
nol yel heen oppolnlod m.y h• .. nil., Sol•• "nd CI"'o!ollon
.,he,,"o, ~ 10 Se,flo n <I., voolo, 01 d. 10 d;,f,;~elio",
O,"onl,,,lloo
do, Notion, Un;", No'~·Yo,k (floll·Uol< d'Am'·
Sod;on, Unif.d NolloOf, N.w Yo,k, U.S."".; 0' So/., S",lIon,
';quo!. o~ & 10 S..li"o dq, .oM.,. O,~o";<oI;on d~, Notion,
Unl .. d 1'10110", OUl<e, Polnl, <I.. Nolion" Gonovo, Swilzer!ond.
Un;«, 1'0101, d .. Nnl;oo,. Go,,~.. (Sui".!.

PrInted in France

Pi~k"r'o.

IRAN

Price: $U.S. 0.15; 1/· stg.; Sw. fr. 0.50
(or eqUivalent in other currenCies)

18124-Novernher 1958-1,800
