A/60/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixtieth session
Volume III

24 December 2005 – 11 September 2006

General Assembly
Official Records  Sixtieth Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/60/49)

United Nations  New York, 2007

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly from 24 December 2005 to 11 September 2006. Resolutions adopted by the
Assembly from 13 September to 23 December 2005 appear in volume I. Volume II
contains the decisions adopted by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)...........................................................................................................................41
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee .................................................................... 45
IV. Decisions .......................................................................................................................................139
A. Elections and appointments.....................................................................................................141
B. Other decisions .......................................................................................................................146
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee.........................................................146

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee.............................................................152
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items............................................................................................................159
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions ..........................................................................................161

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

60/251.

Human Rights Council.............................................................................................................................................. 2

60/252.

World Summit on the Information Society ................................................................................................................. 5

60/253.

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies................................................................................................................................................. 7

60/261.

Election of seven members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission ................................... 9

60/262.

Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.......................................................................................................................... 11

60/264.

Admission of the Republic of Montenegro to membership in the United Nations........................................................ 17

60/265.

Follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the Millennium Development
Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals ................................................................................... 17

60/284.

Prevention of armed conflict.................................................................................................................................... 26

60/285.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ............................................................................................... 27

60/286.

Revitalization of the General Assembly.................................................................................................................... 27

60/287.

The Peacebuilding Fund.......................................................................................................................................... 31

60/288.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy............................................................................................ 31

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 60/251
Adopted at the 72nd plenary meeting, on 15 March 2006, by a recorded vote of 170 to 4, with 3 abstentions,* on the basis
of draft resolution A/60/L.48, submitted by the President of the General Assembly
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Belarus, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

60/251. Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations,
including developing friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, and achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 and the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action, 2 and recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,3 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights3 and other human
rights instruments,
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that all human rights must be treated in a fair and
equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming that, while the significance of national and regional particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, all States, regardless of their
political, economic and cultural systems, have the duty to promote and protect all human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Emphasizing the responsibilities of all States, in conformity with the Charter, to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any kind as to race, colour,
sex, language or religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or
other status,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
2

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Acknowledging that peace and security, development and human rights are the pillars of the
United Nations system and the foundations for collective security and well-being, and recognizing
that development, peace and security and human rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
Affirming the need for all States to continue international efforts to enhance dialogue and
broaden understanding among civilizations, cultures and religions, and emphasizing that States,
regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an
important role to play in promoting tolerance, respect for and freedom of religion and belief,
Recognizing the work undertaken by the Commission on Human Rights and the need to
preserve and build on its achievements and to redress its shortcomings,
Recognizing also the importance of ensuring universality, objectivity and non-selectivity in
the consideration of human rights issues, and the elimination of double standards and
politicization,
Recognizing further that the promotion and protection of human rights should be based on
the principles of cooperation and genuine dialogue and aimed at strengthening the capacity of
Member States to comply with their human rights obligations for the benefit of all human beings,
Acknowledging that non-governmental organizations play an important role at the national,
regional and international levels, in the promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming the commitment to strengthen the United Nations human rights machinery, with
the aim of ensuring effective enjoyment by all of all human rights, civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights, including the right to development, and to that end, the resolve to create a
Human Rights Council,
1. Decides to establish the Human Rights Council, based in Geneva, in replacement of
the Commission on Human Rights, as a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly; the Assembly
shall review the status of the Council within five years;
2. Decides also that the Council shall be responsible for promoting universal respect for
the protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any
kind and in a fair and equal manner;
3. Decides further that the Council should address situations of violations of human
rights, including gross and systematic violations, and make recommendations thereon. It should
also promote the effective coordination and the mainstreaming of human rights within the United
Nations system;
4. Decides that the work of the Council shall be guided by the principles of universality,
impartiality, objectivity and non-selectivity, constructive international dialogue and cooperation,
with a view to enhancing the promotion and protection of all human rights, civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development;
5.

Decides also that the Council shall, inter alia:

(a) Promote human rights education and learning as well as advisory services, technical
assistance and capacity-building, to be provided in consultation with and with the consent of
Member States concerned;
(b)

Serve as a forum for dialogue on thematic issues on all human rights;

(c) Make recommendations to the General Assembly for the further development of
international law in the field of human rights;
(d) Promote the full implementation of human rights obligations undertaken by States and
follow-up to the goals and commitments related to the promotion and protection of human rights
emanating from United Nations conferences and summits;
(e) Undertake a universal periodic review, based on objective and reliable information, of
the fulfilment by each State of its human rights obligations and commitments in a manner which
3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

ensures universality of coverage and equal treatment with respect to all States; the review shall be
a cooperative mechanism, based on an interactive dialogue, with the full involvement of the
country concerned and with consideration given to its capacity-building needs; such a mechanism
shall complement and not duplicate the work of treaty bodies; the Council shall develop the
modalities and necessary time allocation for the universal periodic review mechanism within one
year after the holding of its first session;
(f) Contribute, through dialogue and cooperation, towards the prevention of human rights
violations and respond promptly to human rights emergencies;
(g) Assume the role and responsibilities of the Commission on Human Rights relating to
the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as
decided by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993;
(h) Work in close cooperation in the field of human rights with Governments, regional
organizations, national human rights institutions and civil society;
(i)

Make recommendations with regard to the promotion and protection of human rights;

(j)

Submit an annual report to the General Assembly;

6. Decides further that the Council shall assume, review and, where necessary, improve
and rationalize all mandates, mechanisms, functions and responsibilities of the Commission on
Human Rights in order to maintain a system of special procedures, expert advice and a complaint
procedure; the Council shall complete this review within one year after the holding of its first
session;
7. Decides that the Council shall consist of forty-seven Member States, which shall be
elected directly and individually by secret ballot by the majority of the members of the General
Assembly; the membership shall be based on equitable geographical distribution, and seats shall
be distributed as follows among regional groups: Group of African States, thirteen; Group of
Asian States, thirteen; Group of Eastern European States, six; Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, eight; and Group of Western European and other States, seven; the members of
the Council shall serve for a period of three years and shall not be eligible for immediate reelection after two consecutive terms;
8. Decides also that the membership in the Council shall be open to all States Members
of the United Nations; when electing members of the Council, Member States shall take into
account the contribution of candidates to the promotion and protection of human rights and their
voluntary pledges and commitments made thereto; the General Assembly, by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting, may suspend the rights of membership in the Council
of a member of the Council that commits gross and systematic violations of human rights;
9. Decides further that members elected to the Council shall uphold the highest standards
in the promotion and protection of human rights, shall fully cooperate with the Council and be
reviewed under the universal periodic review mechanism during their term of membership;
10. Decides that the Council shall meet regularly throughout the year and schedule no
fewer than three sessions per year, including a main session, for a total duration of no less than ten
weeks, and shall be able to hold special sessions, when needed, at the request of a member of the
Council with the support of one third of the membership of the Council;
11. Decides also that the Council shall apply the rules of procedure established for
committees of the General Assembly, as applicable, unless subsequently otherwise decided by the
Assembly or the Council, and also decides that the participation of and consultation with
observers, including States that are not members of the Council, the specialized agencies, other
intergovernmental organizations and national human rights institutions, as well as nongovernmental organizations, shall be based on arrangements, including Economic and Social
Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996 and practices observed by the Commission on Human
Rights, while ensuring the most effective contribution of these entities;
4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Decides further that the methods of work of the Council shall be transparent, fair and
impartial and shall enable genuine dialogue, be results-oriented, allow for subsequent follow-up
discussions to recommendations and their implementation and also allow for substantive
interaction with special procedures and mechanisms;
13. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council request the Commission on
Human Rights to conclude its work at its sixty-second session, and that it abolish the Commission
on 16 June 2006;
14. Decides to elect the new members of the Council; the terms of membership shall be
staggered, and such decision shall be taken for the first election by the drawing of lots, taking into
consideration equitable geographical distribution;
15. Decides also that elections of the first members of the Council shall take place on
9 May 2006, and that the first meeting of the Council shall be convened on 19 June 2006;
16. Decides further that the Council shall review its work and functioning five years after
its establishment and report to the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 60/252
Adopted at the 74th plenary meeting, on 27 March 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.50 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Belarus, Canada, China, Norway, South Africa (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77), Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey

60/252. World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/183 of 21 December 2001, 57/238 of 20 December 2002,
57/270 B of 23 June 2003 and 59/220 of 22 December 2004,
Recalling also the Declaration of Principles and the Plan of Action adopted by the World
Summit on the Information Society at its first phase, held in Geneva from 10 to 12 December
2003,4 as endorsed by the General Assembly,5
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,6
Recognizing that the implementation and follow-up of the World Summit should be an
integral part of the integrated follow-up of the major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields and should contribute to the achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
should not require the creation of any new operational bodies,
Acknowledging the urgent need to bridge the digital divide and to assist developing
countries, including least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States, and countries with economies in transition to benefit fully from the potential of
information and communication technologies,
Reaffirming the potential of information and communication technologies as powerful tools
to foster socio-economic development and contribute to the realization of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,

_______________
4

See A/C.2/59/3, annex.
See resolution 59/220.
6
See resolution 60/1.
5

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing the importance of the contribution of the Summit to the building of a peoplecentred, inclusive and development-oriented information society so as to enhance digital
opportunities for all people in order to help to bridge the digital divide,
Acknowledging with appreciation the role played by the International Telecommunication
Union in the organization of the two phases of the Summit,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Government of Tunisia for having hosted the second
phase of the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis from 16 to 18 November 2005;
2. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication Union on the second phase of the
Summit;7
3. Endorses the Tunis Commitment and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society
adopted by the Summit at its second phase;7
4. Welcomes the contribution of Member States, relevant United Nations bodies and
other intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations, civil society and the
private sector to the success of the Tunis phase of the Summit;
5. Also welcomes the strong development orientation of the outcomes of both the Geneva
and the Tunis phases of the Summit, and urges their full implementation;
6. Further welcomes progress achieved by the Summit towards a multi-stakeholder
approach in building a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented information society,
and acknowledges that Governments could play an important role in that process;
7. Welcomes the Digital Solidarity Fund, established in Geneva as an innovative financial
mechanism of a voluntary nature, open to interested stakeholders, with the objective of
transforming the digital divide into digital opportunities for the developing world by focusing
mainly on specific and urgent needs at the local level and seeking new voluntary sources of
“solidarity” financing;
8. Reiterates that the process towards enhanced cooperation to be started by the
Secretary-General will involve all relevant organizations and all stakeholders in their respective
roles, as mentioned in paragraph 71 of the Tunis Agenda;
9. Invites the Secretary-General, in an open and inclusive process, to convene a new
forum for multi-stakeholder policy dialogue called the Internet Governance Forum, in accordance
with the decisions made at the Tunis phase of the Summit;
10. Welcomes the importance attached by the Summit, as reflected in the Tunis Agenda, to
multi-stakeholder implementation at the international level, which should be organized taking into
account the themes and action lines in the Geneva Plan of Action4 and moderated or facilitated by
United Nations agencies, where appropriate;
11. Urges Member States, relevant United Nations bodies and other intergovernmental
organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations, civil society and the private sector, to
contribute actively, inter alia by initiating actions, where appropriate, to the implementation and
follow-up of the outcomes of the Geneva and Tunis phases of the Summit;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council to oversee the system-wide follow-up of
the Geneva and Tunis outcomes of the Summit, and to that end requests the Council, at its
substantive session of 2006, to review the mandate, agenda and composition of the Commission
on Science and Technology for Development, including considering strengthening the
Commission, taking into account the multi-stakeholder approach;

_______________
7

6

See A/60/687.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. Decides to proclaim 17 May annual World Information Society Day to help to raise
awareness of the possibilities that the use of the Internet and other information and communication
technologies can bring to societies and economies, as well as of ways to bridge the digital divide;
14. Also decides to conduct an overall review of the implementation of the Summit
outcomes in 2015;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly through the
Economic and Social Council, by June 2006, a report on the modalities of the inter-agency
coordination of the implementation of the Summit outcomes, including recommendations on the
follow-up process, for consideration at the substantive session of the Council.
RESOLUTION 60/253
Adopted at the 78th plenary meeting, on 2 May 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.53 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Comoros, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia

60/253. Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote
and consolidate new or restored democracies
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights8 and the foundations of any democratic society,
Recognizing that human rights, the rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and that they belong to the universal and indivisible core values and principles of the
United Nations,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads of State and
Government on 8 September 2000,9 in particular paragraphs 6 and 24 thereof, and the 2005 World
Summit Outcome,10
Recalling also its resolutions 49/30 of 7 December 1994, 50/133 of 20 December 1995,
51/31 of 6 December 1996, 52/18 of 21 November 1997, 53/31 of 23 November 1998, 54/36 of
29 November 1999, 55/43 of 27 November 2000, 56/96 of 14 December 2001, 56/269 of
27 March 2002, 58/13 of 17 November 2003 and 58/281 of 9 February 2004,
Recalling further the declarations and plans of action of the five international conferences of
new or restored democracies adopted in Manila in 1988, Managua in 1994, Bucharest in 1997,
Cotonou in 2000 and Ulaanbaatar in 2003,
Recalling that the Fifth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies, which
was held in Ulaanbaatar from 10 to 12 September 2003, focused on democracy, good governance
and civil society,

_______________
8

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 55/2.
10
See resolution 60/1.
9

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the results of the Parliamentarians’ Forum convened by the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the Parliament of Mongolia on the occasion of the Fifth International Conference, and
noting the follow-up work conducted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the field of enhancing
parliamentary democracy,
Stressing that democracy, development and respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed will of people
to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation
in all aspects of their lives,
Reaffirming also that while democracies share common features, there is no single model of
democracy and that it does not belong to any country or region, and reaffirming further the
necessity of due respect for sovereignty and the right to self-determination,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene and the aspirations of
all peoples for an international order based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including the promotion and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
and other important principles, such as respect for the equal rights and self-determination of
peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality, the rule of law, pluralism, development, better
standards of living and solidarity,
Bearing in mind that the activities of the United Nations carried out in support of
Governments to promote and consolidate democracy are undertaken in accordance with the
Charter and only at the specific request of the Member States concerned,
Taking note with satisfaction of the seminars, workshops and conferences on
democratization and good governance convened in 2004 and 2005, including those held under the
auspices of the International Conference of New or Restored Democracies,
Taking note of the views expressed by Member States in the debate on this question from the
fifty-eighth to the sixtieth session,
Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken significant efforts to
achieve their social, political and economic goals through democratization, good governance
practices and the reform of their economies, pursuits that are deserving of the support and
recognition of the international community,
Noting with satisfaction that the Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies will be held in Doha from 30 October to 1 November 2006,
Stressing the importance of support by Member States, the United Nations system, the
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations for the holding of the Sixth
International Conference,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,11
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,11 and invites
Member States to consider the proposals contained therein;
2. Invites Member States, the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, other
intergovernmental organizations, national parliaments, including in collaboration with the InterParliamentary Union and other parliamentary organizations, and non-governmental organizations
to contribute actively to the follow-up to the Fifth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies and to make additional efforts to identify possible steps in support of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies, including through those

_______________
11

8

A/60/556.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

steps set out in the Ulaanbaatar Declaration and Plan of Action: Democracy, Good Governance
and Civil Society,12 and to inform the Secretary-General of the actions taken;
3. Recognizes that the United Nations has an important role to play in providing timely,
appropriate and coherent support to the efforts of Governments to achieve democratization and
good governance within the context of their development efforts;
4. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the capacity of the
Organization to respond effectively to the requests of Member States by providing coherent and
adequate support for their efforts to achieve the goals of good governance and democratization,
including through the activities of the Democracy Fund at the United Nations;
5. Stresses that the activities of the Organization must be undertaken in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
6. Commends the Secretary-General, and through him the United Nations system, for the
activities undertaken at the request of Governments to support efforts to consolidate democracy
and good governance, and requests him to continue those activities;
7. Welcomes the work carried out by the follow-up mechanism of the Fifth International
Conference and the efforts of the Chair of the Conference to make the Conference and the followup thereto more effective and efficient;
8. Also welcomes the comprehensive tripartite character (governments, parliaments, civil
society) of the Sixth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies, which will allow
for greater interaction and cooperation in the common effort of promoting democracy;
9. Encourages the Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue to promote the contribution by
parliaments worldwide to democracy, including through the process of the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies and the upcoming Parliamentarians’ Forum in
Doha;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to examine options for strengthening the support
provided by the United Nations system for the efforts of Member States to consolidate democracy
and good governance, including the provision of support to the President of the Fifth International
Conference in his efforts to make the Conference and the follow-up thereto more effective and
efficient;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, including the information
requested in paragraph 2 above;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session the item
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies”.
RESOLUTION 60/261
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.52, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

60/261. Election of seven members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645 (2005), both of
20 December 2005, in which the Assembly and the Council concurrently operationalized the

_______________
12

A/58/387, annexes I and II.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

decision by the 2005 World Summit 13 to establish the Peacebuilding Commission as an
intergovernmental advisory body,
Recalling in particular paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) and 5 of the above-mentioned resolutions
setting out the arrangements for the composition of the Organizational Committee of the
Commission,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with paragraph 4 (e) of the above-mentioned
resolutions, seven additional members of the Organizational Committee shall be elected according
to rules and procedures decided by the General Assembly,
Emphasizing that, in electing members of the Organizational Committee, the General
Assembly should give due consideration to representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee and to representation from countries that have experienced postconflict recovery,
Emphasizing also that Member States from all regional groups should have the possibility of
presenting candidatures for election in the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 4 (e)
of the above-mentioned resolutions,
1. Notes that the elections and/or selections that have taken place, in accordance with the
provisions of paragraphs 4 (a) to (d) of General Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005), have resulted in the following distribution of seats for this year among the
five regional groups in the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission:
(a)

Five members from African States;

(b)

Seven members from Asian States;

(c)

Two members from Eastern European States;

(d)

One member from Latin American and Caribbean States;

(e)

Nine members from Western European and other States;

2. Decides that the seven seats for election by the General Assembly for membership in
the Organizational Committee for this year shall be distributed among the five regional groups as
follows:
(a)

Two seats for African States;

(b)

One seat for Asian States;

(c)

One seat for Eastern European States;

(d)

Three seats for Latin American and Caribbean States;

(e)

No seats for Western European and other States;

3. Also decides that the rules of procedure and established practice of the General
Assembly for the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply to its election of
members of the Organizational Committee;
4. Reiterates that the members of the Organizational Committee shall serve for
renewable terms of two years, as applicable, beginning on the day of the first meeting of the
Committee;
5. Calls upon Member States to give due consideration to representation from countries
that have experienced post-conflict recovery when electing members of the Organizational
Committee in the General Assembly;

_______________
13

See resolution 60/1.

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Decides that the term of membership shall be staggered, and that two members from
different regional groups, to be drawn by lots in the first election, shall serve for an initial period of
one year;
7. Also decides that each of the five regional groups shall have no less than three seats in
the overall composition of the Organizational Committee;
8. Further decides that the elections to be held by the General Assembly this year will set
no precedent for future elections and that the distribution of seats as set out in paragraph 2 above
will be reviewed annually, on the basis of changes in the membership in other categories
established in paragraphs 4 (a) to (d) of the above-mentioned resolutions, in order to give due
consideration to representation of all regional groups in the overall composition of the
Organizational Committee.
RESOLUTION 60/262
Adopted at the 87th plenary meeting, on 2 June 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.57, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

60/262. Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS
The General Assembly
Adopts the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS annexed to the present resolution.
Annex
Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS
1. We, Heads of State and Government and representatives of States and Governments
participating in the comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the targets set out
in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,14 held on 31 May and 1 June 2006, and the
High-Level Meeting, held on 2 June 2006;
2. Note with alarm that we are facing an unprecedented human catastrophe; that a quarter of a
century into the pandemic, AIDS has inflicted immense suffering on countries and communities
throughout the world; and that more than 65 million people have been infected with HIV, more
than 25 million people have died of AIDS, 15 million children have been orphaned by AIDS and
millions more made vulnerable, and 40 million people are currently living with HIV, more than
95 per cent of whom live in developing countries;
3. Recognize that HIV/AIDS constitutes a global emergency and poses one of the most
formidable challenges to the development, progress and stability of our respective societies and
the world at large, and requires an exceptional and comprehensive global response;
4. Acknowledge that national and international efforts have resulted in important progress
since 2001 in the areas of funding, expanding access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support and in mitigating the impact of AIDS, and in reducing HIV prevalence in a small but
growing number of countries, and also acknowledge that many targets contained in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS have not yet been met;
5. Commend the Secretariat and the Co-sponsors of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS for their leadership role on HIV/AIDS policy and coordination, and for the support
they provide to countries through the Joint Programme;

_______________
14

Resolution S-26/2, annex.

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Recognize the contribution of, and the role played by, various donors in combating
HIV/AIDS, as well as the fact that one third of resources spent on HIV/AIDS responses in 2005
came from the domestic sources of low- and middle-income countries, and therefore emphasize
the importance of enhanced international cooperation and partnership in our responses to
HIV/AIDS worldwide;
7. Remain deeply concerned, however, by the overall expansion and feminization of the
pandemic and the fact that women now represent 50 per cent of people living with HIV
worldwide and nearly 60 per cent of people living with HIV in Africa, and in this regard recognize
that gender inequalities and all forms of violence against women and girls increase their
vulnerability to HIV/AIDS;
8. Express grave concern that half of all new HIV infections occur among children and young
people under the age of 25, and that there is a lack of information, skills and knowledge regarding
HIV/AIDS among young people;
9. Remain gravely concerned that 2.3 million children are living with HIV/AIDS today, and
recognize that the lack of paediatric drugs in many countries significantly hinders efforts to protect
the health of children;
10. Reiterate with profound concern that the pandemic affects every region, that Africa, in
particular sub-Saharan Africa, remains the worst-affected region, and that urgent and exceptional
action is required at all levels to curb the devastating effects of this pandemic, and recognize the
renewed commitment by African Governments and regional institutions to scale up their own
HIV/AIDS responses;
11. Reaffirm that the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all is an
essential element in the global response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic, including in the areas of
prevention, treatment, care and support, and recognize that addressing stigma and discrimination
is also a critical element in combating the global HIV/AIDS pandemic;
12. Reaffirm also that access to medication in the context of pandemics, such as HIV/AIDS, is
one of the fundamental elements to achieve progressively the full realization of the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health;
13. Recognize that in many parts of the world, the spread of HIV/AIDS is a cause and
consequence of poverty, and that effectively combating HIV/AIDS is essential to the achievement
of internationally agreed development goals and objectives, including the Millennium
Development Goals;
14. Recognize also that we now have the means to reverse the global pandemic and to avert
millions of needless deaths, and that to be effective, we must deliver an intensified, much more
urgent and comprehensive response, in partnership with the United Nations system,
intergovernmental organizations, people living with HIV and vulnerable groups, medical,
scientific and educational institutions, non-governmental organizations, the business sector,
including generic and research-based pharmaceutical companies, trade unions, the media,
parliamentarians, foundations, community organizations, faith-based organizations and traditional
leaders;
15. Recognize further that to mount a comprehensive response, we must overcome any legal,
regulatory, trade and other barriers that block access to prevention, treatment, care and support;
commit adequate resources; promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all; promote gender equality and empowerment of women; promote and protect the rights of the
girl child in order to reduce the vulnerability of the girl child to HIV/AIDS; strengthen health
systems and support health workers; support greater involvement of people living with HIV; scale
up the use of known effective and comprehensive prevention interventions; do everything
necessary to ensure access to life-saving drugs and prevention tools; and develop with equal
urgency better tools – drugs, diagnostics and prevention technologies, including vaccines and
microbicides – for the future;
12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Convinced that without renewed political will, strong leadership and sustained commitment
and concerted efforts on the part of all stakeholders at all levels, including people living with HIV,
civil society and vulnerable groups, and without increased resources, the world will not succeed in
bringing about the end of the pandemic;
17. Solemnly declare our commitment to address the HIV/AIDS crisis by taking action as
follows, taking into account the diverse situations and circumstances in different regions and
countries throughout the world;
Therefore, we:
18. Reaffirm our commitment to implement fully the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, entitled “Global Crisis – Global Action”, adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth special session, in 2001; and to achieve the internationally agreed development goals
and objectives, including the Millennium Development Goals, in particular the goal to halt and
begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria and other major diseases, the agreements
dealing with HIV/AIDS reached at all major United Nations conferences and summits, including
the 2005 World Summit and its statement on treatment, and the goal of achieving universal access
to reproductive health by 2015, as set out at the International Conference on Population and
Development;
19. Recognize the importance, and encourage the implementation, of the recommendations of
the inclusive, country-driven processes and regional consultations facilitated by the Secretariat and
the Co-sponsors of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS for scaling up HIV
prevention, treatment, care and support, and strongly recommend that this approach be continued;
20. Commit ourselves to pursuing all necessary efforts to scale up nationally driven, sustainable
and comprehensive responses to achieve broad multisectoral coverage for prevention, treatment,
care and support, with full and active participation of people living with HIV, vulnerable groups,
most affected communities, civil society and the private sector, towards the goal of universal
access to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by 2010;
21. Emphasize the need to strengthen policy and programme linkages and coordination between
HIV/AIDS, sexual and reproductive health, national development plans and strategies, including
poverty eradication strategies, and to address, where appropriate, the impact of HIV/AIDS on
national development plans and strategies;
22. Reaffirm that the prevention of HIV infection must be the mainstay of national, regional and
international responses to the pandemic, and therefore commit ourselves to intensifying efforts to
ensure that a wide range of prevention programmes that take account of local circumstances,
ethics and cultural values is available in all countries, particularly the most affected countries,
including information, education and communication, in languages most understood by
communities and respectful of cultures, aimed at reducing risk-taking behaviours and encouraging
responsible sexual behaviour, including abstinence and fidelity; expanded access to essential
commodities, including male and female condoms and sterile injecting equipment; harmreduction efforts related to drug use; expanded access to voluntary and confidential counselling
and testing; safe blood supplies; and early and effective treatment of sexually transmitted
infections;
23. Reaffirm also that prevention, treatment, care and support for those infected and affected by
HIV/AIDS are mutually reinforcing elements of an effective response and must be integrated in a
comprehensive approach to combat the pandemic;
24. Commit ourselves to overcoming legal, regulatory or other barriers that block access to
effective HIV prevention, treatment, care and support, medicines, commodities and services;
25. Pledge to promote, at the international, regional, national and local levels, access to
HIV/AIDS education, information, voluntary counselling and testing and related services, with
full protection of confidentiality and informed consent, and to promote a social and legal
environment that is supportive of and safe for voluntary disclosure of HIV status;
13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

26. Commit ourselves to addressing the rising rates of HIV infection among young people to
ensure an HIV-free future generation through the implementation of comprehensive, evidencebased prevention strategies, responsible sexual behaviour, including the use of condoms,
evidence- and skills-based, youth-specific HIV education, mass media interventions and the
provision of youth-friendly health services;
27. Commit ourselves also to ensuring that pregnant women have access to antenatal care,
information, counselling and other HIV services and to increasing the availability of and access to
effective treatment to women living with HIV and infants in order to reduce mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, as well as to ensuring effective interventions for women living with HIV,
including voluntary and confidential counselling and testing, with informed consent, access to
treatment, especially life-long antiretroviral therapy and, where appropriate, breast-milk
substitutes and the provision of a continuum of care;
28. Resolve to integrate food and nutritional support, with the goal that all people at all times
will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food
preferences, for an active and healthy life, as part of a comprehensive response to HIV/AIDS;
29. Commit ourselves to intensifying efforts to enact, strengthen or enforce, as appropriate,
legislation, regulations and other measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against and to
ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by people living with
HIV and members of vulnerable groups, in particular to ensure their access to, inter alia,
education, inheritance, employment, health care, social and health services, prevention, support
and treatment, information and legal protection, while respecting their privacy and confidentiality;
and developing strategies to combat stigma and social exclusion connected with the epidemic;
30. Pledge to eliminate gender inequalities, gender-based abuse and violence; increase the
capacity of women and adolescent girls to protect themselves from the risk of HIV infection,
principally through the provision of health care and services, including, inter alia, sexual and
reproductive health, and the provision of full access to comprehensive information and education;
ensure that women can exercise their right to have control over, and decide freely and responsibly
on, matters related to their sexuality in order to increase their ability to protect themselves from
HIV infection, including their sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination and
violence; and take all necessary measures to create an enabling environment for the empowerment
of women and strengthen their economic independence; and in this context, reiterate the
importance of the role of men and boys in achieving gender equality;
31. Commit ourselves to strengthening legal, policy, administrative and other measures for the
promotion and protection of women’s full enjoyment of all human rights and the reduction of their
vulnerability to HIV/AIDS through the elimination of all forms of discrimination, as well as all
types of sexual exploitation of women, girls and boys, including for commercial reasons, and all
forms of violence against women and girls, including harmful traditional and customary practices,
abuse, rape and other forms of sexual violence, battering and trafficking in women and girls;
32. Commit ourselves also to addressing as a priority the vulnerabilities faced by children
affected by and living with HIV; providing support and rehabilitation to these children and their
families, women and the elderly, particularly in their role as caregivers; promoting child-oriented
HIV/AIDS policies and programmes and increased protection for children orphaned and affected
by HIV/AIDS; ensuring access to treatment and intensifying efforts to develop new treatments for
children; and building, where needed, and supporting the social security systems that protect them;
33. Emphasize the need for accelerated scale-up of collaborative activities on tuberculosis and
HIV, in line with the Global Plan to Stop TB 2006–2015, and for investment in new drugs,
diagnostics and vaccines that are appropriate for people with TB-HIV co-infection;
34. Commit ourselves to expanding to the greatest extent possible, supported by international
cooperation and partnership, our capacity to deliver comprehensive HIV/AIDS programmes in
ways that strengthen existing national health and social systems, including by integrating
HIV/AIDS intervention into programmes for primary health care, mother and child health, sexual
14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and reproductive health, tuberculosis, hepatitis C, sexually transmitted infections, nutrition,
children affected, orphaned or made vulnerable by HIV/AIDS, as well as formal and informal
education;
35. Undertake to reinforce, adopt and implement, where needed, national plans and strategies,
supported by international cooperation and partnership, to increase the capacity of human
resources for health to meet the urgent need for the training and retention of a broad range of
health workers, including community-based health workers; improve training and management
and working conditions, including treatment for health workers; and effectively govern the
recruitment, retention and deployment of new and existing health workers to mount a more
effective HIV/AIDS response;
36. Commit ourselves, invite international financial institutions and the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, according to its policy framework, and encourage other donors,
to provide additional resources to low- and middle- income countries for the strengthening of
HIV/AIDS programmes and health systems and for addressing human resources gaps, including
the development of alternative and simplified service delivery models and the expansion of the
community-level provision of HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support, as well as other
health and social services;
37. Reiterate the need for Governments, United Nations agencies, regional and international
organizations and non-governmental organizations involved with the provision and delivery of
assistance to countries and regions affected by conflicts, humanitarian emergencies or natural
disasters to incorporate HIV/AIDS prevention, care and treatment elements into their plans and
programmes;
38. Pledge to provide the highest level of commitment to ensuring that costed, inclusive,
sustainable, credible and evidence-based national HIV/AIDS plans are funded and implemented
with transparency, accountability and effectiveness, in line with national priorities;
39. Commit ourselves to reducing the global HIV/AIDS resource gap through greater domestic
and international funding to enable countries to have access to predictable and sustainable
financial resources and ensuring that international funding is aligned with national HIV/AIDS
plans and strategies; and in this regard welcome the increased resources that are being made
available through bilateral and multilateral initiatives, as well as those that will become available
as a result of the establishment of timetables by many developed countries to achieve the targets of
0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance by 2015 and to reach at
least 0.5 per cent of gross national product for official development assistance by 2010 as well as,
pursuant to the Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2001–2010,15 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent for the least developed countries no later than 2010,
and urge those developed countries that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts in this
regard in accordance with their commitments;
40. Recognize that the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS has estimated that 20 to
23 billion United States dollars per annum is needed by 2010 to support rapidly scaled-up AIDS
responses in low- and middle-income countries, and therefore commit ourselves to taking
measures to ensure that new and additional resources are made available from donor countries and
also from national budgets and other national sources;
41. Commit ourselves to supporting and strengthening existing financial mechanisms, including
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as well as relevant United Nations
organizations, through the provision of funds in a sustained manner, while continuing to develop
innovative sources of financing, as well as pursuing other efforts, aimed at generating additional
funds;

_______________
15

A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

42. Commit ourselves also to finding appropriate solutions to overcome barriers in pricing, tariffs
and trade agreements, and to making improvements to legislation, regulatory policy, procurement
and supply chain management in order to accelerate and intensify access to affordable and quality
HIV/AIDS prevention products, diagnostics, medicines and treatment commodities;
43. Reaffirm that the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights16 does not and should not prevent members from taking measures
now and in the future to protect public health. Accordingly, while reiterating our commitment to
the TRIPS Agreement, reaffirm that the Agreement can and should be interpreted and
implemented in a manner supportive of the right to protect public health and, in particular, to
promote access to medicines for all including the production of generic antiretroviral drugs and
other essential drugs for AIDS-related infections. In this connection, we reaffirm the right to use,
to the full, the provisions in the TRIPS Agreement, the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health17 and the World Trade Organization’s General Council decision of
200318 and amendments to Article 31, which provide flexibilities for this purpose;
44. Resolve to assist developing countries to enable them to employ the flexibilities outlined in
the TRIPS Agreement, and to strengthen their capacities for this purpose;
45. Commit ourselves to intensifying investment in and efforts towards the research and
development of new, safe and affordable HIV/AIDS-related medicines, products and technologies,
such as vaccines, female-controlled methods and microbicides, paediatric antiretroviral formulations,
including through such mechanisms as Advance Market Commitments, and to encouraging
increased investment in HIV/AIDS-related research and development in traditional medicine;
46. Encourage pharmaceutical companies, donors, multilateral organizations and other partners
to develop public-private partnerships in support of research and development and technology
transfer, and in the comprehensive response to HIV/AIDS;
47. Encourage bilateral, regional and international efforts to promote bulk procurement, price
negotiations and licensing to lower prices for HIV prevention products, diagnostics, medicines
and treatment commodities, while recognizing that intellectual property protection is important for
the development of new medicines and recognizing the concerns about its effects on prices;
48. Recognize the initiative by a group of countries, such as the International Drug Purchase
Facility, based on innovative financing mechanisms that aim to provide further drug access at
affordable prices to developing countries on a sustainable and predictable basis;
49. Commit ourselves to setting, in 2006, through inclusive, transparent processes, ambitious
national targets, including interim targets for 2008 in accordance with the core indicators
recommended by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, that reflect the
commitment of the present Declaration and the urgent need to scale up significantly towards the
goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by
2010, and to setting up and maintaining sound and rigorous monitoring and evaluation
frameworks within their HIV/AIDS strategies;
50. Call upon the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, including its Co-sponsors, to
assist national efforts to coordinate the AIDS response, as elaborated in the “Three Ones”
principles and in line with the recommendations of the Global Task Team on Improving AIDS
Coordination among Multilateral Institutions and International Donors; assist national and
regional efforts to monitor and report on efforts to achieve the targets set out above; and strengthen
global coordination on HIV/AIDS, including through the thematic sessions of the Programme
Coordinating Board;

_______________
16
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at
Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994–7).
17
See World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
18
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/540 and Corr.1. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

51. Call upon Governments, national parliaments, donors, regional and subregional
organizations, organizations of the United Nations system, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, civil society, people living with HIV, vulnerable groups, the private
sector, communities most affected by HIV/AIDS and other stakeholders to work closely together
to achieve the targets set out above, and to ensure accountability and transparency at all levels
through participatory reviews of responses to HIV/AIDS;
52. Request the Secretary-General of the United Nations, with the support of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, to include in his annual report to the General Assembly on the
status of implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution S-26/2 of 27 June 2001, the progress achieved in realizing the
commitments set out in the present Declaration;
53. Decide to undertake comprehensive reviews in 2008 and 2011, within the annual reviews of
the General Assembly, of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, entitled “Global Crisis – Global Action”, adopted by the General Assembly at its
twenty-sixth special session, and the present Declaration.
RESOLUTION 60/264
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 28 June 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.58 and Add.1,
sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Serbia,19 Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

60/264. Admission of the Republic of Montenegro to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security Council of 22 June 2006 that the
Republic of Montenegro should be admitted to membership in the United Nations,20
Having considered the application for membership of the Republic of Montenegro,21
Decides to admit the Republic of Montenegro to membership in the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 60/265
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.59, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

_______________
19

On 3 June 2006, following the declaration of independence adopted by the National Assembly of Montenegro, the
State union of Serbia and Montenegro ceased to exist. Also on 3 June 2006, the Secretary-General received a letter
informing him that the membership of Serbia and Montenegro in the United Nations would be continued by the
Republic of Serbia.
20
A/60/902.
21
A/60/890-S/2006/409, annex.

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60/265. Follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the
Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development
goals
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,22
Recalling also the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields, including the development goals and objectives contained
therein, and recognizing the vital role played by these conferences and summits in shaping a broad
development vision and in identifying commonly agreed objectives, which have contributed to
improving human life in different parts of the world,
Recalling further its resolutions 50/227 of 24 May 1996 and 57/270 B of 23 June 2003,
Recalling all relevant General Assembly resolutions, in particular those that have built upon
the 2005 World Summit Outcome, in the economic, social and related fields, adopted during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly,
Recognizing that the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, offer a framework for planning, reviewing and assessing the activities of the
United Nations for development,
Reaffirming that development is a central goal by itself and that sustainable development in
its economic, social and environmental aspects constitutes a key element of the overarching
framework of United Nations activities,
Emphasizing the need to fully implement the global partnership for development and
enhance the momentum generated by the 2005 World Summit in order to operationalize and
implement, at all levels, the commitments in the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits, including the 2005 World Summit, in the economic, social and related
fields,
Recognizing the action already under way by all Member States, the United Nations system
and other international, regional and national forums and organizations and the progress made to
implement the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals,
Recognizing also that the achievement of many of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, in many countries is currently off track, and
emphasizing that vigorous implementation of all development commitments will be needed
without delay if the Goals are to be achieved,
Remaining concerned that Africa is the only continent currently not on track to achieve any
of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration 23 by 2015, and in this regard
emphasizing that concerted efforts and continued support are required to fulfil the commitments to
address the special needs of Africa,
Also remaining concerned by the lack of and/or uneven progress made by least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States in achieving the
internationally agreed development goals including the Millennium Development Goals, and in
this regard reiterating the importance of strengthening global partnership in the follow-up to and
implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2001–2010,24 the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of

_______________
22

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 55/2.
24
A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
23

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport
Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries25 and the Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States,26
Reaffirming the commitment to sound policies, good governance at all levels and the rule of
law, to mobilizing domestic resources, attracting international flows, promoting international trade
as an engine for development and increasing international financial and technical cooperation for
development, sustainable debt financing and external debt relief and to enhancing the coherence
and consistency of the international monetary, financial and trading systems,
Reaffirming also that each country must take primary responsibility for its own development
and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized in the
achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing that national efforts should be
complemented by supportive global programmes, measures and policies aimed at expanding the
development opportunities of developing countries, while taking into account national conditions
and ensuring respect for national ownership, strategies and sovereignty,
Reaffirming further the commitments to the global partnership for development set out in
the Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey Consensus 27 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation,28
1. Calls for concerted efforts by all to ensure the timely and full realization of the
development goals and objectives agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits,
including the Millennium Development Goals, which have helped to galvanize efforts towards
poverty eradication;
2. Calls upon all Member States and the United Nations system, and invites international
organizations and institutions, including the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade
Organization, to translate all commitments made at the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including the 2005 World Summit, in the economic, social and related fields into
concrete and specific actions in order to, inter alia, achieve the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and calls for the efficient use of monitoring
and follow-up mechanisms to ensure that these commitments and actions are effectively
implemented;
3. Stresses the need for the United Nations to play a fundamental role in the promotion of
international cooperation for development and the coherence, coordination and implementation of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
actions agreed upon by the international community, and resolves to strengthen coordination
within the United Nations system in close cooperation with all other multilateral financial, trade
and development institutions in order to support sustained economic growth, poverty and hunger
eradication and sustainable development;

_______________
25
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor
Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty,
Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
26
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
27
Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development (Report of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex).
28
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Report of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex).

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Emphasizes that the United Nations system has an important responsibility to assist
Governments to stay fully engaged in the follow-up to and implementation of agreements and
commitments reached at the major United Nations conferences and summits, including the 2005
World Summit, and invites its intergovernmental bodies to further promote the implementation of
the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits;
5. Also emphasizes the need to fully implement the global partnership for development
and enhance the momentum generated by the 2005 World Summit in order to operationalize and
implement, at all levels, the commitments in the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits, including the 2005 World Summit, in the economic, social and related
fields, decides to strengthen the existing mechanisms and, as appropriate and where needed, to
consider establishing effective mechanisms to monitor, review and follow up the implementation
of the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences and summits in the social, economic
and related fields, and stresses that all countries should promote policies coherent and consistent
with the commitments of the major United Nations conferences and summits, including those
systemic in nature;
6. Welcomes the efforts by developing countries to adopt and implement national
development strategies to achieve their national development priorities as well as the
internationally agreed development goals and objectives, including the Millennium Development
Goals, calls upon those countries that have not yet done so to adopt such strategies by 2006, and in
this regard calls upon developed countries and the international community to support these
efforts as set out in the 2005 World Summit Outcome,22 including through increased resources;
7. Calls upon all countries to promote good governance, which is essential for
sustainable development, and reaffirms that sound economic policies, solid democratic institutions
responsive to the needs of the people and improved infrastructure are the basis for sustained
economic growth, poverty eradication and employment creation and that freedom, peace and
security, domestic stability, respect for human rights, including the right to development, the rule
of law, gender equality and market-oriented policies and an overall commitment to just and
democratic societies, are also essential and mutually reinforcing;
8. Resolves to pursue good governance and sound macroeconomic policies at all levels
and to support developing countries in their efforts to put in place the policies and investments to
drive sustained economic growth, promote small and medium-sized enterprises and employment
generation and stimulate the private sector;
9. Reaffirms that good governance at the international level is fundamental for achieving
sustainable development, that, in order to ensure a dynamic and enabling international economic
environment, it is important to promote global economic governance through addressing the
international finance, trade, technology and investment patterns that have an impact on the
development prospects of developing countries, and that, to that end, the international community
should take all necessary and appropriate measures, including ensuring support for structural and
macroeconomic reform, a comprehensive solution to the external debt problem and increasing the
market access of developing countries;
10. Urges countries that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying and implementing
the United Nations Convention against Corruption,29 and calls for the implementation of actions
to make the fight against corruption a priority at all levels;
11. Calls for the effective management of public finances in all countries to achieve and
maintain macroeconomic stability and long-term growth, as well as the effective and transparent
use of public funds;

_______________
29

Resolution 58/4, annex.

20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Reiterates that the increasing interdependence of national economies in a globalizing
world and the emergence of rule-based regimes for international economic relations have meant
that the space for national economic policy, that is, the scope for domestic policies, especially in
the areas of trade, investment and industrial development, is now often framed by international
disciplines, commitments and global market considerations, that it is for each Government to
evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international rules and commitments and
the constraints posed by the loss of policy space and that it is particularly important for developing
countries, bearing in mind development goals and objectives, that all countries take into account
the need for appropriate balance between national policy space and international disciplines and
commitments;
13. Resolves to encourage greater direct investment, including foreign investment, in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition to support their development
activities and to enhance the benefits they can derive from such investments, including, in this
regard:
(a) Continuing to support efforts by developing countries and countries with economies in
transition to create a domestic environment conducive to attracting investments through, inter alia,
achieving a transparent, stable and predictable investment climate with proper contract
enforcement and respect for property rights and the rule of law and pursuing appropriate policy
and regulatory frameworks that encourage business formation;
(b) Putting into place policies to ensure adequate investment in a sustainable manner in
health, clean water and sanitation, housing and education and in the provision of public goods and
social safety nets to protect vulnerable and disadvantaged sectors of society;
(c) Inviting national Governments seeking to develop infrastructure projects and generate
foreign direct investment to pursue strategies with the involvement of both the public and private
sectors and, where appropriate, international donors;
(d) Calling upon international financial and banking institutions to consider enhancing the
transparency of risk rating mechanisms; sovereign risk assessments, made by the private sector,
should maximize the use of strict, objective and transparent parameters, which can be facilitated
by high-quality data and analysis;
(e) Underscoring the need to sustain sufficient and stable private financial flows to
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, that it is important to promote
measures in source and destination countries to improve transparency and the information about
financial flows to developing countries, particularly countries in Africa, the least developed
countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing countries, and that measures
that mitigate the impact of excessive volatility of short-term capital flows are important and must
be considered;
14. Acknowledges recent increases and commitments to substantial increases in official
development assistance, while recognizing that a substantial increase in such assistance is required
to achieve the internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, within
the respective time frames, and in this regard stresses the importance of the fulfilment of those
commitments;
15. Welcomes the increased resources that are becoming available as a result of the
establishment of timetables by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of
gross national product for official development assistance, as well as the target of 0.15 per cent to
0.20 per cent for least developed countries, and urges those developed countries that have not yet
done so to make concrete efforts in this regard in accordance with their commitments;
16. Also welcomes recent efforts and initiatives to enhance the quality of aid and to
increase its impact, including the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and calls for concrete,
effective and timely action in implementing all agreed commitments on aid effectiveness, with
clear monitoring and deadlines, including through further aligning assistance with countries’
21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

strategies, building institutional capacities, reducing transaction costs and eliminating bureaucratic
procedures, making progress on untying aid, enhancing the absorptive capacity and financial
management of recipient countries and strengthening the focus on development results;
17. Calls upon developed countries to ensure that information on their efforts to increase
the volume of official development assistance is made available to the relevant United Nations
intergovernmental bodies, including through making best use of sources such as the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development;
18. Welcomes the progress in the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, and calls for its full
and timely implementation and the provision of additional resources to ensure that the financial
capacity of the international financial institutions is not reduced;
19. Calls for the consideration of additional measures and initiatives aimed at ensuring
long-term debt sustainability through increased grant-based financing, cancellation of 100 per cent
of the official multilateral and bilateral debt of heavily indebted poor countries and, where
appropriate, and on a case-by-case basis, significant debt relief or restructuring for low- and
middle-income developing countries with an unsustainable debt burden that are not part of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, as well as the exploration of mechanisms to
comprehensively address the debt problems of those countries;
20. Calls upon Member States to address the development needs of low-income
developing countries by working in competent multilateral, regional and international forums to
help them to meet, inter alia, their financial, technical and technological requirements, in support
of national development strategies;
21. Calls for continued support for the development efforts of middle-income developing
countries, including through targeted and substantial technical assistance, and the promotion of
new partnerships and cooperation arrangements, including bilateral arrangements, as well as by
working in competent multilateral, regional and international forums, in support of national
development strategies;
22. Acknowledges the vital role the private sector can play in generating new investments,
employment and financing for development;
23. Emphasizes the importance of recognizing and addressing the specific concerns of
countries with economies in transition, including through policy advice and substantial and
targeted technical assistance, so as to help them to benefit more from globalization, with a view to
their full integration into the world economy;
24. Reaffirms the commitment to broaden and strengthen the participation of developing
countries and countries with economies in transition in international economic decision-making
and norm-setting, to that end stresses the importance of continuing efforts to reform the
international financial architecture, noting that enhancing the voice and participation of developing
countries and countries with economies in transition in the Bretton Woods institutions remains a
continuous concern, and in this regard calls for further and effective progress;
25. Requests the specialized agencies and invites the Bretton Woods institutions and the
World Trade Organization to keep the General Assembly informed about their contribution to the
implementation of the outcomes of all major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields, including the 2005 World Summit Outcome;
26. Stresses the need to identify, develop and promote innovative and additional sources of
financing for development to increase and supplement traditional sources of financing;
27. Reaffirms the commitments made in the Doha Ministerial Declaration 30 and the
decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 200431 to fulfil the

_______________
30
31

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

development dimension of the Doha Development Agenda,30 which places the needs and interests
of developing and least developed countries at the heart of the Doha work programme,30 and calls
for the successful and timely completion of the Doha round of trade negotiations with the fullest
realization of the development dimensions of the Doha work programme;
28. Calls for the implementation of commitments made in the Brussels Programme of
Action24 on the objective of duty-free and quota-free market access for all products of the least
developed countries to the markets of developed countries, as well as to the markets of developing
countries in a position to do so, and support for efforts to overcome their supply-side constraints;
29. Encourages the continued promotion of South-South cooperation, which
complements North-South cooperation as an effective contribution to development and as a
means to share best practices and provide enhanced technical cooperation, and encourages
continued international support for South-South cooperation, including regional and interregional
cooperation, through, inter alia, triangular cooperation;
30. Calls upon Member States to achieve the goal of universal access to reproductive
health by 2015, as set out at the International Conference on Population and Development,32
integrating this goal in strategies to attain the internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals, aimed at reducing maternal mortality, improving maternal
health, reducing child mortality, promoting gender equality, combating HIV/AIDS and eradicating
poverty;
31. Remains convinced that progress for women is progress for all, and reaffirms that full
and effective implementation of the goals and objectives of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action33 and the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”,34 is an
essential contribution to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and resolves to promote gender equality and eliminate pervasive
gender discrimination;
32. Calls for the full implementation of Agenda 21 35 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation,28 taking into account the Rio principles, 36 calls for the promotion of the
integration of the three components of sustainable development, economic development, social
development and environmental protection, as mutually reinforcing pillars, and to that end calls
for concrete action;
33. Reaffirms that the eradication of hunger and poverty, changing unsustainable patterns
of production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base of
economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential requirements for
sustainable development, and invites all countries to promote sustainable consumption and
production patterns, with the developed countries taking the lead and all countries benefiting from
the process, taking into account the Rio principles, including the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities as set out in principle 7 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development,36 as called for in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;

_______________
32
See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
33
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
34
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
35
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June 1992,
vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum),
resolution 1, annex II.
36
Ibid., annex I.

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

34. Emphasizes the need to meet all the commitments and obligations undertaken in the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change37 and other relevant international
agreements, including, for many countries, the Kyoto Protocol to the Convention;38
35. Reaffirms the commitment to moving forward the global discussion on long-term
cooperative action to address climate change, in accordance with the principles enshrined in the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and to that end encourages the
parties to the Convention to continue the dialogue as decided at the eleventh session of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention;39
36. Calls upon the United Nations system to continue to mainstream the special needs of
Africa in all its normative and operational activities;
37. Calls for the full, timely and effective achievement of the goals and targets of the
Brussels Programme of Action,24 the Almaty Programme of Action,25 the Barbados Programme of
Action40 and the Mauritius Strategy26 to address the special needs of least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island developing States;
38. Also calls for the promotion and facilitation of, as appropriate, access to and the
development, transfer and diffusion of technologies, including new and advanced environmentally
sound technologies and corresponding know-how, to developing countries;
39. Invites national Governments seeking to develop infrastructure projects and to
generate foreign direct investment to pursue strategies with the involvement of both the public and
private sectors and, where appropriate, international donors, and in this regard calls for support to
complement and enhance investments in infrastructure in developing countries and countries with
economies in transition consistent with national priorities and strategies;
40. Urges countries to continue to take actions to implement quick-impact initiatives;
41. Calls for action to address and promote conditions for cheaper, faster and safer
transfers of remittances in both source and recipient countries and, as appropriate, to encourage
opportunities for development-oriented investment in recipient countries by beneficiaries that are
willing and able to do so;
42. Stresses the important nexus between international migrations and development, and
looks forward to the General Assembly High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development to be held at Headquarters on 14 and 15 September 2006 as an opportunity to
discuss the multidimensional aspects of international migration and development in order to
identify appropriate ways and means to maximize their development benefits and minimize their
negative impacts;
43. Reiterates its strong support for fair globalization and its resolve to make the goals of
full and productive employment and decent work for all, including for women and young people,
a central objective of relevant national and international policies as well as national development
strategies, including poverty reduction strategies, as part of efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals;
44. Calls upon all Member States to support the implementation of Education for All
programmes and to achieve universal primary education by 2015;

_______________
37

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
FCCC/CP/1997/7/Add.1, decision 1/CP.3, annex.
39
See FCCC/CP/2005/5.
40
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States (Report of the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, Barbados,
25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1,
annex II).
38

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

45. Reiterates that the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition, particularly as they
affect children, is crucial for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and that rural
and agricultural development should be an integral part of national and international development
policies, calls for increased productive investment in rural and agricultural development to achieve
food security, in this regard calls for enhanced support for agricultural development and trade
capacity-building in the agricultural sector in developing countries, including by the international
community and the United Nations system, and encourages support for commodity development
projects, especially market-based projects, and for their preparation under the Second Account of
the Common Fund for Commodities;
46. Calls upon all countries to pursue all necessary efforts to scale up nationally driven,
sustainable and comprehensive responses to achieve broad multisectoral coverage for prevention,
treatment, care and support, with full and active participation of people living with HIV,
vulnerable groups, most affected communities, civil society and the private sector, towards the
goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by
2010;
47. Calls for active international cooperation in the control of infectious diseases, based on
the principles of mutual respect and equality, with a view to strengthening capacity-building in
public health, especially in developing countries, including through the exchange of information
and the sharing of experience, as well as research and training programmes focusing on
surveillance, prevention, control, response and care and treatment in respect of infectious diseases,
and vaccines against them;
48. Emphasizes the need to strengthen the role of the General Assembly as the highest
intergovernmental mechanism for the formulation and appraisal of policy on matters relating to
coordinated and integrated follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields;
49. Reiterates that the Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen its role
as the central mechanism for system-wide coordination and thus promote the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution 50/227;
50. Underscores the fact that the functional commissions, when mandated, should
continue to have the primary responsibility for the review and assessment of progress made in
implementing the outcomes of the United Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields;
51. Stresses that all relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
should, in accordance with their respective mandates, strengthen their focus on the
implementation of and follow-up to the outcome of the 2005 World Summit on development and
the other major United Nations conferences and summits;
52. Recalls the role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development as the
focal point within the United Nations for the integrated treatment of trade and development and
interrelated issues in the areas of finance, technology, investment and sustainable development,
and invites the Trade and Development Board to contribute, within its mandate, to the
implementation and to the review of progress made in the implementation of the outcomes of the
major United Nations conferences and summits, under its relevant agenda items;
53. Resolves to accelerate the implementation of the measures and mechanisms defined in
its resolution 57/270 B on integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields;
54. Reiterates its request to the Statistical Commission to refine and finalize indicators to
assess the implementation of commitments and the achievement of development goals at the
national, regional and international levels;
25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

55. Emphasizes the need for a substantial increase in resources for operational activities
for development on a predictable, continuous and assured basis to enable the United Nations funds
and programmes and the specialized agencies to contribute effectively to the implementation of
the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields, and reiterates the need for continuous overall improvement in the effectiveness,
efficiency, management and impact of the United Nations system in delivering its development
assistance;
56. Decides to dedicate a specific meeting focused on development, including an
assessment of progress over the previous year, at each session of the General Assembly during the
debate on the follow-up to the Millennium Declaration23 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome;
57. Invites the regional commissions, in cooperation with regional organizations and other
regional processes, as appropriate, to further contribute within their respective mandates to
implementation and reviews of outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields;
58. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to continue to include in the annual overview
report of the Chief Executives Board information on the mainstreaming, integration and
coordination of development activities at the Secretariat level;
59. Encourages and supports development frameworks initiated at the regional level, such
as the New Partnership for Africa’s Development41 and similar efforts in other regions;
60. Reiterates its resolve to enhance the contribution of non-governmental organizations,
civil society, the private sector and other stakeholders in national development efforts, as well as to
promote the global partnership for development;
61. Stresses the importance of promoting corporate responsibility and accountability;
62. Emphasizes the need for adequate and substantive preparation for the review
conference on the implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,27 as set out in General Assembly
resolution 60/188 of 22 December 2005;
63. Requests the Secretary-General to report on progress made in the implementation of
the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit in the framework of the comprehensive
report on the follow-up to the Millennium Declaration and the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
RESOLUTION 60/284
Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 7 September 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.61,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

60/284. Prevention of armed conflict
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003,
Bearing in mind its responsibilities, functions and powers under the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular with respect to matters related to the prevention of armed conflict,
Taking note of the statements made during the consideration of the agenda item entitled
“Prevention of armed conflict” at its sixtieth session,

_______________
41

A/57/304, annex.

26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the prevention of armed conflict;42

2. Decides to continue its consideration of the report of the Secretary-General and the
recommendations contained therein at its sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 60/285
Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 7 September 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/60/L.60/Rev.2, sponsored by Azerbaijan

60/285. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
The General Assembly,
Seriously concerned by the fires in the affected territories, which have inflicted widespread
environmental damage,
1. Stresses the necessity to urgently conduct an environmental operation to suppress the
fires in the affected territories and to overcome their detrimental consequences;
2. Welcomes the readiness of the parties to cooperate to that end, and considers such an
operation to be an important confidence-building measure;
3. Takes note of the intention of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to organize a mission to the region to assess the short- and long-term impact of the fires on the
environment as a step in preparation for the environmental operation;
4. Calls upon, in this regard, the organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system, in particular the United Nations Environment Programme, in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to provide all necessary assistance and
expertise, including, inter alia, the assessment of and counteraction to the short- and long-term
impact of the environmental degradation of the region, as well as in its rehabilitation;
5. Requests the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to provide a report on this matter to States members of the General Assembly by 30 April
2007.
RESOLUTION 60/286
Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2006, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly (A/60/999)

60/286. Revitalization of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the central position of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative,
policymaking and representative organ of the United Nations, as well as the role of the Assembly
in the process of standard-setting and the codification of international law,
Reaffirming also the authority of the General Assembly and the strengthening of its role on
global matters of concern to the international community, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, and reaffirming its central role in the reform process,
Recognizing that the General Assembly is the universal and representative forum comprising
all Members of the United Nations,

_______________
42

A/60/891.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing the need fully to respect and maintain the balance between the principal organs of
the United Nations within their respective purviews and mandates in accordance with the Charter,
Reaffirming that the plenary meetings of the General Assembly should constitute a forum for
high-level policy statements, as well as for the consideration, inter alia, of agenda items of special
importance or urgency,
Underlining the importance of providing adequate resources for the implementation of
mandated programmes and activities,
Reaffirming its authority in the consideration of all budgetary issues, as stipulated in the
Charter,
Reaffirming also its previous resolutions relating to the revitalization of its work, in
particular resolutions 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July 2004 and 59/313 of
12 September 2005,
Recalling its resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the General Assembly established by Assembly resolution 59/313,43
Decides to adopt the text contained in the annex to the present resolution.
Annex
The General Assembly,
Cluster I. Role and authority of the General Assembly
In the context of further strengthening the role and authority of the General Assembly as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the role and the authority of the General Assembly, including on questions
relating to international peace and security, as stipulated in Articles 10 to 14 and 35 of the Charter
of the United Nations, where appropriate using the procedures set forth in rules 7 to 10 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, which enable swift and urgent action by the Assembly,
bearing in mind that the Security Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter;
2. Urges the Presidents of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council to meet periodically to ensure increased cooperation and coordination of their
work programmes in accordance with their respective responsibilities under the Charter; the
President of the Assembly shall inform Member States about the outcome of those meetings on a
regular basis;
3. Encourages the holding of thematic interactive debates on current issues of critical
importance to the international community in the General Assembly, and invites the President of
the Assembly to propose themes for such interactive debates, in consultation with Member States;
4. Invites the Security Council to further its initiatives to improve the quality of its annual
report to the General Assembly, mandated by Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, in order to
provide the Assembly with a substantive and analytical report;
5. In carrying out the assessment of the debate on the annual report of the Security
Council called for in paragraph 12 of the annex to resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997, the President
shall inform the General Assembly of his decision regarding the need for further consideration of
the report of the Council, including in respect of the convening of informal consultations, on the

_______________
43

A/60/999.

28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

need for, and content of, any action by the Assembly based on the debate, as well as on any
matters to be brought to the attention of the Council;
6. Invites the Security Council to update the General Assembly on a regular basis on the
steps it has taken or is contemplating with respect to improving its reporting to the Assembly;
7. Also invites the Security Council to submit periodically, in accordance with Articles 15
and 24 of the Charter, special subject-oriented reports to the General Assembly for its
consideration on issues of current international concern;
8. Invites the Economic and Social Council to continue to prepare its report to the
General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996, striving to
make it more concise and action-oriented by highlighting the critical areas requiring action by the
Assembly and, as appropriate, by making specific recommendations for consideration by the
Member States;
9. Requests the President of the General Assembly, at the end of his/her tenure, to
provide an informal, short report on best practices and lessons learned to his/her successor;
10. Takes note of paragraph 3 (b) of its resolution 59/313 of 12 September 2005, and also
takes note of paragraph 9 of its resolution 60/246 of 23 December 2005, by which two additional
positions at management and senior levels were made available to the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, within the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007, as part of the
effort to strengthen the Office of the President;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to make the necessary arrangements for
the provision of transitional office accommodation and other support to the President-elect of the
General Assembly, in accordance with resolution 58/126 of 19 December 2003;
12. Encourages enhanced interaction, as and where appropriate, with civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, in particular those from developing countries, on
relevant issues, while fully respecting the intergovernmental nature of the General Assembly and
in conformity with the relevant rules of procedure;
13. Also encourages, where appropriate, continued cooperation between the General
Assembly and national and regional parliaments, particularly through the Inter-Parliamentary
Union;
14. Requests the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in cooperation with
countries concerned and with the relevant organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
to continue to take appropriate measures to enhance world public awareness of the work of the
General Assembly;
15. Urges the Secretariat to continue its endeavours to raise the visibility of the General
Assembly and, to that end, requests the rearrangement of items in the Journal of the United
Nations so that listings of plenary meetings and other major events of the General Assembly may
appear alongside those of the meetings of the Security Council;
16. Encourages the Presidents of the General Assembly to increase their public visibility,
including through enhanced contacts with representatives of the media and civil society, thus
promoting the activities of the Assembly, and encourages the Secretary-General to continue the
practice of providing to the Office of the President of the Assembly a Spokesperson for the
President of the Assembly and an assistant to the Spokesperson;
Cluster II. Selection of the Secretary-General
17. Recalls Article 97 of the Charter, as well as the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 11(I) of 24 January 1946 and 51/241, as relevant to the role of the Assembly in
appointing the Secretary-General, upon the recommendation of the Security Council;

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Emphasizes, bearing in mind the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter, the need for
the process of selection of the Secretary-General to be inclusive of all Member States and made
more transparent and that, in the course of the identification and appointment of the best candidate
for the post of Secretary-General, due regard should be given to regional rotation and gender
equality, and invites the Security Council to regularly update the General Assembly on the steps it
has taken in this regard;
19. Encourages, without prejudice to the role of the principal organs as enshrined in
Article 97 of the Charter, the President of the General Assembly to consult with Member States to
identify potential candidates endorsed by a Member State and, upon informing all Member States
of the results, to forward those results to the Security Council;
20. Also encourages formal presentation of candidatures for the position of SecretaryGeneral in a manner that allows sufficient time for interaction with Member States, and requests
candidates to present their views to all States members of the General Assembly;
21. Recalls paragraph 61 of its resolution 51/241, in which it is stated that, in order to
ensure a smooth and efficient transition, the Secretary-General should be appointed as early as
possible, preferably no later than one month before the date on which the term of the incumbent
expires;
22. Emphasizes the importance of candidates for the post of Secretary-General possessing
and displaying, inter alia, commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, extensive leadership, and administrative and diplomatic experience;
Cluster III. Working methods
23. Reaffirms the sovereign right of Member States to submit proposals in the context of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and encourages Member States to submit draft
resolutions in a more concise, focused and action-oriented form;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to issue the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly in a consolidated version in all official languages, in print and online, and requests the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat to make precedents and past practice available in the
public domain with respect to rules and practices of the intergovernmental bodies of the
Organization;
25. Requests the Main Committees to continue their efforts to further rationalize their
agendas and to improve their working methods, and invites the Bureaux of the Main Committees
to enhance their cooperation, in conformity with the rules of procedure;
26. Decides, in that respect, to give due consideration to those recommendations of the
Main Committees regarding the improvement of their working methods and the allocation of
agenda items which require the approval of the General Assembly for their implementation;
27. Reiterates its call for the effective implementation of rule 42 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly;
28. Requests an update on its recommendation, in paragraph 15 of its resolution 59/313,
regarding consideration of the use of optical scanners as a means of expediting the counting of
votes cast through secret ballots during elections, taking due account of the security requirements
in this regard and the credibility, reliability and confidentiality of such means, and requests the
Secretary-General to report on the modalities thereof to the General Assembly;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to implement further the measures set out in
paragraph 20 of resolution 57/300 of 20 December 2002 on the consolidation of reports and in
paragraph 6 of the annex to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004 on documentation;
30. Recalls paragraph 19 of its resolution 59/313, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a status report with a factual chart to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the

30

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

implementation of all resolutions regarding the revitalization of its work, including resolutions
58/126, 58/316 and 59/313, and the present resolution;
31. Decides to invite the President of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly to
convene consultations among Member States to decide on the establishment of an ad hoc working
group on the revitalization of the Assembly, open to all Member States: to identify ways to further
enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, inter alia, by building on
relevant Assembly resolutions and reviewing the agenda and working methods of the Assembly;
and to submit a report to the Assembly at its sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 60/287
Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.63 and
Add.1, sponsored by: Angola, Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Turkey, Zambia

60/287. The Peacebuilding Fund
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,44
Recalling also its resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) of
20 December 2005 on the operationalization of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular
paragraphs 24 and 25 thereof,
1. Takes note of the arrangements for establishing the Peacebuilding Fund as contained in
the report of the Secretary-General45 and the terms of reference for the Fund contained in the
annex thereto;
2. Affirms its role to provide overall policy guidance on the use of the Fund to maximize
its impact and improve its functioning;
3. Welcomes the contributions and financial pledges already made to the Fund, and
emphasizes the necessity of sustained contributions in order to enhance the capacity of the Fund to
immediately release the resources needed to launch post-conflict peacebuilding activities;
4.

Urges all Member States to consider making voluntary contributions to the Fund;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual report to the General Assembly on
the operation and activities of the Fund;
6. Decides to include in the draft agenda of its sixty-first session an item entitled “Report
of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund”.
RESOLUTION 60/288
Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2006, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/60/L.62,
submitted by the President of the General Assembly

_______________
44
45

See resolution 60/1.
A/60/984.

31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60/288. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirming
its role under the Charter, including on questions related to international peace and security,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes, as it constitutes one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in
the annex to General Assembly resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994, the Declaration to
Supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism, contained in
the annex to General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996, and the 2005 World
Summit Outcome,46 in particular its section on terrorism,
Recalling all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international terrorism,
including resolution 46/51 of 9 December 1991, and Security Council resolutions on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts, as well as relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism,
Recalling also that, in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, world leaders rededicated
themselves to support all efforts to uphold the sovereign equality of all States, respect their
territorial integrity and political independence, to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, to uphold the resolution of disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, the right to self-determination of peoples which remain
under colonial domination or foreign occupation, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for the equal rights of all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, international cooperation in solving international
problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and the fulfilment in good
faith of the obligations assumed in accordance with the Charter,
Recalling further the mandate contained in the 2005 World Summit Outcome that the
General Assembly should develop without delay the elements identified by the Secretary-General
for a counter-terrorism strategy, with a view to adopting and implementing a strategy to promote
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses, at the national, regional and international
levels, to counter terrorism, which also takes into account the conditions conducive to the spread
of terrorism,
Reaffirming that acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
are activities aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy,
threatening territorial integrity, security of States and destabilizing legitimately constituted
Governments, and that the international community should take the necessary steps to enhance
cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism,
Reaffirming also that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Reaffirming further Member States’ determination to make every effort to reach an
agreement on and conclude a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, including by
resolving the outstanding issues related to the legal definition and scope of the acts covered by the
convention, so that it can serve as an effective instrument to counter terrorism,

_______________
46

See resolution 60/1.

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Continuing to acknowledge that the question of convening a high-level conference under the
auspices of the United Nations to formulate an international response to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations could be considered,
Recognizing that development, peace and security, and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing,
Bearing in mind the need to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism,
Affirming Member States’ determination to continue to do all they can to resolve conflict,
end foreign occupation, confront oppression, eradicate poverty, promote sustained economic
growth, sustainable development, global prosperity, good governance, human rights for all and
rule of law, improve intercultural understanding and ensure respect for all religions, religious
values, beliefs or cultures,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the report entitled “Uniting against terrorism:
recommendations for a global counter-terrorism strategy” submitted by the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly;47
2. Adopts the present resolution and its annex as the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy (“the Strategy”);
3. Decides, without prejudice to the continuation of the discussion in its relevant
committees of all their agenda items related to terrorism and counter-terrorism, to undertake the
following steps for the effective follow-up of the Strategy:
(a)

To launch the Strategy at a high-level segment of its sixty-first session;

(b) To examine in two years progress made in the implementation of the Strategy, and to
consider updating it to respond to changes, recognizing that many of the measures contained in the
Strategy can be achieved immediately, some will require sustained work through the coming few
years and some should be treated as long-term objectives;
(c) To invite the Secretary-General to contribute to the future deliberations of the General
Assembly on the review of the implementation and updating of the Strategy;
(d) To encourage Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international,
regional and subregional organizations to support the implementation of the Strategy, including
through mobilizing resources and expertise;
(e) To further encourage non-governmental organizations and civil society to engage, as
appropriate, on how to enhance efforts to implement the Strategy;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session an item
entitled “The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”.
Annex
Plan of action
We, the States Members of the United Nations, resolve:
1. To consistently, unequivocally and strongly condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes, as it constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace and security;
2. To take urgent action to prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and, in particular:

_______________
47

A/60/825.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) To consider becoming parties without delay to the existing international conventions
and protocols against terrorism, and implementing them, and to make every effort to reach an
agreement on and conclude a comprehensive convention on international terrorism;
(b) To implement all General Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate international
terrorism and relevant General Assembly resolutions on the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism;
(c) To implement all Security Council resolutions related to international terrorism and to
cooperate fully with the counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies of the Security Council in the
fulfilment of their tasks, recognizing that many States continue to require assistance in
implementing these resolutions;
3. To recognize that international cooperation and any measures that we undertake to
prevent and combat terrorism must comply with our obligations under international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations and relevant international conventions and protocols, in
particular human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law.
I.

Measures to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism

We resolve to undertake the following measures aimed at addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism, including but not limited to prolonged unresolved conflicts,
dehumanization of victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, lack of the rule of law
and violations of human rights, ethnic, national and religious discrimination, political exclusion,
socio-economic marginalization and lack of good governance, while recognizing that none of
these conditions can excuse or justify acts of terrorism:
1. To continue to strengthen and make best possible use of the capacities of the United
Nations in areas such as conflict prevention, negotiation, mediation, conciliation, judicial
settlement, rule of law, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in order to contribute to the successful
prevention and peaceful resolution of prolonged unresolved conflicts. We recognize that the
peaceful resolution of such conflicts would contribute to strengthening the global fight against
terrorism;
2. To continue to arrange under the auspices of the United Nations initiatives and
programmes to promote dialogue, tolerance and understanding among civilizations, cultures,
peoples and religions, and to promote mutual respect for and prevent the defamation of religions,
religious values, beliefs and cultures. In this regard, we welcome the launching by the SecretaryGeneral of the initiative on the Alliance of Civilizations. We also welcome similar initiatives that
have been taken in other parts of the world;
3. To promote a culture of peace, justice and human development, ethnic, national and
religious tolerance and respect for all religions, religious values, beliefs or cultures by establishing
and encouraging, as appropriate, education and public awareness programmes involving all
sectors of society. In this regard, we encourage the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to play a key role, including through inter-faith and intra-faith dialogue and
dialogue among civilizations;
4. To continue to work to adopt such measures as may be necessary and appropriate and
in accordance with our respective obligations under international law to prohibit by law incitement
to commit a terrorist act or acts and prevent such conduct;
5. To reiterate our determination to ensure the timely and full realization of the
development goals and objectives agreed at the major United Nations conferences and summits,
including the Millennium Development Goals. We reaffirm our commitment to eradicate poverty
and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development and global prosperity for all;
6. To pursue and reinforce development and social inclusion agendas at every level as
goals in themselves, recognizing that success in this area, especially on youth unemployment,

34

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

could reduce marginalization and the subsequent sense of victimization that propels extremism
and the recruitment of terrorists;
7. To encourage the United Nations system as a whole to scale up the cooperation and
assistance it is already conducting in the fields of rule of law, human rights and good governance
to support sustained economic and social development;
8. To consider putting in place, on a voluntary basis, national systems of assistance that
would promote the needs of victims of terrorism and their families and facilitate the normalization
of their lives. In this regard, we encourage States to request the relevant United Nations entities to
help them to develop such national systems. We will also strive to promote international solidarity
in support of victims and foster the involvement of civil society in a global campaign against
terrorism and for its condemnation. This could include exploring at the General Assembly the
possibility of developing practical mechanisms to provide assistance to victims.
II.

Measures to prevent and combat terrorism

We resolve to undertake the following measures to prevent and combat terrorism, in
particular by denying terrorists access to the means to carry out their attacks, to their targets and to
the desired impact of their attacks:
1. To refrain from organizing, instigating, facilitating, participating in, financing,
encouraging or tolerating terrorist activities and to take appropriate practical measures to ensure
that our respective territories are not used for terrorist installations or training camps, or for the
preparation or organization of terrorist acts intended to be committed against other States or their
citizens;
2. To cooperate fully in the fight against terrorism, in accordance with our obligations
under international law, in order to find, deny safe haven and bring to justice, on the basis of the
principle of extradite or prosecute, any person who supports, facilitates, participates or attempts to
participate in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts or provides safe
havens;
3. To ensure the apprehension and prosecution or extradition of perpetrators of terrorist
acts, in accordance with the relevant provisions of national and international law, in particular
human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law. We will endeavour to conclude
and implement to that effect mutual judicial assistance and extradition agreements and to
strengthen cooperation between law enforcement agencies;
4. To intensify cooperation, as appropriate, in exchanging timely and accurate
information concerning the prevention and combating of terrorism;
5. To strengthen coordination and cooperation among States in combating crimes that
might be connected with terrorism, including drug trafficking in all its aspects, illicit arms trade, in
particular of small arms and light weapons, including man-portable air defence systems, moneylaundering and smuggling of nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological and other potentially
deadly materials;
6. To consider becoming parties without delay to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime48 and to the three protocols supplementing it,49 and implementing
them;
7. To take appropriate measures, before granting asylum, for the purpose of ensuring that
the asylum-seeker has not engaged in terrorist activities and, after granting asylum, for the purpose

_______________
48
49

Resolution 55/25, annex I.
Resolution 55/25, annexes II and III; and resolution 55/255, annex.

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of ensuring that the refugee status is not used in a manner contrary to the provisions set out in
section II, paragraph 1, above;
8. To encourage relevant regional and subregional organizations to create or strengthen
counter-terrorism mechanisms or centres. Should they require cooperation and assistance to this
end, we encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate and, where
consistent with their existing mandates, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Criminal Police Organization, to facilitate its provision;
9. To acknowledge that the question of creating an international centre to fight terrorism
could be considered, as part of international efforts to enhance the fight against terrorism;
10. To encourage States to implement the comprehensive international standards
embodied in the Forty Recommendations on Money-Laundering and Nine Special
Recommendations on Terrorist Financing of the Financial Action Task Force, recognizing that
States may require assistance in implementing them;
11. To invite the United Nations system to develop, together with Member States, a single
comprehensive database on biological incidents, ensuring that it is complementary to the
biocrimes database contemplated by the International Criminal Police Organization. We also
encourage the Secretary-General to update the roster of experts and laboratories, as well as the
technical guidelines and procedures, available to him for the timely and efficient investigation of
alleged use. In addition, we note the importance of the proposal of the Secretary-General to bring
together, within the framework of the United Nations, the major biotechnology stakeholders,
including industry, the scientific community, civil society and Governments, into a common
programme aimed at ensuring that biotechnology advances are not used for terrorist or other
criminal purposes but for the public good, with due respect for the basic international norms on
intellectual property rights;
12. To work with the United Nations with due regard to confidentiality, respecting human
rights and in compliance with other obligations under international law, to explore ways and
means to:
(a) Coordinate efforts at the international and regional levels to counter terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations on the Internet;
(b) Use the Internet as a tool for countering the spread of terrorism, while recognizing that
States may require assistance in this regard;
13. To step up national efforts and bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation, as appropriate, to improve border and customs controls in order to prevent and detect
the movement of terrorists and prevent and detect the illicit traffic in, inter alia, small arms and
light weapons, conventional ammunition and explosives, and nuclear, chemical, biological or
radiological weapons and materials, while recognizing that States may require assistance to that
effect;
14. To encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate to
continue to work with States, at their request, to facilitate the adoption of legislation and
administrative measures to implement the terrorist travEl-related obligations and to identify best
practices in this area, drawing whenever possible on those developed by technical international
organizations, such as the International Civil Aviation Organization, the World Customs
Organization and the International Criminal Police Organization;
15. To encourage the Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1267 (1999) to continue to work to strengthen the effectiveness of the travel ban under the United
Nations sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities,
as well as to ensure, as a matter of priority, that fair and transparent procedures exist for placing
individuals and entities on its lists, for removing them and for granting humanitarian exceptions.
In this regard, we encourage States to share information, including by widely distributing the

36

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

International Criminal Police Organization/United Nations special notices concerning people
subject to this sanctions regime;
16. To step up efforts and cooperation at every level, as appropriate, to improve the
security of manufacturing and issuing identity and travel documents and to prevent and detect
their alteration or fraudulent use, while recognizing that States may require assistance in doing so.
In this regard, we invite the International Criminal Police Organization to enhance its database on
stolen and lost travel documents, and we will endeavour to make full use of this tool, as
appropriate, in particular by sharing relevant information;
17. To invite the United Nations to improve coordination in planning a response to a
terrorist attack using nuclear, chemical, biological or radiological weapons or materials, in
particular by reviewing and improving the effectiveness of the existing inter-agency coordination
mechanisms for assistance delivery, relief operations and victim support, so that all States can
receive adequate assistance. In this regard, we invite the General Assembly and the Security
Council to develop guidelines for the necessary cooperation and assistance in the event of a
terrorist attack using weapons of mass destruction;
18. To step up all efforts to improve the security and protection of particularly vulnerable
targets, such as infrastructure and public places, as well as the response to terrorist attacks and
other disasters, in particular in the area of civil protection, while recognizing that States may
require assistance to this effect.
III. Measures to build States’ capacity to prevent and combat terrorism and to strengthen
the role of the United Nations system in this regard
We recognize that capacity-building in all States is a core element of the global counterterrorism effort, and resolve to undertake the following measures to develop State capacity to
prevent and combat terrorism and enhance coordination and coherence within the United Nations
system in promoting international cooperation in countering terrorism:
1. To encourage Member States to consider making voluntary contributions to United
Nations counter-terrorism cooperation and technical assistance projects, and to explore additional
sources of funding in this regard. We also encourage the United Nations to consider reaching out
to the private sector for contributions to capacity-building programmes, in particular in the areas of
port, maritime and civil aviation security;
2. To take advantage of the framework provided by relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations to share best practices in counter-terrorism capacity-building, and to
facilitate their contributions to the international community’s efforts in this area;
3. To consider establishing appropriate mechanisms to rationalize States’ reporting
requirements in the field of counter-terrorism and eliminate duplication of reporting requests,
taking into account and respecting the different mandates of the General Assembly, the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies that deal with counter-terrorism;
4. To encourage measures, including regular informal meetings, to enhance, as
appropriate, more frequent exchanges of information on cooperation and technical assistance
among Member States, United Nations bodies dealing with counter-terrorism, relevant specialized
agencies, relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and the donor community,
to develop States’ capacities to implement relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. To welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to institutionalize, within existing
resources, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force within the Secretariat in order to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations
system;
6. To encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate to
continue to improve the coherence and efficiency of technical assistance delivery in the field of
counter-terrorism, in particular by strengthening its dialogue with States and relevant international,
37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regional and subregional organizations and working closely, including by sharing information,
with all bilateral and multilateral technical assistance providers;
7. To encourage the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including its Terrorism
Prevention Branch, to enhance, in close consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate, its provision of technical assistance to States, upon request, to facilitate
the implementation of the international conventions and protocols related to the prevention and
suppression of terrorism and relevant United Nations resolutions;
8. To encourage the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International Criminal Police Organization to enhance
cooperation with States to help them to comply fully with international norms and obligations to
combat money-laundering and the financing of terrorism;
9. To encourage the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to continue their efforts, within their respective mandates, in
helping States to build capacity to prevent terrorists from accessing nuclear, chemical or
radiological materials, to ensure security at related facilities and to respond effectively in the event
of an attack using such materials;
10. To encourage the World Health Organization to step up its technical assistance to help
States to improve their public health systems to prevent and prepare for biological attacks by
terrorists;
11. To continue to work within the United Nations system to support the reform and
modernization of border management systems, facilities and institutions at the national, regional
and international levels;
12. To encourage the International Maritime Organization, the World Customs
Organization and the International Civil Aviation Organization to strengthen their cooperation,
work with States to identify any national shortfalls in areas of transport security and provide
assistance, upon request, to address them;
13. To encourage the United Nations to work with Member States and relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations to identify and share best practices to prevent
terrorist attacks on particularly vulnerable targets. We invite the International Criminal Police
Organization to work with the Secretary-General so that he can submit proposals to this effect. We
also recognize the importance of developing public-private partnerships in this area.
IV. Measures to ensure respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the
fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism
We resolve to undertake the following measures, reaffirming that the promotion and
protection of human rights for all and the rule of law is essential to all components of the Strategy,
recognizing that effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are not
conflicting goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing, and stressing the need to promote
and protect the rights of victims of terrorism:
1. To reaffirm that General Assembly resolution 60/158 of 16 December 2005 provides
the fundamental framework for the “Protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism”;
2. To reaffirm that States must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with their obligations under international law, in particular human rights law, refugee law
and international humanitarian law;
3. To consider becoming parties without delay to the core international instruments on
human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law, and implementing them, as
well as to consider accepting the competence of international and relevant regional human rights
monitoring bodies;
38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. To make every effort to develop and maintain an effective and rule of law-based
national criminal justice system that can ensure, in accordance with our obligations under
international law, that any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or
perpetration of terrorist acts or in support of terrorist acts is brought to justice, on the basis of the
principle to extradite or prosecute, with due respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and that such terrorist acts are established as serious criminal offences in domestic laws and
regulations. We recognize that States may require assistance in developing and maintaining such
effective and rule of law-based criminal justice systems, and we encourage them to resort to the
technical assistance delivered, inter alia, by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
5. To reaffirm the important role of the United Nations system in strengthening the
international legal architecture by promoting the rule of law, respect for human rights and effective
criminal justice systems, which constitute the fundamental basis of our common fight against
terrorism;
6. To support the Human Rights Council and to contribute, as it takes shape, to its work
on the question of the promotion and protection of human rights for all in the fight against
terrorism;
7. To support the strengthening of the operational capacity of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with a particular emphasis on increasing field
operations and presences. The Office should continue to play a lead role in examining the question
of protecting human rights while countering terrorism, by making general recommendations on
the human rights obligations of States and providing them with assistance and advice, in particular
in the area of raising awareness of international human rights law among national lawenforcement agencies, at the request of States;
8. To support the role of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. The Special Rapporteur
should continue to support the efforts of States and offer concrete advice by corresponding with
Governments, making country visits, liaising with the United Nations and regional organizations
and reporting on these issues.

39

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

60/263.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ...................................... 42

60/289.

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations ......................................................................................................................................... 43

41

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 60/263
Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 6 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
1
(A/60/478/Add.1, para. 8)

60/263. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolutions 59/281 of 29 March 2005 and 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the
field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping
operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to
peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraphs 28 to 188 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take
all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special
Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special
Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman
of the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its
efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new
proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
2
A/60/19. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 19.

42

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 60/289
Adopted at the 99th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
3
(A/60/478/Add.2 and Corr.1, para. 8)

60/289. Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 60/1, paragraph 165, of 16 September 2005, and its
resolutions 59/281 of 29 March 2005 and 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
Recalling its resolution 60/263 of 6 June 2006, in which it endorsed the decision of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, contained in paragraph 74 of its report, 4 to
consider, during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General’s strategy for
victim assistance and the revised draft model memorandum of understanding, including a
proposal on national investigations officers,
Reaffirming its resolution 59/296 of 22 June 2005, as well as resolutions 59/300 and 60/263,
and the need for the United Nations to implement its policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in its peacekeeping operations as recommended by the Special Committee,
Affirming the need for a comprehensive strategy of assistance to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations staff or related personnel,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to take strong and effective steps in this
regard,
1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on its
2006 resumed session;5
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee
contained in paragraphs 5 to 10 of the report on its 2006 resumed session;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and the relevant organs of the United Nations to
take all necessary steps to implement the aforementioned proposals, recommendations and
conclusions of the Special Committee, and supports the request of the Special Committee to the
Secretary-General that he provide a progress report on the implementation of its recommendations
at its next regular session;
4. Requests the Special Committee to include this issue in its report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session.

_______________
3

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
4
A/60/19. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 19.
5
A/60/19/Add.1. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 19.

43

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

60/17.

Title

Page

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire ...................................................................................... 47
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 47

60/18.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti .................................................................................. 50
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 50

60/121.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo................................ 54
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 54

60/122.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan .............................................................................................. 57
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 57

60/234.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 61
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 61

60/236.

Pattern of conferences............................................................................................................................................. 62
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 63

60/254.

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations.................................... 68

60/255.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007......................................................... 71

60/256.

Capital master plan ................................................................................................................................................. 74

60/257.

Programme planning............................................................................................................................................... 75

60/258.

Joint Inspection Unit............................................................................................................................................... 78

60/259.

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services ...................................... 79

60/260.

Investing in the United Nations: for a stronger Organization worldwide ..................................................................... 81

60/266.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues ................................................................................................................................................. 87

60/267.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ............................................................................... 92

60/268.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ........................................................................................................... 95

60/269.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.............................................................................................. 98

60/270.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus .............................................................................. 101

60/271.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor.......................................................................... 104

60/272.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea ............................................................................. 105

60/273.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia................................................................................. 108

60/274.

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission.......................................................................... 111

60/275.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ............................................................ 112

60/276.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia ................................................................................................ 115

60/277.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................. 118

60/278.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon...................................................................................... 120
45

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

60/279.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone........................................................................................ 124

60/280.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara...................................................... 126

60/281.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council............................................................................................. 128

60/282.

Capital master plan ............................................................................................................................................... 129

60/283.

Investing in the United Nations for a stronger Organization worldwide: detailed report ............................................. 132

46

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/17 B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
1
(A/60/540/Add.1, para. 6)

60/17.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
B2

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire 3 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the
Council established the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of twelve
months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1652 (2006) of 24 January 2006, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 15 December 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/17 A of 23 November
2005,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions
59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 80.7 million
United States dollars, representing some 9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only twenty-eight Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Resolution 60/17, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/17 A.
3
A/60/630 and A/60/753 and Corr.1.
4
A/60/896.
2

47

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
11. Looks forward to the consideration of the comprehensive report requested in
section VIII, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/266;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that quick-impact projects are implemented
in compliance with the original intent of such projects and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
13. Decides to approve the resources requested for quick-impact projects in the proposed
budget for the Operation for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, in the interim;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the quick-impact
projects in the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;5
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the amount of 438,366,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
inclusive of 420,175,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 15,025,600 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,166,000 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 200,328,914 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 15 December 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General

_______________
5

A/60/630.

48

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
20. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
4,483,156 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,601,258 dollars
approved for the Operation, the prorated share of 772,403 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 109,495 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 238,037,886 dollars at a
monthly rate of 36,530,566 dollars for the period from 16 December 2006 to 30 June 2007, in
accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of assessments for 2007,6
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
22. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 5,327,044 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 4,279,142 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 917,797 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 130,105 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Operation, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
57,385,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
24. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 57,385,300 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23
above;
25. Decides also that the decrease of 1,436,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 57,385,300 dollars referred to in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Operation, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
_______________
6

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/18 B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
7
(A/60/541/Add.1, para. 7)

60/18.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
B8

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti9 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the
Council declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process and the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period
of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1658 (2006) of 14 February 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/18 A of 23 November 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 66.8 million
United States dollars, representing some 11 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
_______________
7

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Resolution 60/18, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/18 A.
9
A/60/646 and A/60/728.
10
A/60/869.
8

50

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions include clear
information regarding mandated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities,
including clear justification for post and non-post resource requirements and their projected
impact on the effective delivery of the Mission’s objectives in this field, as well as information on
collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities present in the field and acting in this area;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the coordination and collaboration of
efforts with the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, to report on progress made and
to provide a clear description of their respective roles and responsibilities in future budget
submissions;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to review the use of consultants required for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in order to ensure the successful implementation of
the mandated programmes, and to report thereon in the performance report;
13. Requests the Secretary General to ensure that the utilization of these resources takes
fully into account the functions performed by existing capacities;
14. Looks forward to the consideration of the comprehensive report requested in
section VIII, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/266;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that quick-impact projects are implemented
in compliance with the original intent of such projects and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
16. Decides to approve the resources requested for quick-impact projects in the proposed
budget for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, in the interim, bearing in
mind Security Council resolution 1608 (2005) of 22 June 2005 and relevant presidential
statements;11
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full implementation of the quick-impact
projects for the financial period 2006/07;

_______________
11

S/PRST/2006/13 and 22; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2005–31 July 2006.

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Notes that full information on the need for the establishment of an off-site, in-theatre
secondary disaster recovery and business continuity centre for the Mission has yet to be provided,
and requests the Secretary-General to provide comprehensive and detailed information in this
regard in the context of the budget for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, in future budget submissions, to ensure that resource
requirements for national interpreters include full justification of the rationale for the number of
interpreters, taking fully into account the principles of efficiency, ensuring effective
implementation of the Mission mandate and the requirements of the various components of the
Mission in the field;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to rejustify the need for five
administrative staff in the light of the experience of the Mission in the context of the next budget
submission for the Mission;
21. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on specific management
improvements achieved, taking fully into account relevant recommendations of the Advisory
Committee;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
24. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
25. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;12
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
26. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti the amount of 510,394,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007, inclusive of 489,207,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 17,500,200 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 3,687,400 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
27. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 63,799,300 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 15 August 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
28. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 27 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
_______________
12

A/60/646.

52

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1,455,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,174,800 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 246,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 34,900 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
29. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 446,595,400 dollars for the
period from 16 August 2006 to 30 June 2007 at a monthly rate of 42,532,892 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of
assessments for 2007,13 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Mission;
30. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 29
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,190,500 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 8,223,900 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 1,722,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 244,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
31. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 27
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
6,646,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
32. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 6,646,600 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 31
above;
33. Also decides that the decrease of 909,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 6,646,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 31 and 32 above;
34. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
35. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
36. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
37. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.

_______________
13

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/121 B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
14
(A/60/574/Add.1, para. 7)

60/121. Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
B15
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo16 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of
30 November 1999 regarding, respectively, the deployment to the region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1635 (2005) of 28 October 2005, by which the Council extended the mandate of the mission until
30 September 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission, and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 60/121 A of 8 December
2005,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions
outstanding in the amount of 172.1 million United States dollars, representing some 5 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only fifty-seven Member States have paid
their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;

_______________
14

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Resolution 60/121, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/121 A.
16
A/60/669 and A/60/840.
17
A/60/888.
15

54

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Welcomes the establishment and development of the logistics base for the Mission at
Entebbe, Uganda, as a regional hub for common use by missions in the region to enhance the
efficiency and responsiveness of logistical support operations, and requests the Secretary-General
to report to the General Assembly in the context of his overview report, to be submitted during the
second part of its resumed sixty-first session, on economies and efficiencies realized through its
utilization and on the increased effectiveness of regional support for peacekeeping operations;
10. Notes with concern the late submission to the General Assembly of the reports related
to the financing of the Mission;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,17 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
13. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with
the United Nations agencies and programmes, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly on measures taken, including on the progress made in the development of an
integrated work plan and the coordination network referred to in paragraph 54 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;17
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the recommendations in the consultants’
report on the comprehensive review of staffing and structure of the Mission are fully analysed by
the Mission and that the results of the analysis are reflected in the budget for the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
15. Looks forward to the consideration of the comprehensive report requested in
section VIII, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/266;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that quick-impact projects are implemented
in compliance with the original intent of such projects and relevant General Assembly resolutions;
17. Decides to approve the resources requested for quick-impact projects in the proposed
budget for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, in the interim;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full implementation of the quick-impact
projects in the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;

55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the administrative support structure of
quick-impact projects with a view to minimizing overhead costs for their implementation;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;18
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
23. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,138,533,000 dollars for the
period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, inclusive of 1,091,242,800 dollars for the maintenance
of the Mission, 39,060,000 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
8,230,200 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
24. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 284,633,250 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
25. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 24 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 5,944,125 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,690,000
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,098,375 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 155,750 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the Untied Nations Logistics Base;
26. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 853,899,750 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2006 to 30 June 2007 at a monthly rate of 94,877,750 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of
assessments for 2007,19 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Mission;
27. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 26
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the amount of 17,832,375 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 14,070,000 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 3,295,125 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 467,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
28. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 24
_______________
18
19

A/60/669.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

56

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
68,769,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
29. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 68,769,500 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 28
above;
30. Decides also that the decrease of 2,640,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 68,769,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above;
31. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
32. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
33. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”.
RESOLUTION 60/122 B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
20
(A/60/562/Add.1, para. 7)

60/122. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
B21
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan 22 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,23
Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from
24 March 2005, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1663 (2006) of 24 March 2006,

_______________
20

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Resolution 60/122, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/122 A.
22
A/60/626 and A/60/726 and Corr.1.
23
A/60/868.
21

57

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also its resolutions 59/292 of 21 April 2005 and 60/122 A of 8 December 2005 on
the financing of the Mission,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as
at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 52.9 million United
States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only sixty Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other
Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Welcomes the use of the Entebbe installation to enhance the efficiency and
responsiveness of its logistical support operations for peacekeeping missions in the region;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,23 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant provisions and the relevant provisions of its resolution 60/266;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Mission
is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Welcomes the efforts of the Mission in developing the unified mission concept, and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve this concept;

58

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Notes with appreciation the strong coordination between the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan and the United Nations country team, and requests the Secretary-General to share the
Mission’s experiences and lessons learned with other complex peacekeeping missions with a view
to increasing their coordination and reducing potential duplication of activities with other entities,
and to report thereon to it at its sixty-first session in the context of the overview report of the
Secretary-General on progress made in this regard;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing the latest available information
on specific management efficiencies achieved as well as future plans in this regard in the unified
area-based and decentralized organizational structure of the Mission in the context of the next
budget submission;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission implementation plan
and results-based budgeting are integrated and to report on progress made to the General
Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Mission;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his ongoing efforts, including through
innovative approaches, to ensure the expeditious filling of all vacant posts;
19. Decides to establish a Planning Officer post at the P-4 level in the Strategic Planning
Office;
20. Stresses the crucial role of demining for the speedy and successful implementation of the
Mission’s mandate, and welcomes the intention of the Mission to ensure successful implementation
of this activity through collaboration and coordination with the relevant partners in the field;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to enhance coordination and provision of
technical advice and operational demining in support of the full deployment of the Mission, in
accordance with relevant mandates, and to report thereon in context of the proposed budget for the
period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide clear information on the budget
provision for mine detection and mine-clearing services, including staffing and operational costs,
in the Mission’s next budget submission;
23. Welcomes the increasing use of the inland waterway;
24. Notes the considerable reliance on air assets for transportation, and, bearing in mind
the expected lifetime of the Mission, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Mission
also effectively utilizes and, where possible, increases the available road, rail and inland waterway
transport modes where they are reliable, cost-effective and safer than air transportation, and also
requests the Secretary-General to report on the experience of the Mission in this area and to
indicate the actual and expected efficiencies resulting from the use of such modes of transportation
as well as a long-term strategy in this regard;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to increase the Mission’s utilization of information and
communication technology tools wherever it is possible and creates efficiencies and to report back
on their utilization to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session in the context of the budget
submission for the Mission;
26. Looks forward to the consideration of the comprehensive report requested in
section VIII, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/266;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that quick-impact projects are implemented
in compliance with the original intent of such projects and relevant General Assembly resolutions;

59

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Decides to approve the resources requested for quick-impact projects in section II of
the proposed budget for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;24
29. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the fullest implementation of the quickimpact projects in the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 in the light of the Mission’s
capacity to undertake these activities;
30. Reaffirms the provisions of its resolution 59/296 on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and requests the Secretary-General to utilize the proposed resources in accordance
with the provisions of that resolution;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions include clear
information regarding mandated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration activities,
including clear justification for post and non-post resource requirements and their projected
impact on the effective delivery of Mission objectives in this field as well as information on the
collaboration with all relevant United Nations entities present in the field and acting in this area;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
32. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;25
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
33. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 1,126,295,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
inclusive of 1,079,534,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 38,623,300 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 8,138,200 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
34. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 262,802,400 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 24 September 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as
set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
35. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 34 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
5,883,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,726,300 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,013,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 143,800 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
36. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 863,493,500 dollars for the
period from 25 September 2006 to 30 June 2007, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 58/256 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of assessments for 2007,26 subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
37. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 36
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 19,332,400 dollars, comprising the
_______________
24

A/60/726 and Corr.1.
A/60/626.
26
To be adopted by the General Assembly.
25

60

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

estimated staff assessment income of 15,529,400 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 3,330,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 472,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
38. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 34
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
2,804,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
39. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 2,804,000 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 38 above;
40. Decides also that the net increase of 455,200 dollars in the staff assessment income in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, representing the difference between the
additional staff assessment income of 678,100 dollars previously approved under the terms of its
resolution 60/122 A for the financial period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and the decrease in
the staff assessment income of 222,900 dollars in respect of the same financial period, shall be
added to the credits from the amount of 2,804,000 dollars referred to in paragraphs 38 and 39
above;
41. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
42. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
43. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
44. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 60/234 B
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/60/561/Add.1, para. 6)27

60/234. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors
B28
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/249 B of 18 June 2004, 59/264 B of 22 June 2005 and 60/234 A
of 23 December 2005,
_______________
27

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Resolution 60/234, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/234 A.
28

61

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the twelve-month
period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the United
Nations peacekeeping operations,29 the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of Auditors on the accounts of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2005 30 and the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
concerning the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period ended 30 June 2005,31
1. Accepts the audited financial statements on the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;29
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Board of Auditors;32
3. Also takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions related to the
report of the Board of Auditors;30
4. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined
format thereof;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005;31
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full implementation of the recommendations
of the Board of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt
and timely manner;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to indicate an expected time frame for the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors as well as the priorities for their
implementation, including the office-holders to be held accountable;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the next report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, full explanation for the delays in implementation of the
recommendations of the Board for the period ended 30 June 2005 or the prior periods.
RESOLUTION 60/236 B
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
33
(A/60/601/Add.1, para. 5)

_______________
29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 and corrigendum (A/60/5 and
A/60/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II.
30
A/60/784.
31
A/60/691.
32
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 and corrigendum (A/60/5 and
A/60/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II, chap. II.
33
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.

62

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

60/236. Pattern of conferences
B34
The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985,
41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 51/211 A to E of
18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of
23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 56/254 D of
27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of 20 December
2002, 57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December 2004 and
60/236 A of 23 December 2005,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2005,35 the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General36 and the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,37
Reaffirming the provisions relevant to conference services of its resolutions on multilingualism,
I
Takes note of the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2005;35
II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources

1. Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be given to
the meetings of Member States;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for conference
services, to ensure that the level of resources proposed for temporary assistance is commensurate
with the full demand of services, estimated on the basis of current experience;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations
increased to 83 per cent in 2004 from 77 per cent in 2003, exceeding the benchmark for the first
time since 2000;
4. Recognizes the importance of the meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far as possible, all requests for conference
services for the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States are met;
5. Notes with concern the continued decrease in the percentage of meetings held by
regional and other major groupings of Member States that were provided with interpretation
services, at the four main duty stations, from 98 per cent during the period from May 2001 to April
2002, to 92 per cent during the period from May 2002 to April 2003, to 90 per cent during the
period from May 2003 to April 2004, to 85 per cent during the period from May 2004 to April
2005, despite the fact that the number of meetings requesting the provision of interpretation
noticeably decreased, by 15 per cent, during the period from May 2004 to April 2005;
_______________
34

Resolution 60/236, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 and corrigendum (A/60/49 and A/60/49 (Vol. I)/Corr.1), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/236 A.
35
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/60/32).
36
A/60/93 and Corr.1 and A/60/112.
37
A/60/433.

63

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Recalls that meetings held by regional and other major groupings of Member States
are provided with interpretation services on an ad hoc basis, in accordance with established
practice;
7. Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to
take into account the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make
provision for such meetings in their programmes of work and to notify conference services, well
in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the
extent possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member
States;
8. Notes that improvements in the utilization factor might entail a reduction in the
availability of conference services for meetings of regional groups, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to explore innovative ways to address this problem and to report to the General Assembly
through the Committee on Conferences;
9. Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their programmes of work
in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources, and requests the
Committee on Conferences to continue consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies
that underutilize their conference-servicing resources, in line with what was requested by
paragraph 2 of section II.A of its resolution 59/265;
10. Recalls its several resolutions, including resolution 59/265, section II.A, paragraph 8,
reaffirms that, in conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobi-based United
Nations bodies shall take place in Nairobi, except as otherwise authorized by the General
Assembly or the Committee on Conferences acting on its behalf, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on the subject to the Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Committee on
Conferences;
11. Strongly discourages any invitation to host meetings that would violate the
headquarters rule at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and at other United Nations centres with
low utilization levels;
12. Welcomes the efforts undertaken so far to increase utilization of the conference
facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa, in particular the introduction by the
Commission of an integrated system for the management of its conferences and the conducting of
a fact-finding mission to identify best practices at similar conference centres within the United
Nations system;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that the conference
centre at the Economic Commission for Africa establishes and develops linkages with other
centres and bodies and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session through
the Committee on Conferences;
14. Notes that the strict implementation of the headquarters minimum operating security
standards has compelled the Economic Commission for Africa to restrict the utilization of its
conference centre to organizations of the United Nations family, foreign representatives accredited
to Addis Ababa, the African Union, recognized international non-governmental organizations and
the Government of Ethiopia;
15. Invites the Secretary-General to explore means to increase the utilization of the
conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, bearing in mind the headquarters
minimum operating security standards, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session, through the Committee on Conferences;
B.

Reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management

1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General
Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;

64

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Also reaffirms that the major goals of the reform of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat are to provide high-quality documents
in a timely manner in all official languages, as well as high-quality conference services to Member
States at all duty stations, and to achieve those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
3. Notes the ongoing efforts towards the attainment of integrated global management,
recognizes the upgrading of the information technology capacity at the United Nations Office at
Nairobi, which is essential for the successful achievement of integrated global management, and
requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly apprised of progress made in this
regard;
4. Also notes the initial measures taken so far by the Department to seek the evaluation
by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them as a key performance
indicator of the Department, including through language-specific informational meetings twice a
year, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that such measures provide equal opportunities
to Member States to present their evaluation in the six official languages of the United Nations and
are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
5. Welcomes the progress achieved in the implementation of the Electronic Meetings
Planning and Resource Allocation System (e-Meets) and the electronic documentation
management concept (e-Doc);
6. Notes the ongoing efforts towards the establishment of the integrated global
management system, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session on the outcome of the work of the task forces through the Committee on
Conferences;
7. Takes note of the conclusions of the departmental task force on workload standards,38
and requests the Secretary-General, while reviewing the issue of workload standards, which date
from 1976, and performance measurement tools in the context of the introduction of applicable
information technologies, to take fully into account the unique nature of the functions of the
language services of the Department;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to further explore the issue of offering information
technology-related training (including keyboarding) and building basic information technology
skills requirements into vacancy announcements;
9. Recalls section II.B, paragraph 10, of its resolution 59/265, and in this regard looks
forward to the submission of the proposal referred to in that paragraph;
10. Reaffirms section II.B, paragraph 10, of its resolution 57/283 B, and in that context
stresses the importance of maintaining the official records editing function, as well as the
importance of retaining the concordance principle in order to ensure equally valid texts of
resolutions in all six official languages;
III
Documentation and publication-related matters
1. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of
the United Nations;
2. Notes with concern the continued high level of late submissions of documentation by
author departments, which, in turn, negatively impact the functioning of intergovernmental bodies,
and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, at its sixty-first session,
through the Committee on Conferences, on impediments, if any, to achieving full compliance with
_______________
38

See A/60/93 and Corr.1, paras. 60–62.

65

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the ten-week and six-week rules for the issuance of pre-session documents, including, where
appropriate, proposed measures to address such impediments;
3. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules concerning the
simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages are followed with respect to both
the distribution of printed copies and the posting of parliamentary documentation on the Official
Document System and the United Nations website, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of its
resolution 55/222;
4. Notes with concern the non-compliance with rule 59 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the communication of resolutions
adopted by the Assembly to Member States within fifteen days of the closure of the session;
5. Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265, that the
issuance of documents on planning, budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent
consideration by the General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
6. Welcomes the efforts of the interdepartmental task force on documentation in
addressing the problem of late issuance of documentation, and requests the Secretary-General to
develop a clear accountability mechanism within the Secretariat for the submission, processing
and issuance of documentation and to submit a detailed report thereon to the Committee on
Conferences for its further consideration and analysis, in order to provide concrete
recommendations to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments of the
Secretariat to include the following elements in their reports:
(a)

Summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

8. Encourages intergovernmental and expert bodies to include the above-mentioned
elements, where appropriate, in their reports to the General Assembly;
9. Requests that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the Secretariat,
intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have conclusions and
recommendations in bold print;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take steps to improve the quality and
accuracy of meeting records in all six official languages through full reliance in the preparation
and translation of those records on sound recordings and written texts of statements as they were
delivered in the original languages;
11. Notes some improvement in the issuance of verbatim and summary records, while
recognizing that delay in their issuance still exists;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures to ameliorate
the delay in the issuance of verbatim and summary records, with a view to issuing them in a
timely manner;
13. Recalls section II.B, paragraph 14, of its resolution 59/265, and reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to further elaborate on all options, including those set out in paragraphs 59
to 63 of his report on the reform of the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management,39 in accordance with legislative mandates, and to report on their practical and
financial implications to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Committee on
Conferences;
_______________
39

A/59/172.

66

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. Recalls section II.B, paragraph 13, of its resolution 59/265, and takes note of
paragraphs 57 to 59 of the report of the Secretary-General,40 and decides to revert to this issue in
the context of its consideration of the report referred to in the paragraph above;
IV
Translation and interpretation-related matters
1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the highest quality of interpretation and
translation services in all official languages;
2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make sure that terminology used in
translation and interpretation services reflects the latest linguistic norms and terminology of the
official languages in order to ensure the highest quality;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the accuracy of translation of
documents into the official languages, giving particular significance to the quality of translation;
4. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, when recruiting temporary assistance in
the language services, to ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are
provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving
maximum quality of their services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official
languages and taking into account their respective workloads;
5. Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to address the question of the
appropriate level of self-revision that is consistent with quality in all official languages and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
6. Notes with concern the disparities in interpretation and translation vacancy rates
between the United Nations Office at Nairobi and other duty stations;
7. Expresses deep concern at the high vacancy rates in the interpretation and translation
services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, especially the chronic difficulty in staffing the
Arabic Interpretation Unit, and requests the Secretary-General to address this through, inter alia,
assistance from Member States in advertising and facilitating the conduct of competitive
examinations to fill these language vacancies;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to address the problem of succession planning in order
to fill emerging vacancies in language services in a timely manner through outreach to eligible
applicants;
9. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General continue efforts to explore the use of
new technologies, such as computer-assisted translation, remote and off-site translation and speech
recognition, in the six official languages, in order to further enhance the quality and productivity of
conference services, and to keep the General Assembly informed of the introduction of any other
new technology;
V
Information technology
1. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved across duty stations in integrating
information technology into meetings management and documentation-processing systems and
the global approach to sharing standards, good practices and technological achievements among
conference services at all duty stations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of technologies used in all
duty stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all official languages;
_______________
40

A/60/93 and Corr.1.

67

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Also requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all important
older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six official languages on a
priority basis, so that these archives are also available to Member States through that medium;
4. Welcomes the strengthening of the Information Technology Unit at the United Nations
Office at Nairobi, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to address the issue of
maintaining parity among duty stations in terms of information technology capacity.
RESOLUTION 60/254
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
41
(A/60/609/Add.1, para. 7)

60/254. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning
of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 54/236 of 23 December 1999 and
59/264 A, 59/272 and 59/275 of 23 December 2004,
Recalling also the importance of accountability and transparency to the Organization,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General 42 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,43
Measures to strengthen the accountability framework
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on measures to strengthen
accountability at the United Nations;44
2. Also takes note of the additional elements that are intended to strengthen the
accountability framework, which would seem to be somewhat fragmented;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen the current framework by
establishing and ensuring an effective system of accountability that clearly defines the lines of
authority and responsibility, as well as the respective roles of the individual elements of the
framework, and efforts aimed at improving coordination between them in order to avoid
duplication;
Monitoring and evaluation/performance measures
4. Stresses the importance of ensuring that programme managers objectively evaluate
programme performance and, in this context, that the Office of Internal Oversight Services should
validate self-evaluation and reporting on programme performance by managers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that programme managers understand and
respect the monitoring and evaluation functions performed by the oversight bodies;
6. Notes that the electronic performance appraisal system is the formal tool employed by
the Secretariat in managing staff performance and that it represents an enhancement of the
performance appraisal system;

_______________
41

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/312 and A/60/342.
43
A/60/418.
44
A/60/312.
42

68

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Decides that staff performance assessment should be further enhanced in order to
strengthen performance management to ensure the accountable implementation of legislative
mandates, and in this regard calls upon the Secretary-General to improve performance
management measures, including:
(a) A system that recognizes competence as an integral element of performance
management and eventual career advancement;
(b) A comprehensive range of measures to address underperformance as well as
incentives to encourage outstanding performance;
(c)

Establishing direct links between performance and career advancement;

Governance review
8. Recalls its resolutions 57/278 A of 20 December 2002 and 59/264 A, and notes that
there will be a separate report on the independent external evaluation of the auditing and oversight
system of the United Nations, including the specialized agencies, as well as one on a
comprehensive governance review;
9. Notes that the focus of the comprehensive governance review should be, inter alia, to
clarify the roles and responsibilities of management with respect to supporting Member States,
and emphasizes the intergovernmental nature of the Organization and its international character;
Oversight bodies
10. Reaffirms the importance of respecting the independent nature of the internal and
external oversight structures of the United Nations, and recognizes that they are key governance
partners;
11. Recalls its resolution 59/272 and, bearing in mind paragraph 4 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,43 decides to revert to the issue
of the terms of reference and title of the high-level follow-up mechanism in the context of its
consideration of the report on the independent external evaluation of the auditing and oversight
system of the United Nations, including the specialized agencies;
12. Stresses the importance of ensuring the full implementation of the recommendations of
the oversight bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that managers are held
accountable for the delay or non-implementation of oversight recommendations;
Fraud and corruption
13. Recalls its resolution 59/264 A and the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
concerning fraud and corruption, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly on measures taken to implement the recommendations;
Procurement
14. Also recalls its resolutions 57/279 of 20 December 2002 and 59/288 of 13 April 2005,
and requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts to make the procurement policies and
practices of the United Nations system more transparent, efficient and effective;
Enhancing transparency
15. Notes the steps taken by the Secretary-General to institute greater transparency in the
appointment of some senior-level positions, including through continued consideration of the
applicants put forward by Member States at the request of the Secretary-General;

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Ethics Office
16. Welcomes the establishment of the Ethics Office, and notes the Secretary-General’s
bulletin thereon,45 and in this respect:
(a) Urges the Secretary-General to finalize a system-wide code of ethics for all United
Nations personnel, including personnel of the funds and programmes, at an early date;
(b) Requests the Secretary-General to administer and monitor more extensive disclosure
of financial and other interests by United Nations officials in accordance with the amended Staff
Regulations46 and to ensure enhanced protection for those who reveal wrongdoing within the
Organization;
(c) Endorses the main responsibilities of the Ethics Office as outlined by the SecretaryGeneral in his report47 and as established by the Secretary-General’s bulletin;45
(d) Emphasizes that the administration of policy by the Ethics Office for protection of staff
against retaliation when reporting misconduct should be carried out in close cooperation with the
Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Office of Human Resources Management;
(e) Also emphasizes that training programmes to cover the range of ethics issues should
be designed by the Ethics Office in coordination with the Office of Human Resources
Management;
(f) Recognizes the need for incrementally requiring all pertinent staff, in particular those
in high-risk areas, to provide relevant financial disclosure, and requests the Secretary-General to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session in the context of his report on the
activities of the Ethics Office;
(g) Requests the Secretary-General to present a comprehensive review to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-second session, as recommended by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report,43 which should include, inter
alia, his views on the possible establishment of a group of internationally representative experts to
provide periodic, independent assessments of the Ethics Office for the consideration of the
Assembly;
(h) Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the comprehensive review
referred to above, to report on staff perception of the impact of the Ethics Office on improving
ethics and integrity in the Organization;
(i) Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the activities of the Ethics Office
and the implementation of ethics policies, in the context of his annual report, for the consideration
and decision of the General Assembly, as appropriate, under the agenda item relating to human
resources management;
Management practices
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the contribution made by the
Department of Management to the improvement of management practices and the time-bound
plan for the reduction of duplication, complexity and bureaucracy in the United Nations
administrative processes and procedures;48

_______________
45

ST/SGB/2005/22.
See ST/SGB/2006/4.
47
A/60/568 and Corr.1 and 2.
48
A/60/342.
46

70

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reporting requirement
18. Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions as contained in paragraph 12 of its report,43 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly under the relevant agenda items, as well as on
an overview of the status of implementation of the provisions of the present resolution, as
appropriate.
RESOLUTION 60/255
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
49
(A/60/608/Add.1, para. 7)

60/255. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
The General Assembly,
I
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council, 50 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,51
Recalling its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005, by which it approved a charge of
100 million United States dollars for the twenty-six special political missions dealt with in the
report of the Secretary-General 52 against the provision for special political missions in the
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007,
Noting the importance of enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of political missions of
the United Nations,
Recognizing the need to identify and achieve greater complementarities and synergies,
where possible, among the various special political missions and good offices of United Nations
entities,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;50

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,51 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to reflect the improvements proposed in paragraphs 11
and 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions51 in
the presentation of the budgets for special political missions for 2007;
4. Recalls paragraph 7 of section VII of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004, and
requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget proposals for special political missions
are presented at an early date in order to facilitate proper consideration by the General Assembly;

_______________
49

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/585 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and 2.
51
A/60/7/Add.37. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
52
A/60/585 and Corr.1.
50

71

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to utilize the existing expertise of staff
within the United Nations system, including experts from regions where special political missions
are located;
6. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure the deployment of staff with relevant
knowledge and experience to special political missions and good offices of the United Nations and
to include information on progress made in future budget proposals;
7. Notes with appreciation efforts made to include information on actual and potential
synergies and complementarities for each individual mission, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to develop and improve the presentation of information in this regard;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to identify means to achieve greater complementarities
and synergies among the various special political missions and good offices of United Nations
entities, including, where possible, through greater sharing of human resources and logistical
arrangements, particularly where mandates are similar or interconnected, while being cognizant of
their respective mandates;
9. Recalls that in paragraph 9 of its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000, it requested
the Secretary-General to ensure that, in presenting the programme budget, expected
accomplishments and, where possible, indicators of achievement are included to measure
achievements in the implementation of the programmes of the Organization and not those of
individual Member States;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his future budget proposals in full
compliance with its resolution 55/231;
11. Notes the lack of information analysing the growth and decrease in resources proposed
as well as the variances between appropriations and expenditures in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;50
12. Also notes the variance between the vacancy rates used in formulating budgets and the
actual vacancy situation, in particular in medium-sized to large missions;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to formulate and present future budgets of special
political missions on the basis of an analysis of actual expenditure patterns, including the latest
vacancy situation and variances between appropriations and expenditures, for the purpose of
achieving more realistic budgeting;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust to the Office of Internal Oversight
Services a management review as outlined in paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory
Committee51 and to submit it to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-first session;
15. Reiterates that experts and consultants for all special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives should be used in full compliance with the existing rules and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and in cases where the required expertise is not
available within the United Nations system;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, in this connection, to provide full justification in
future budget submissions when requesting resources for experts and consultants;
17. Notes the observation of the Advisory Committee in paragraph 52 (c) of its report51
regarding the two positions funded from general temporary assistance, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include specific information on their status in the budget submission for 2007;
18. Takes note of paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee,51 and decides to
establish a position for a Political Affairs Officer at the P-4 level within the Office of the Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General for Lebanon;

72

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Approves an additional charge of 202,469,500 dollars against the provision for special
political missions already approved under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for
the biennium 2006–2007;53
II
2005 World Summit Outcome: Peacebuilding Support Office; revised estimates
to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the related revised estimates to the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007,54 as well
as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,55
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;54

2. Also takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;55
3. Decides to authorize the Secretary-General to utilize an amount of up to 1,571,300
dollars from the approved initial provision for special political missions under section 3, Political
affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007,53 to operationalize a peacebuilding
support office;
4. Stresses that the authorization from the provision for special political missions referred
to in paragraph 3 above is a provisional and exceptional measure, decides that the Peacebuilding
Support Office shall be financed from the programme budget, and requests the Secretary-General
to include a provision for the Peacebuilding Support Office in the appropriate section of the
programme budget, commencing with the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2008–2009, to ensure sustainable and reliable long-term financing of the Office;
5. Decides to revert to the issues regarding level, staffing and functions of the
Peacebuilding Support Office as contained in the report of the Secretary-General54 in the context
of its consideration of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009 and in the
light of decisions, if any, that may result from the consideration by the General Assembly of the
report of the Secretary-General to be submitted in accordance with paragraph 25 of its resolution
60/180 of 20 December 2005;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Peacebuilding Support Office has the
necessary gender competence to support the Peacebuilding Commission in implementing its
mandate to integrate a gender perspective into all of its work, taking into account, inter alia,
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and drawing on the appropriate
expertise in the United Nations system;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the efficient use of the resources
approved in the provision for special political missions for the biennium 2006–2007, taking into
account the provisions of paragraph 23 of its resolution 60/180;
III
Liabilities and proposed funding for after-service health insurance benefits
Recalling its resolution 58/249 A of 23 December 2003,

_______________
53

See A/60/6 (Sect. 3) and resolution 60/247 A.
A/60/694.
55
A/60/7/Add.36. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
54

73

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on liabilities and proposed funding
for after-service health insurance benefits56 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General56 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;57
2. Also takes note of the background information on the after-service health insurance
programme provided in paragraphs 6 to 9 of the report of the Secretary-General,56 and requests
further explanation of the programme;
3. Recognizes the end-of-service accrued benefit liabilities reported by the SecretaryGeneral in his report,56 and requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to disclose
those liabilities in the United Nations financial statements;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session a report that addresses the issues raised in paragraph 2 above, as well as the issues raised
by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report,57 and that
provides updated information on the status of liabilities, clarifications with regard to the
assumptions used to determine liabilities and alternative strategies to fund the liabilities;
IV
Harmonization of the conditions of travel
Noting with appreciation the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on harmonization of the
conditions of travel throughout the United Nations system58 and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,59
1. Decides to revert to the consideration of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit,58 the
note by the Secretary-General59 and any relevant contributions by the International Civil Service
Commission at its sixty-first session, together with the question “Standards of accommodation for
air travel”;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to initiate, within the framework of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, a review of the standards of travel and
entitlements for staff members, members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United Nations
and organizations of the United Nations system, with a view to adopting a common policy at the
United Nations system level;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit the results of the review to the General
Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 60/256
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
60
(A/60/608/Add.2, para. 8)

_______________
56

A/60/450 and Corr.1.
A/60/7/Add.11. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
58
See A/60/78.
59
A/60/78/Add.1.
60
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
57

74

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

60/256. Capital master plan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000,
56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001 and 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution
57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution
60/248 of 23 December 2005 and its decision 58/566 of 8 April 2004,
1. Takes note of the third annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the capital master plan61 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;62
2. Decides to appropriate an amount of 23.5 million United States dollars for financing
the design and pre-construction phases of the capital master plan, including swing space
requirements;
3. Also decides that the appropriation of 23.5 million dollars shall be financed in
accordance with regulation 3.1 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations63
through assessment on Member States in 2006 on the basis of the regular budget scale of
assessments in effect for the year;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments of up to 77 million dollars
for the biennium 2006–2007 to provide for the construction, fit-out and related requirements of a
conference swing space building on the North Lawn and for the leasing, design, pre-construction
services, fit-out and related requirements of library and office swing space for the capital master
plan;
5. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into the lease commitments necessary
for the implementation of the capital master plan;
6. Reaffirms paragraph 28 of its resolution 57/292, and calls upon the Secretary-General
to explore the possibility of private donor funding for the capital master plan;
7. Recalls paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee,62 and requests the
Secretary-General to present a more detailed business analysis on the possibility of constructing a
new permanent building on the North Lawn by the second part of its resumed sixtieth session;
8. Decides to revert, as a matter of priority, to the consideration of the reports on the
capital master plan during the second part of its resumed sixtieth session.
RESOLUTION 60/257
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/60/747,
64
para. 8)

60/257. Programme planning
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/234 of 21 December 1982, 38/227 A of 20 December 1983,
41/213 of 19 December 1986, 55/234 of 23 December 2000, 56/253 of 24 December 2001,

_______________
61

A/60/550 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1.
A/60/7/Add.12. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 7A.
63
ST/SGB/2003/7.
64
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
62

75

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

57/282 of 20 December 2002, 58/268 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003 and 59/275 of
23 December 2004,
Recalling also the terms of reference of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as
outlined in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the
work of its forty-fifth session65 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
proposals on the strengthening and monitoring of programme performance and evaluation,66
Having received the letter from the President of the General Assembly transmitting the
recommendations of the Second Committee concerning the evaluation of linkages between
headquarters and field activities: a review of best practices for poverty eradication in the
framework of the United Nations Millennium Declaration and concerning the in-depth evaluation
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme,67
1. Reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main
subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning,
programming and coordination;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination as contained in paragraphs 36 to 39, 135 to 139, 151 to 158, 165, 175 to 178, 186,
201 to 212, 227 to 237 and 248 of its report65 and the recommendations of the Second Committee
concerning the evaluation of linkages between headquarters and field activities: a review of best
practices for poverty eradication in the framework of the United Nations Millennium Declaration
and concerning the in-depth evaluation of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme;67
3. Re-emphasizes the role of the plenary and the Main Committees in reviewing and
taking action on the appropriate recommendations of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination relevant to their work, in accordance with regulation 4.10 of the Regulations and
Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of
Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation;68
4. Requests the General Committee to take fully into account resolutions 56/253, 57/282
and 59/275 in the allocation of agenda items to the Main Committees;
Programme questions
5. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the
Member States, as reflected in legislative mandates;
6. Also stresses the need for Member States to participate fully in the budget preparation
process, from its early stages and throughout the process;
7. Recalls paragraph 3 of its resolution 60/246 of 23 December 2005, and invites the
Committee for Programme and Coordination at its forty-seventh session, in the light of its
recommendations in paragraphs 118 to 120 and 122 of its report,65 to provide further comments on
the various aspects of the review process referred to in paragraphs 12 and 13 of General Assembly
resolution 58/269 to facilitate the decision of the Assembly at its sixty-second session;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure and without prejudice to
the provisions of General Assembly resolutions 41/213, 42/211 of 21 December 1987 and 58/269
or to the future scheduling of the sessions of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, and
_______________
65

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 16 and corrigendum (A/60/16 and
Corr.1).
66
A/60/73.
67
A/C.5/60/11.
68
ST/SGB/2000/8.

76

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

taking into account paragraph 4 of its resolution 60/246, to reschedule the forty-sixth session of
the Committee to September 2006 at the latest in order to consider the proposed strategic
framework for the period 2008–2009 and other items on the Committee’s provisional agenda;
Evaluation
9. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services,66 and encourages
intergovernmental bodies to make use of the findings in the programme performance report of the
Secretary-General and evaluation reports in planning and policymaking;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, as appropriate, on
the measures taken to promote the strengthening of monitoring and evaluation in the Organization,
as per the proposals contained in the annex to the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services;66
11. Concurs with the findings contained in paragraphs 16 and 17 of the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services,66 and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly in the context of the overall information technology strategy on measures and resources
needed to strengthen the use of information technology as a management and monitoring tool;
12. Notes with concern that the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services66 was
not submitted to the General Assembly through the Committee for Programme and Coordination;
13. Welcomes the enhanced coordination between the Joint Inspection Unit and the Office
of Internal Oversight Services as reflected in the report of the Office,66 and encourages such
coordination in the future;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with reporting to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on ongoing efforts and measures
taken to strengthen its in-depth and thematic evaluation function, as well as to respond to ad hoc
evaluation requests by programme managers to ensure that intergovernmental bodies are provided
with high-quality professional and objective reports on the performance of programmes and
activities;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixtysecond session on the measures taken to strengthen self-evaluation by programme managers and
to ensure more extensive and uniform use of self-evaluation at the programme and subprogramme
levels, as well as to develop and implement common professional standards and methodologies
for self-evaluation throughout the United Nations system, in consultation with the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination;
Other conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination
16. Welcomes the high priority that the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination continues to attach to ensuring effective and coordinated United Nations system
support for Africa’s development and the implementation of the priorities and programmes of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development;69
17. Requests the Secretary-General, with reference to the conclusions and
recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination in paragraphs 227 to 237 of
its report,65 to submit the recommended report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on
further efforts made to ensure that support for the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
remains a priority of the United Nations system and that organizations represented on the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination increase their efforts in support of the
New Partnership;
_______________
69

A/57/304, annex.

77

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

18. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to enhance and monitor the effective
coordination of system-wide efforts against hunger and poverty;
19. Recalls its resolutions 58/269 and 59/275, as well as discussions held at the forty-fifth
session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination, and, in this regard, notes with
concern that no conclusions or recommendations were agreed to on improving the working
methods and procedures of the Committee for Programme and Coordination during its forty-fifth
session, and emphasizes the need for the Committee, within the framework of its mandate, to
improve its working methods and procedures without having a negative impact on the effective
consideration of other agenda items, in particular the proposed strategic framework for the period
2008–2009, as matters of priority, during its forty-sixth session;
20. Recognizes the importance of ensuring the highest level of expertise that is most
appropriate for the Committee for Programme and Coordination, and, in this regard, invites the
Committee to consider at its forty-sixth session how best to achieve this objective.
RESOLUTION 60/258
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/60/748,
70
para. 6)

60/258. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
I
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions
31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of
23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002, 58/286
of 8 April 2004 and 59/267 of 23 December 2004,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2004 and its programme of
work for 200571 and the note by the Chairperson of the Unit on the programme of work of the
Unit for 2006,72
Noting the ongoing internal reform process of the Joint Inspection Unit aimed at further
improving its effectiveness,
1. Notes the thematic reports mentioned in the programme of work of the Joint
Inspection Unit for 2005,73 and in this regard reaffirms paragraph 4 of its resolution 50/233;
2.

Reaffirms the unique role of the Unit as the only system-wide external oversight body;

3. Welcomes the efforts made by the Unit to improve the quality of the reports issued in
2004 and also the improvements made in the implementation of its reform process, as indicated in
paragraphs 1 to 5 of its report;71
4. Takes note with appreciation of the single consolidated format of the report of the Unit
on its activities for 2004 and its programme of work for 2005;71
5. Notes paragraphs 28 and 29 of the report of the Unit for 2004, and urges all host
countries to facilitate prompt access for inspectors to all offices of participating organizations;
_______________
70

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/60/34).
72
A/C.5/60/CRP.1.
73
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/60/34), chap. II.
71

78

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Takes note of the programme of work for 2006,72 and requests the Unit to continue to
submit an advance version of its programme of work to the General Assembly at the first part of
its resumed sessions;
7. Requests the Unit to continue to enhance dialogue with participating organizations and
thereby to strengthen the follow-up of the implementation of its recommendations, in particular on
managing for results;
8. Reaffirms the importance of effective coordination, in the implementation of their
respective mandates, between the Unit, the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, in order to maximize the use of resources and share experiences, knowledge, best
practices and lessons learned;
9. Requests the Unit to include in future annual reports more information on the impact
of full implementation of recommendations, including any cost savings, productivity and
efficiency gains achieved;
II
Having considered the note by the President of the General Assembly on the procedures for
the appointment of inspectors of the Joint Inspection Unit,74
Decides to revert to the consideration of this subject at its sixty-first session.
RESOLUTION 60/259
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
75
(A/60/604/Add.1, para. 6)

60/259. Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December 1999 and 59/272
of 23 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolutions 56/246 of 24 December 2001, 58/101 B of 9 December 2003
and 59/270 of 23 December 2004,
Having considered the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the
period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005,76
1.

Reaffirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on reports submitted

to it;
2. Also reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative
and budgetary matters;
3. Further reaffirms the independence and the separate and distinct roles of the internal
and external oversight mechanisms;
4. Looks forward to the results of the independent external evaluation of the audit and
oversight system of the United Nations, and stresses that the evaluation should include proposals
on:
_______________
74

A/60/659.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
76
A/60/346 and Corr.1.
75

79

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(a) Ensuring the full operational independence of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services;
(b) Strengthening the evaluation capacity of the Office at the programme and
subprogramme levels;
(c) Ensuring adequate funding arrangements for timely reimbursement by funds and
programmes for services of the Office;
5. Notes with concern the description of the mission of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, as outlined in paragraph 1 of its annual report,76 and in this regard reiterates that, in
accordance with paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 59/270, the mission of the Office
should be in full conformity with its mandate, as approved by the Assembly in its resolution
48/218 B;
6.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;

7.

Takes note of the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services;76

8. Stresses the importance of full implementation of legislative decisions, and requests
the Secretary-General to ensure that programme managers provide information to the Office of
Internal Oversight Services to be reflected in the programme performance report on the rate of
implementation of legislative mandates and decisions and, where applicable, in cases where full
implementation has not been achieved, the reasons therefor;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions, in particular
cross-cutting resolutions, are brought to the attention of relevant managers, and further requests
that the Office of Internal Oversight Services also take those resolutions into account in the
conduct of its activities;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant resolutions pertaining to
the work of the Office of Internal Oversight Services are brought to the attention of the relevant
managers;
11. Notes that not all programme managers have reported the results of investigations to
the Office of Internal Oversight Services, as required in paragraph 11 of its resolution 59/287 of
13 April 2005, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that programme managers comply
with this requirement as a measure of accountability;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
submit a report on the use of the best-value concept in the evaluation and awarding of
procurement contracts in order to identify any possible misuse;
13. Recalls its request, as contained in section IV, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296 of
22 June 2005, notes with concern paragraph 25 of the annual report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services76 concerning the management of fuel in peacekeeping missions, and welcomes
the intention of the Office to report to the General Assembly on the oversight of fuel management
in peacekeeping missions;
14. Welcomes the comprehensive tsunami risk assessments undertaken by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services jointly with United Nations funds and programmes and the specialized
agencies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that United Nations funds and programmes
and the specialized agencies cooperate with the Office in the preparation of a consolidated report
on audits and investigative reviews undertaken of the tsunami relief operation and to entrust the
Office to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
15. Also welcomes the intention of the Office of Internal Oversight Services to conduct a
risk assessment of the activities of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, and invites the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board to request the Office, in this context, to conduct an audit
of the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of services provided to beneficiaries;

80

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Notes with concern the numerous allegations of fraud and irregularities in the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, and requests the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to submit to the General Assembly at its resumed sixtieth session an overview report on
its investigations and follow-up;
17. Decides to modify the title of the relevant agenda item to read “Report on the activities
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services” in accordance with paragraph 3 of its resolution
59/272.
RESOLUTION 60/260
Adopted at the 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/60/831, para. 9),77 by a
recorded vote of 121 to 50, with 2 abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining: Norway, Uganda

60/260. Investing in the United Nations: for a stronger Organization worldwide
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/1 of 16 September 2005,
Reaffirming its determination to strengthen further the role, capacity, effectiveness and
efficiency of the United Nations, and thus improve its performance, in order to realize the full
potential of the Organization, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to respond more effectively to the needs of Member States and existing and
new global challenges facing the United Nations in the twenty-first century,
Recalling its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 42/211 of 21 December 1987,
49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 57/300 of 20 December 2002 and 58/269 of 23 December 2003,
Recalling also its resolutions 55/258 of 14 June 2001, 57/305 and 57/307 of 15 April 2003,
58/296 of 18 June 2004, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005 and 60/238 of
23 December 2005, as well as its other relevant resolutions and decisions on human resources
management and administration of justice,

_______________
77
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced by the representative of South Africa (on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).

81

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling further its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999, 54/256 of 7 April 2000, 55/232
of 23 December 2000, 55/247 of 12 April 2001, 57/279 of 20 December 2002, 58/276 and 58/277
of 23 December 2003 and 59/288 and 59/289 of 13 April 2005, as well as its other relevant
resolutions on procurement and outsourcing practices,
Recalling its resolutions 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, 52/220 of 22 December 1997,
55/231 of 23 December 2000, 57/304 of 15 April 2003, 58/268 of 23 December 2003, 59/275 of
23 December 2004, 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/237 of 23 December 2005 and 60/254, 60/257
and 60/259 of 8 May 2006,
Recalling also Article 2, paragraph 1, and Articles 17, 18, 97 and 100 of the Charter,
Reaffirming the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
Recalling the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme
Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation78 and
the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,79
Stressing the intergovernmental, multilateral and international character of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the role of the General Assembly and its relevant intergovernmental and expert
bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and
evaluation,
Stressing the need for Member States to participate in the budget preparation process, from
its early stages and throughout the process,
Recognizing the ongoing efforts to reform human resources management, the system of
administration of justice, the budgetary and planning processes and the procurement system of the
United Nations, in accordance with the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and decisions,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Investing in the United
Nations: for a stronger Organization worldwide” 80 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,81
1.
Nations;
2.

Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to strengthening the United
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;80

3. Also takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;81
4. Reaffirms its oversight role and the role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and
budgetary matters;
5. Also reaffirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on reports
submitted to it;
6. Stresses that setting the priorities of the United Nations is the prerogative of the
Member States, as reflected in legislative decisions;
7. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and
financial resources and policies, with a view to ensuring full, effective and efficient
_______________
78

ST/SGB/2000/8.
ST/SGB/2003/7.
80
A/60/692 and Corr.1.
81
A/60/735 and Corr.1.
79

82

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
I
Accountability
1. Stresses the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial
resources;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the reports requested in the present
resolution and the proposals contained therein, to specifically define accountability as well as clear
accountability mechanisms, including to the General Assembly, and to propose clear parameters
for its application and the instruments for its rigorous enforcement, without exception, at all levels;
3. Emphasizes the need for strengthening oversight in the Organization, and looks
forward to considering and taking action on the report on the strengthening of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services and the terms of reference requested in section XIII, paragraph 4, of its
resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005;
II
Proposals 1 to 4 and 7
1. Recalls its requests for reports, as contained in the relevant paragraphs of its
resolutions 59/266 and 60/238;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session, in addition to the reports and assessments requested in its resolutions 59/266, 59/296 and
60/238, a report, including details regarding proposals 1 to 4 and 7 contained in the report of the
Secretary-General,80 focusing on the following elements:
(a) Information on all relevant previous reform proposals as agreed by the General
Assembly, including concise references to previous relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Assembly, as well as an outline of the measures taken to implement them;
(b) An assessment of the impact of previous and ongoing reforms as they relate to the
proposals;
(c) Specific costs and administrative implications, including required changes to the
regulations, rules and procedures, with detailed analysis and justification;
(d) Detailed explanation and concrete examples of how it is envisaged that the proposals
will enhance the effectiveness of the work of the Organization and to address current deficiencies;
(e) Proposals to effectively increase the representation of developing countries in the
Secretariat, in particular at senior levels, with due regard to the principle of equitable geographical
distribution of posts;
(f)

Proposals on how gender targets can be strictly enforced;

(g) An assessment of the impact of the proposals on the role and authority of the
centralized human resources function;
3. Reaffirms that the staff of the United Nations is an invaluable asset of the
Organization, and requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the reports requested in the
present resolution, to provide information on the consultations undertaken with the staff
representatives, in accordance with article VIII of the Staff Regulations, to develop the proposals
on personnel policies;

83

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

III
Proposals 5 and 6
1. Recalls the role of the Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the
Organization, in accordance with the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter of the United Nations;
2.

Reaffirms paragraphs 1 and 2 of its resolution 52/12 B;

3. Recalls its resolutions 52/12 B and 52/220, by which it decided to establish the post of
Deputy Secretary-General as an integral part of the Office of the Secretary-General, without
prejudice to the mandate of the Secretary-General as provided by the Charter, and noted that the
Secretary-General would appoint the Deputy Secretary-General following consultations with
Member States;
4. Also recalls that in its resolution 52/12 B, the General Assembly identified functions of
the post of Deputy Secretary-General and the duration of the term of office, and decides that the
functions of the post should be in accordance with that resolution and should not diminish the role
or responsibilities of the Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the Organization,
including in management policies and overall operational matters;
5. Recognizes that the delegation of authority on the part of the Secretary-General should
be in order to facilitate the better management of the Organization, but stresses that the overall
responsibility for management of the Organization rests with the Secretary-General as the chief
administrative officer;
6. Reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and stresses that
proposals that amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the format of the programme
budget and the biennial programme plan are subject to the review and approval of the General
Assembly;
7. Emphasizes that proposal 6 would be developed in the light of paragraph 13 of the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;81
IV
Proposals 8 to 12, 17 and 18
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a detailed report, bearing in mind the unique
intergovernmental nature and international character of the United Nations and the provisions of
previous resolutions, including paragraph 15 of its resolution 60/237, to the General Assembly on
proposals 8 to 10, 17 and 18 contained in his report,80 which would respond to the following
elements:
(a) Information on all relevant previous reform proposals as agreed by the General
Assembly, including concise references to previous relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Assembly, as well as an outline of the measures taken to implement them;
(b) An assessment of the impact of previous and ongoing reforms as they relate to the
proposals;
(c) Specific costs and administrative implications, including required changes to the
regulations, rules and procedures, with detailed analysis and justification;
(d) Detailed explanation and concrete examples of how it is envisaged that the proposals
will enhance the effectiveness of the work of the Organization and to address current deficiencies;
(e)

A clear definition of the terminologies and rationale for the proposals;

(f) An assessment of previous investments in information and communications
technology, as well as lessons learned and expected time frames for introducing the proposed
system and arrangements for the continuation of the present system during the transitional period;

84

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(g) Proposals on how to increase public access to United Nations information materials
and important documents, including in languages other than the six official languages;
2. Notes that the short-term study of Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management documentation outsourcing options was conducted by the Secretariat without a
General Assembly mandate, and reaffirms, in this context, paragraph 27 of its resolution 53/208 B
of 18 December 1998 and its resolution 55/232;
3. Takes note of proposal 12, requests the Secretary-General to provide additional
information in this regard, and decides to revert to the issue of undertaking a detailed cost-benefit
analysis of relocation, outsourcing and telecommuting opportunities on the following selected
administrative services at its sixty-first session:
(a)

Internal printing and publishing processes;

(b)

Medical insurance plan administration;

(c)

Information technology support services;

(d)

Payables, receivables and payroll processes;

(e)

Staff benefits administration;

4. Recalls paragraphs 9 to 15 of its resolution 60/257, paragraph 8 of its resolution
60/259 and paragraphs 4 to 7 of its resolution 60/254, and requests the Secretary-General, in the
report referred to in paragraph 1 of the present section, to include information on how to ensure
the implementation of the provisions of the above-mentioned resolutions when proposing
measures to improve the performance evaluation and reporting of the Secretariat, as stated in
proposal 18;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a detailed proposal on strengthening the
monitoring and evaluation tools in the Secretariat, taking into account recent experience in resultsbased budgeting;
V
Proposals 14 and 15
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a detailed report, bearing in mind the unique
intergovernmental nature and international character of the United Nations, to the General
Assembly on proposals 14 and 15 contained in his report,80 which would respond to the following
elements:
(a) Information on all relevant previous reform proposals as agreed by the General
Assembly, including concise references to previous relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Assembly, as well as an outline of the measures taken to implement them;
(b) An assessment of the impact of previous and ongoing reforms as they relate to the
proposals;
(c) Specific costs and administrative implications, including required changes to the
regulations, rules and procedures, with detailed analysis and justification;
(d) Detailed explanation and concrete examples of how it is envisaged that the proposals
will enhance the effectiveness of the work of the Organization and to address current deficiencies;
(e)

Clear definition of the terminologies and rationale for the proposals;

(f)

Proposals on how to increase the use of open source software in the Secretariat;

(g) Proposals to effectively increase procurement opportunities and participation of
vendors from developing countries;

85

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(h) An assessment of the effectiveness of the internal controls of the United Nations
organizations referred to in proposal 14, as well as an assessment of how these internal controls
differ from those of the United Nations Procurement Service;
VI
Proposal 16
1. Recalls paragraph 11 of its resolution 60/246 of 23 December 2005, in which it
recognized the need for limited discretion in budgetary implementation for the Secretary-General,
within defined parameters to be agreed by the General Assembly, with clear accountability
mechanisms to the Assembly for its use;
2. Recognizes that the proposals contained in proposal 16 do not respond to the request of
the General Assembly, as contained in paragraph 11 of its resolution 60/246, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit proposals to the Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixtieth
session in full conformity with paragraph 11 of resolution 60/246;
3. Stresses that the General Assembly will review the planning and budgetary reform
experiment at its sixty-second session with a view to making a final decision thereon, in
accordance with its resolutions 58/269 and 60/257;
4.

Reaffirms the provisions of section I of its resolution 49/233 A;
VII
Proposal 19

1. Emphasizes the importance of providing the information necessary to enable Member
States to make well-informed decisions;
2. Recalls paragraph 20 of its resolution 57/300, paragraph 6 of the annex to resolution
58/316 of 1 July 2004 and paragraph 16 of its resolution 59/313 of 12 September 2005, and
requests the Secretary-General to implement measures in accordance with the above-mentioned
paragraphs with a view to consolidating reports on related subjects;
3. Reaffirms that all reports pertaining to administrative and budgetary matters are subject
to the consideration of the Fifth Committee as the appropriate Main Committee of the General
Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for those matters;
VIII
Proposals 20 and 21
1. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General
Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters;
2. Also reaffirms the role of the Committee for Programme and Coordination as the main
subsidiary organ of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for planning,
programming and coordination;
3. Further reaffirms that no changes to the budget methodology, to established budgetary
procedures and practices or to the financial regulations may be implemented without prior review
and approval by the General Assembly, in accordance with established budgetary procedures;
4. Recalls paragraph 162 of its resolution 60/1, whereby the General Assembly called
upon the Secretary-General to make proposals to the Assembly for its consideration on the
conditions and measures necessary for him to carry out his managerial responsibilities effectively,
and stresses that proposals 20 and 21 do not bear any relation to the requests of the Assembly as
outlined in resolution 60/1 or in any other legislative mandate adopted by the Assembly;

86

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Also recalls, in this context, section II of its resolution 41/213, and reaffirms that the
decision-making process is governed by the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular Article 18, and the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
IX
Proposals 22 and 23
1. Takes note of the idea of a dedicated capacity within the Secretariat with the aim of
facilitating the management reform efforts within the Secretariat by the Secretary-General, and
requests the Secretary-General to take into account existing capacity and expertise already
available in the Secretariat in formulating future proposals in this regard;
2. Stresses that the implementation of reform measures approved by the General
Assembly is the responsibility of the Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the
Organization and should be undertaken in full transparency with the entire membership of the
Organization through established reporting lines to the Assembly;
3. Recalls paragraph 163 (c) of its resolution 60/1, and requests the Secretary-General to
present a detailed and justified proposal in line with the provisions and intent of paragraph 163 (c).
RESOLUTION 60/266
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/60/916, para. 12)82

60/266. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations: cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of 31 March 1995,
51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of 1 July 2004 and 59/296 of
22 June 2005,
Having considered the interim report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations,83
I
1. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests full implementation of its relevant
provisions;
2.

Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at Headquarters;

3. Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations84 and other relevant reports on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations at the main part of its sixty-first session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session on progress in training in peacekeeping;

_______________
82

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/880.
84
A/60/696.
83

87

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Budget presentation
1. Recalls the unique nature and mandate of each operation, and stresses that the resource
requirements should respond to the mandates and circumstances of each operation;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake the review of staffing
requirements, function and level of posts that would reflect evolving mandates, changing
operational requirements, actual responsibilities and functions performed, with a view to ensuring
the most cost-effective use of resources;
3. Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution 49/233 A, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include in all performance reports in respect of peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and the support account, details of monthly expenditure
patterns, as well as to provide, in the context of the consideration of the budget submission, to the
extent possible, supplementary information on the most up-to-date financial data available on
actual expenditures for the current period;
4. Regrets the late issuance and receipt of budgets of some peacekeeping operations,
which has placed some considerable strain on the ability of the General Assembly to engage in a
detailed consideration of the requirements, and requests the Secretary-General to make every
effort to improve the timely submission of peacekeeping budgets;
5. Notes the practice of allowing peacekeeping staff to take up temporary duty positions
in other peacekeeping missions, and requests the Secretary-General to review this practice,
including for staff currently seconded on temporary duty, to consider ways to limit the length of
temporary duty secondments as well as to elaborate on the exceptions and ensure that such
secondments do not impact adversely on the operational activities of the parent mission, in
particular when the parent mission has existing vacancies;
III
Use of consultants
1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full utilization of synergies present in the
United Nations system and to develop an effective evaluation mechanism for the use of outside
expertise;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the commissioning of external
consultants in the Organization by senior management and programme managers is conducted
according to established administrative procedures and financial regulations and rules, with full
respect for the mandates of internal and external oversight bodies and the oversight role of the
General Assembly, and to report thereon;
IV
High vacancy rates
1. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his ongoing efforts, including through
innovative approaches, to ensure the expeditious filling of all vacant posts;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure greater use of national staff
in peacekeeping operations;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, cognizant of the continuously high
international staff vacancy rates in many missions, to consider, when formulating budget
submissions, greater utilization of national staff, as appropriate, commensurate with the
requirements of the mission and its mandate;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen coordination between the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations Volunteers programme for the
88

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

use of volunteers in peacekeeping operations and to evaluate the contribution of United Nations
Volunteers as a component of peacekeeping operations;
V
Accountability, fraud, corruption, mismanagement, misconduct
and conflict of interest
1. Notes with concern the observations contained in the reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,83 the Board of Auditors85 and the Office
of Internal Oversight Services, 86 concerning instances of non-compliance with established
guidelines, rules, regulations and procedures;
2.

Regrets any incidence of fraud, corruption, mismanagement and misconduct;

3. Requests the Secretary-General, within his purview, to address all cases of fraud,
corruption, mismanagement and misconduct and to ensure that United Nations staff are held
accountable for any proven wrongdoings;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services
with ensuring that all current and future investigations by the Office are conducted impartially,
thoroughly, expeditiously, taking into account current capacity, and with full respect for due
process, and that they are not subject to any unnecessary delays;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to recover financial
and other losses and to take appropriate measures to prevent fraud, corruption, mismanagement
and misconduct;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the application and enforcement of
accountability in the United Nations system is carried out impartially at all levels and without
exception;
7. Notes with concern the increase in the level of fraud and presumptive fraud in respect
of fuel abuse within some peacekeeping operations, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that lessons learned from addressing these cases are shared systematically with all missions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session on the implementation of paragraphs 1 to 7 above;
9. Reiterates paragraph 28 of its resolution 52/226 A of 31 March 1998 and paragraph 30
of its resolution 54/14 of 29 October 1999, related to the issue of conflict of interest, and requests
the Secretary-General to ensure their expeditious implementation and to submit the proposals
requested in the aforementioned paragraphs to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixtyfirst session;
VI
Integrated missions
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to refine the concept and functioning of
integrated missions, strengthening the mission planning process, and to clearly detail lines of
responsibility and accountability within integrated missions as well as the interaction between
such missions and the different partners;

_______________
85
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 and corrigendum (A/60/5 and
A/60/5 (Vol. II)/Corr.1), vol. II.
86
A/60/717.

89

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the utilization of mission assets by
United Nations agencies is fully justified and reimbursed and that such utilization is duly recorded
and reported properly;
VII
Procurement opportunities
1. Requests the Secretary-General, taking fully into account the observations of the
Board of Auditors, in paragraphs 71 to 74 of its report,85 to increase efforts to improve
procurement opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to
the Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation thereof;
2. Recalls section XVI, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to ensure that information on procurement opportunities in peacekeeping
operations is made available to business communities, in particular in developing countries and
countries with economies in transition, through, inter alia, continued cooperation between the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and the Procurement Service of the
Department of Management of the Secretariat, utilizing the United Nations information centres
and offices, as appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the United Nations Procurement Manual
available to Member States through the website of the Procurement Service no later than August
2006;
VIII
Quick-impact projects
1. Welcomes the inclusion of quick-impact projects in the budgets of peacekeeping
operations, and recognizes the important contribution that they make towards the successful
implementation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
2. Stresses that quick-impact projects are an integral part of mission planning and
development, as well as of the implementation of comprehensive strategies to meet the challenges
facing complex peacekeeping operations;
3. Emphasizes the need for a comprehensive policy, including on resource allocations,
for quick-impact projects, and, bearing in mind the unique nature and mandate of each operation,
requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session,
addressing, inter alia: the definition of quick-impact projects and the selection processes; the
duration of such projects; how, and if, quick-impact projects complement the activities of other
United Nations bodies on the ground; the role of the Mission, other United Nations bodies and
implementing partners in managing and implementing quick-impact projects in the short and
longer term; and how administrative costs can be minimized;
IX
Regional cooperation
1. Welcomes the efforts to increase collaboration between missions, in particular those in
the same region, and emphasizes the importance of further enhancing collaboration, to the extent
possible, with a view to achieving greater synergy in the effective and efficient use of the
resources of the United Nations and the implementation of missions’ mandates, bearing in mind
that individual missions bear a responsibility for the preparation and for overseeing their own
budgets and for controlling their own assets and logistical operations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to develop and implement regional coordination plans
aligned to the missions’ objectives, while mindful of the specific mandate of each mission, and to
report on the progress achieved in the context of his next overview report;
90

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

X
Fuel management
Requests the Secretary-General to review all aspects of fuel management, including the
preparation of a comprehensive fuel management manual, implementation of the electronic fuel
accounting system, development of standard operating procedures on fuel management and
preparation of an annual fuel procurement plan, and to report on the status of implementation;
XI
Costing structure for air operations
1. Welcomes the efforts to enhance the optimal use of air assets, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that operations share best practices in order to increase utilization of
air assets;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake an analysis of the impact of the new
costing structure relating to air operations, bearing in mind the relevant observations and
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions83 and
the Board of Auditors,85 to determine whether the application of the new costing structure for air
operations contracts has resulted in savings or brought about other benefits and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at the sixty-second session in the context of his overview report;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, mindful of the importance of air services to the
effective operational activities of peacekeeping operations, to review, in all peacekeeping
operations, the ongoing necessity and current frequency of flights, to ensure the optimal use of air
assets, to reconfigure them to respond to changing circumstances, to increase the utilization of air
assets, inter alia, by continuing to review flight schedules to accommodate more passengers and
cargo and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore ways to increase
regional management of air assets and further strengthen the coordination between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and relevant United Nations departments and entities,
with a view to sharing air assets, when feasible;
XII
Spare parts
1. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to limit the acquisition of
new spare parts in the light of the current high level of holdings, requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on optimal levels for spare parts in all
missions, and also requests that the budget proposals for the period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008 not exceed those levels;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session on the possible establishment of a mechanism for global management of spare parts at
United Nations Headquarters, including the ongoing identification of spare parts requirements, the
capacity to redeploy them from other missions and any efficiencies to be achieved from such a
mechanism;
XIII
Better use of technology
Requests the Secretary-General to make greater use of videoconferencing facilities and elearning programmes for training and other purposes and to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session on improvements and efficiencies made through greater utilization of those
tools;

91

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

XIV
Staffing of field missions, including the use of 300-series
and 100-series appointments
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field missions,
including the use of 300-series and 100-series appointments 87 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,88
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field missions,
including the use of 300-series and 100-series appointments;87
2.

Recalls section VIII of its resolution 59/296;

3. Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum limit for
appointments of limited duration until 31 December 2006;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 3 above, to reappoint,
under the 100 series of the Staff Rules, those mission staff whose service under 300-series
contracts has reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2006, provided that their functions have
been reviewed and found necessary and their performance has been confirmed as fully
satisfactory, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using 300-series contracts
as the primary instrument for the appointment of new staff;
XV
Disaster recovery
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its resumed sixty-first
session a comprehensive report on the proposed establishment of and justification for mission
onsite, mission in theatre and off site, and off site and out-of-theatre redundant data centres for
disaster recovery and business continuity in peacekeeping missions, as well as on a secondary
active communications facility and a disaster recovery and business continuity centre for
information technology;
XVI
Strategic deployment stocks
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of strategic deployment stocks and the use of
logistics base and installations, as well as all mechanisms for rapid deployment, including on the
evolving concepts used in this regard, taking fully into account the surge in peacekeeping
operations, the location, operational and strategic requirements of peacekeeping operations and the
need to ensure the utmost efficiencies in the use of resources.
RESOLUTION 60/267
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/60/916, para. 12)89

_______________
87

A/60/698 and Corr.1 and 2.
A/60/851 and Corr.1.
89
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
88

92

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

60/267. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which was resolution 59/299 of 22 June 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the
strategic deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions 57/315 of 18 June 2003, 58/297 of
18 June 2004 and 59/299 on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base and implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the
award of contracts for procurement,90 the report of the Secretary-General on the use of the United
Nations Logistics Base to provide efficient and economical communications and information
technology services, as well as other services, for United Nations peacekeeping and Headquarters
clients,91 the report of the Secretary-General on the cost-benefit analysis on the issue of the
transfer of vehicles with high mileage to the United Nations Logistics Base, to other missions and
to upcoming United Nations peacekeeping operations,92 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,93
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the use of the United Nations
Logistics Base to provide efficient and economical communications and information technology
services, as well as other services, for United Nations peacekeeping and Headquarters clients,91
and the report of the Secretary-General on the cost-benefit analysis on the issue of the transfer of
vehicles with high mileage to the United Nations Logistics Base, to other missions and to
upcoming United Nations peacekeeping operations;92
3. Also takes note of the proposals of the Secretary-General for the establishment at the
United Nations Logistics Base during the fiscal year 2007/08 of a strategic air operations centre,
an aviation quality assurance programme, a central design unit and a geographical information
system centre;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,93 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
5. Recalls paragraph 3 of its resolution 59/299, in which it took note of the proposal to
expand the United Nations Logistics Base, and requests the Secretary-General that detailed
information on the concept of operations, financial and legal implications and expected benefits
that may arise from the expansion be submitted with the budget for 2007/08 to the General
Assembly for its decision;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session, in the context of the reporting on the Training Delivery Cell, detailed information on the
efficiency and effectiveness of all Department of Peacekeeping Operations training programmes
_______________
90

A/60/700 and A/60/711.
A/60/715.
92
A/60/699.
93
A/60/787.
91

93

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

to be implemented at the United Nations Logistics Base, drawing a comparison with training
programmes provided at other facilities and United Nations offices;
7. Welcomes the establishment of a pilot project for the regional aviation safety office at
the United Nations Logistics Base, and requests the Secretary-General to provide, to the extent
possible, a preliminary assessment of the pilot project in the next presentation of the budget, and
notes that if the concept is applicable it will consider proposals to establish regional aviation safety
offices for other peacekeeping missions;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to ensure the active participation of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat in the negotiations with the Government of Italy
concerning the possible extensions of the facilities at Brindisi;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in future budget submissions, to report on any
proposals to extend the facilities at Brindisi;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to analyse how the Logistics Base
could best be utilized to provide efficient and economical communications and information
technology services, as well as other services for United Nations peacekeeping and Headquarters
clients, and to ensure that any related proposals contain full justification and detailed cost-benefit
analyses;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of
30 June 2006;
12. Reiterates the need to implement, as a matter of priority, an effective inventory
management standard, especially in respect of peacekeeping operations involving high inventory
value;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and
implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the award of contracts for
procurement;94
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
14. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to
35,478,700 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
Financing of the budget estimates
15. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 1,399,200 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 to be applied against the resources required
for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
(b) The balance of 34,079,500 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
(c) The net estimated staff assessment income of 2,579,300 dollars, comprising the
amount of 2,535,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and the increase of
44,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, to be set off against the
_______________
94

A/60/700.

94

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual
active peacekeeping operations;
16. Also decides to consider at its sixty-first session the question of the financing of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 60/268
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
95
(A/60/916, para. 12)

60/268. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A
of 23 December 1993, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June
2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004 and 59/301 of 22 June 2005, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994,
49/469 of 23 December 1994 and 50/473 of 23 December 1995 and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations, 96 the note by the Secretary-General on the resource
requirements for the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 200797 and the
related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98
Recognizing the importance for the United Nations to be able to respond and deploy rapidly
to a peacekeeping operation upon adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council, within
thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and ninety days for complex peacekeeping
operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping
operations, including the liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate,
number, size and complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the support
account for peacekeeping operations96 and the note by the Secretary-General on the resource
requirements for the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;97
2. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management
of peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to
increase the productivity and efficiency of the support account;
3. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;

_______________
95

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/681 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and A/60/727.
97
A/60/898.
98
A/60/807 and A/60/900.
96

95

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006 as well as other
relevant resolutions;
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
6.

Decides to establish the following posts:

(a) Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5) for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti team in the Office of Operations of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat;
(b) Policy Coordinator (P-4) in the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
(c)

Secretariat Services Officer (P-3) in the Fifth Committee secretariat;

(d) Information/communications expert (P-3) in support of the African Peacekeeping
Capacity in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Addis Ababa;
(e) Administration/finance analyst (P-3) in support of the African Peacekeeping Capacity
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in Addis Ababa;
7. Also decides to approve the establishment of the post of Chief of the Integrated
Training Service (D-1) in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to evaluate the functioning of this post and to report thereon within the context of the
support account budget for the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008;
8. Further decides to approve the establishment of the post of Chief of the Transport and
Movement Service (D-1) of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, to be funded from the
abolishment of one existing P-4 post, with the balance of the requirements to be funded from
within the approved level of the support account for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to
30 June 2007;
9. Decides to approve the establishment of the post of Environmental Engineer (P-3) in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and requests the Secretary-General to rejustify the
requirement for this post in the support account budget for the financial period from 1 July 2007 to
30 June 2008;
10. Decides not to approve the post of Security Coordinator Officer (P-4) in the
Department of Safety and Security, and requests the Secretary-General to rejustify the requirement
for this post in the support account budget for the financial period from 1 July 2007 to 30 June
2008;
11. Decides to approve an amount of 23,265,700 United States dollars in general
temporary assistance and an amount of 4,417,900 dollars in non-post resources in the financial
period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 in respect of the African Peacekeeping Capacity in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the
Procurement Service and the Headquarters Committee on Contracts in the Department of
Management of the Secretariat, procurement-related functions in the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat and in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and conduct and discipline
capacity in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
12. Decides not to approve an amount of 154,200 dollars under consultancy;
13. Notes the request of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions99 and requests the Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the
_______________
99

See A/60/807.

96

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

evolution of the support account, on the basis of the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee100 and in close consultation with the Office of Internal Oversight Services, bearing in
mind section IV, paragraph 5, of General Assembly resolution 59/296, and to share the analysis
with the Board of Auditors, and to report thereon to the Assembly at the second part of its resumed
sixty-first session within the context of his next budget proposal for the support account;
14. Reaffirms section VIII of General Assembly resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999,
section IX of resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, section V of resolution 57/305 of 15 April 2003
and section XI of resolution 59/266 of 23 December 2004;
15. Notes with concern that the financial provision for consultants has steadily increased in
recent years despite the parallel provision of additional posts for the support account, while
bearing in mind that the provisions were needed, inter alia, to enhance the quality of work,
management efficiencies and skills of staff;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, when proposing resources for consultancies in
subsequent support account budgets, to include a trend-analysis comparing the requested level of
resources with the approved resource levels in the previous five financial years and to provide
supplementary information with full justification for all consultancies including, inter alia,
information on why the expertise is not available within the Organization;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust to the Office of Internal Oversight
Services the task of refining the methodology for allocating resident auditors, taking also into
account the risks and complexity of the operation of individual peacekeeping operations, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session, within the appropriate context, on the efforts made in support of African Union
capacity-building, taking into account the functions and contributions to be provided by the United
Nations, its funds, programmes and agencies and all external partners, including the efforts made
to avoid duplication and overlap;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate, at the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly, on the relationship between the Senior Review Group101 and the proposed senior
leadership review group in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations within the context of
human resources management;
20. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, the
funding mechanism for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2005 to
30 June 2006, as approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June 1996;
21. Reaffirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation of authority
to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and field missions is in strict compliance with
relevant resolutions and decisions and the relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly
on this matter;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
22. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;102

_______________
100

See A/59/784.
See Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/2005/4 for the terms of reference of the Group.
102
A/60/681 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
101

97

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
23. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 183,187,000 dollars for
the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, including 734 continuing and 56 new
temporary posts and their related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the budget estimates
24. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for
the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance of 3,584,800 dollars and other income of 2,121,900
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, to be applied to the resources
required for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
(b) The amount of 15,804,000 dollars in excess of the authorized level of the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, to be applied to
the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
(c) The balance of 161,676,300 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007;
(d) The net estimated staff assessment income of 18,186,100 dollars, comprising the
amount of 18,804,200 dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007 and the
decrease of 618,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, to be set off
against the balance referred to in subparagraph (c) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the
individual active peacekeeping operations.
RESOLUTION 60/269
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
103
(A/60/917, para. 6)

60/269. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi 104 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105
Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of 21 May 2004, by which the Council
authorized, for an initial period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to renew it
for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping operation called the United Nations
Operation in Burundi, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1650 (2005) of 21 December 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 58/312 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/15 B of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,

_______________
103

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/731 and Add.1.
105
A/60/893.
104

98

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Burundi as
at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 47.3 million United
States dollars, representing some 7 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only thirty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
9. Welcomes the use of the Entebbe installation to enhance the efficiency and
responsiveness of its logistical support operations for peacekeeping missions in the region;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Operation;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2006
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation for the
period from 1 July to 31 October 2006 for the maintenance of the Operation in a total amount not
exceeding 78,959,200 dollars;

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the commitment authority
15. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 40 million dollars at a
monthly rate of 10 million dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of the Security
Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
16. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,092,500 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the Operation
for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2006;
Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
17. Decides further to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation
in Burundi the amount of 3,426,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
comprising 2,830,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 596,400
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 3,426,800 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of assessments for 2007;106
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 363,400 dollars, comprising the
prorated share of 318,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 45,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Operation, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi”.

_______________
106

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

100

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/270
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
107
(A/60/918, para. 7)

60/270. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus108 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,109
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1642 (2005) of 14 December 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force for
the period beginning 16 June 1993, and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest
of which was resolution 59/284 B of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by
certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force,
including those incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting
the absence of an adequate response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that
contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member States,110
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 16.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-eight Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;

_______________
107

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/584 and A/60/592.
109
A/60/785.
110
S/1994/647.
108

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,109 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Recalls its request as contained in section XIV, paragraph 4, of resolution 59/296;
11. Decides to finance resources for conduct and discipline capacity equivalent to 253,900
dollars under general temporary assistance;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in view of the recent amendment of the concept of
operations and force level of the Force, to conduct a review of the number and grade levels of
support staff, including the possibility of utilizing United Nations Volunteers, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly in the context of the next budget submission for the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;111
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus the amount of 46,770,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007, inclusive of 44,831,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,601,200 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 337,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics
Base;

_______________
111

A/60/584.

102

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
18. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to
14,915,300 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of
Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the Government of Greece;
19. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 25,354,700 dollars at a
monthly rate of 2,112,891 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, and the scale of assessments for 2007,112 subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
20. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,024,100 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,818,500 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 180,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 25,500 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
870,911 dollars for the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the levels updated
in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 870,911 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21 above;
23. Decides also that the decrease in the estimated staff assessment income of 339,100
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 870,911 dollars referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Decides further, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2005, that one third of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 331,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be returned
to the Government of Cyprus;
25. Decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended
30 June 2005, that the prorated share of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 130,989 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be returned
to the Government of Greece;
26. Decides also to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force
for the period prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that
account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary
contributions to the account;
27. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
_______________
112

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

29. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 60/271
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
113
(A/60/919, para. 6)

60/271. Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor,114 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,115
Recalling Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Transitional Administration, the last
of which was resolution 1392 (2002) of 31 January 2002, by which the mandate was extended
until 20 May 2002,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1410 (2002) of 17 May 2002, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as of 20 May 2002 for
an initial period of twelve months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission, the last of which was resolution 1573 (2004) of 16 November 2004,
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period of six months until
20 May 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 54/246 A of 23 December 1999 on the financing of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and its subsequent resolutions on the
financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor, the latest of which was
resolution 59/13 B of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission and to
the Trust Fund for the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as at
30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 36.1 million United States
dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only one hundred and five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;

_______________
113

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/614 and A/60/703.
115
A/60/789.
114

104

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Transitional Administration and the Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;115
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;116
5. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the total amount of 16,775,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2005, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of
23 December 2003;
6. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, their share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
16,775,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against
their outstanding obligations in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 5 above;
7. Decides further that the decrease of 408,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 16,775,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above;
8. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
Final disposition of the assets of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final disposition of the assets
of the Mission;117
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”.
RESOLUTION 60/272
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
118
(A/60/920, para. 6)

60/272. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea119 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,120

_______________
116

A/60/614.
A/60/703.
118
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
119
A/60/615 and A/60/636 and Corr.1.
120
A/60/790.
117

105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1681 (2006) of 31 May 2006,
Recalling its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/303 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 29 million
United States dollars, representing some 2.6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only eighteen Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions120 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Recalls its request as contained in section XIV, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296;
11. Decides to finance resources for conduct and discipline capacity equivalent to 622,300
dollars under general temporary assistance;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
106

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;121
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea the amount of 182,237,800 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007, inclusive of 174,679,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 6,243,100 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,315,500 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 45,559,450 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 30 September 2006, and, subject to a decision of the Security Council to
extend the mandate of the Mission, to apportion the amount of 45,559,450 dollars for the period
from 1 October to 31 December 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
18. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,091,375 dollars for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2006, comprising the estimated staff
assessment income of 890,925 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 175,550
dollars approved for the support account, and the prorated share of 24,900 dollars approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base and their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,091,375 dollars for the period from 1 October to 31 December 2006, comprising the estimated
staff assessment income of 890,925 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of
175,550 dollars approved for the support account and the prorated share of 24,900 dollars
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
32,154,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
20. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 32,154,200 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;

_______________
121

A/60/615.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Decides further that the decrease of 556,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 32,154,200 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
peacekeeping operations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 60/273
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
122
(A/60/921, para. 7)

60/273. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia123 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,124
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of 6 August 1993, by which the Council
approved the deployment of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military observers for a
period of three months and the incorporation of the advance team into a United Nations observer
mission if such a mission was formally established by the Council,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, by which the
Council established the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Observer Mission, the latest of
which was resolution 1666 (2006) of 31 March 2006,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the
Observer Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 59/304 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Observer Mission with the necessary
financial resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,

_______________
122

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/643 and Corr.2 and A/60/652.
124
A/60/810.
123

108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 16.8 million
United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and
providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Observer Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,124 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.

Recalls its request as stated in section XIV, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296;

10. Decides to finance resources for conduct and discipline capacity equivalent to 191,200
dollars under general temporary assistance;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Observer Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Observer Mission against
General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;125
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia the amount of 34,827,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June
2007, inclusive of 33,377,900 dollars for the maintenance of the Observer Mission, 1,196,900
_______________
125

A/60/643 and Corr.2.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 252,200 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 10,157,900 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 15 October 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
694,300 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 649,400 dollars approved
for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of 39,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 5,600 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 24,669,100 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2006 to 30 June 2007 at a monthly rate of 2,902,247 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of
assessments for 2007,126 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Observer Mission;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,686,100 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,577,200 dollars approved for the Observer Mission, the
prorated share of 95,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 13,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 1,854,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance
with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observer Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share
of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 1,854,900 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20
above;
22. Decides also that the increase of 37,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 1,854,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in

_______________
126

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

110

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the Observer Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution
1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Observer Mission in cash and in the form of
services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 60/274
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
127
(A/60/922, para. 6)

60/274. Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission128 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,129
Expressing its appreciation for the substantial voluntary contributions made to the
Observation Mission by the Government of Kuwait and the contributions of other Governments,
1. Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 14 of his
report;128
2. Also takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
3.9 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only one hundred and forty-one Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure the
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its continued appreciation of the decision of the Government of Kuwait to
defray two thirds of the cost of the Observation Mission, effective 1 November 1993;
4. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observation Mission in full;
5. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;129
6. Decides that, taking into account the voluntary contributions of the Government of
Kuwait, two thirds of the cash balance available as at 30 June 2005 in the amount of 27,844,700
dollars shall be returned to the Government of Kuwait;
7. Also decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observation Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the remaining balance as at
30 June 2005 in the amount of 13,922,300 dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235 of 23 December 2000, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 of the same date and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, and taking into account
_______________
127

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/651.
129
A/60/788.
128

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and
57/4 B of 20 December 2002;
8. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial
obligations to the Observation Mission, their respective share of the remaining balance as at
30 June 2005 in the amount of 13,922,300 dollars shall be set off against their outstanding
obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 7 above;
9. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
10. Decides that updated information on the financial position of the Observation Mission
shall be included in the report on the updated position of closed peacekeeping missions to be
considered by the General Assembly at its sixty-first session under the agenda item entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations”;
11.

Also decides to delete from its agenda the item entitled:

“Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 687 (1991):
“(a) United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission;
“(b) Other activities”.
RESOLUTION 60/275
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
130
(A/60/923, para. 7)

60/275. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo131 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,132
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/286 B of 22 June 2005,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the Security
Council,

_______________
130

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/637 and Corr.1 and A/60/684 and Corr.1.
132
A/60/809.
131

112

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
58.7 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only eighty-three Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,132 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Recalls its request as contained in section XIV, paragraph 4, of its resolution 59/296;
11. Decides to finance resources for conduct and discipline capacity equivalent to 601,300
dollars under general temporary assistance;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;133

_______________
133

A/60/637 and Corr.1.

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo the amount of 227,400,400 dollars for the period from 1 July
2006 to 30 June 2007, inclusive of 217,962,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
7,795,800 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,642,600 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 227,400,400 dollars,
in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December
2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B
of 23 December 2003, and the scale of assessments for 2007;134
18. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 17,537,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 16,536,600
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 876,900 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 124,300 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 10,423,600
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the levels
updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
20. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 10,423,600 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19
above;
21. Decides further that the increase of 84,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 10,423,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.

_______________
134

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

114

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/276
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
135
(A/60/924, para. 7)

60/276. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia136 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,137
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council
declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional
government and to assist in the implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve months,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1667 (2006) of 31 March 2006, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2006,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/305 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at
30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 212.9 million United
States dollars, representing some 8.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;

_______________
135

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/645 and A/60/653 and Corr.1 and 2.
137
A/60/852.
136

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Emphasizes the importance of ensuring coordination and collaboration of efforts with
the United Nations agencies and programmes and implementation of a unified workplan, and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly on measures taken, as well as
progress made and to provide clear descriptions of respective roles and responsibilities in its future
budget submissions;
11. Looks forward to the consideration of the comprehensive report requested in
section VIII, paragraph 3, of its resolution 60/266;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that quick impact projects are implemented
in compliance with the original intent of such projects and relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
13. Decides to provide 1 million dollars for quick impact projects for the period 2006/07,
in the interim, and requests the Secretary-General to utilize resources in strict compliance with the
original intent of this type of project;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to review the administrative support structure for the
quick impact projects with a view to minimizing overhead costs for their implementation;
15. Decides to reduce operational costs by 1 million dollars;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
19. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;138

_______________
138

A/60/645.

116

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia the amount of 745,572,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
inclusive of 714,613,300 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 25,571,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 5,388,000 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 186,393,100 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
3,394,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,573,000 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 719,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 101,900 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 559,179,200 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2006 to 30 June 2007 at a monthly rate of 62,131,022 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of
assessments for 2007,139 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the
Mission;
24. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,182,100 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 7,718,900 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 2,157,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 305,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
108,308,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2005 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
26. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 108,308,700 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 25
above;
27. Also decides that the decrease of 316,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 108,308,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;

_______________
139

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 60/277
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
140
(A/60/925, para. 6)

60/277. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force141 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,142
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1648 (2005) of 21 December 2005,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the
United Nations Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/306 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
20.1 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only forty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
_______________
140

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/628 and Corr.1 and A/60/641 and Corr.2.
142
A/60/811.
141

118

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure the payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,142 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 and 60/266;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;143
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 41,588,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
inclusive of 39,865,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 1,423,300 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 299,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 41,588,400 dollars at a
monthly rate of 3,465,700 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for

_______________
143

A/60/628 and Corr.1.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, and the scale of assessments for
2007,144 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,249,400 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,066,600 dollars
approved for the Force for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007, the prorated share of
160,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 22,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,983,300
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the levels
updated in its resolution 58/256 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set
out in its resolution 58/1 B;
18. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,983,300 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17
above;
19. Decides further that the decrease of 101,500 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 1,983,300 dollars referred to in paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 60/278
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/60/928, para. 12),145
by a recorded vote of 150 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,

_______________
144

To be adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced by the representative of South Africa (on behalf of
the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).

145

120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, 146 Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia

60/278. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 147 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,148
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1655 (2006) of 31 January 2006,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/307 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004 and 59/307,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon with the task of formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the Force as at 30 April 2006, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 71 million United States dollars, representing some
_______________
146
On 3 June 2006, following the declaration of independence adopted by the National Assembly of Montenegro, the
State union of Serbia and Montenegro ceased to exist. Also on 3 June 2006, the Secretary-General received a letter
informing him that the membership of Serbia and Montenegro in the United Nations would be continued by the
Republic of Serbia. On 28 June 2006, the Republic of Montenegro was admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
147
A/60/629 and Corr.1 and A/60/642 and Corr.1.
148
A/60/812 and Corr.1.

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only thirty Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular
those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307 and
59/307;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by General Assembly resolutions
51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A , 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307 and
59/307;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,148 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
12. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant provisions and the relevant provisions of its resolution 60/266;
13. Notes with great concern the reported fuel and rations fraud as reported by the
Advisory Committee,149 which was revealed in an investigation undertaken by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services at the request of the Force;
14. Recognizes that the investigation is still ongoing, and requests the Secretary-General to
report in the next budget submission on the status of recovery of the financial loss, if any, to the
Force;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Force is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing General
Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service posts,
commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
17. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its resolution
52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14
_______________
149

Ibid., para. 30.

122

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

of its resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of its resolution
56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 58/307 and paragraph 13 of its resolution 59/307, stresses once
again that Israel shall pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on
18 April 1996, and requests the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
18. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;150
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
19. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 97,579,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007,
inclusive of 93,526,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 3,348,000 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 705,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
20. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 8,131,633 dollars for
the period from 1 to 31 July 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
21. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
414,025 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 378,200 dollars approved
for the Force, the prorated share of 31,383 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 4,442 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
22. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 89,447,967 dollars for the
period from 1 August 2006 to 30 June 2007 at a monthly rate of 8,131,633 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2006, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of assessments for 2007,151 subject to a
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
23. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 22
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 4,554,275 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 4,160,200 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share
of 345,217 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 48,858 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
24. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 20 and
22 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
8,814,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
_______________
150
151

A/60/629 and Corr.1.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

25. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 8,814,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 24
above;
26. Also decides that the decrease of 521,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 8,814,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 24 and 25 above;
27. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Force;
29. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
30. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 60/279
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
152
(A/60/926, para. 6)

60/279. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone 153 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,154
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) of 22 October 1999, by which the
Council established the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council revised and extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1610 (2005) of 30 June 2005, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission for a final period of six months until 31 December 2005,
Recalling its resolution 53/29 of 20 November 1998 on the financing of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and subsequent resolutions on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the latest of which was resolution 59/14 B of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,

_______________
152

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/631.
154
A/60/786.
153

124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to meet its outstanding liabilities,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 30 April 2006, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 42.6 million United States dollars, representing some
2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only eighty-three Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Welcomes the great efforts of the Mission and its personnel in the successful
completion of the mandate of the Mission;
4. Also welcomes the structured, carefully planned and executed drawdown that allowed
the established benchmarks to be achieved as scheduled;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the lessons learned from the Mission,
including its drawdown stages, are applied, as best practices, in other missions as appropriate, and
to report thereon in the context of the final performance report;
6. Notes with concern the cases of fraud and presumptive fraud identified by the Mission,
and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session on
the matters, including investigations undertaken in this regard and actions taken regarding proven
cases, in accordance with established procedures, as well as efforts to recover any lost funds;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,154 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;153
9. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the amount of 99,287,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005,
in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2005, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December
2003;
10. Decides also that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, their share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
99,287,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against
their outstanding obligations in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 9 above;
11. Decides further that, the decrease of 1,339,800 dollars in the estimated staff
assessment income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against
the credits from the amount of 99,287,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 9 and 10 above;
12. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 60/280
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
155
(A/60/927, para. 6)

60/280. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara156 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,157
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1675 (2006) of 28 April 2006,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 59/308 of 22 June
2005,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006, as well as other relevant
resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as at 30 April 2006, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 45.5 million United States dollars, representing some 8 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only seventy-one Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
_______________
155

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/634 and A/60/724.
157
A/60/897.
156

126

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make the fullest possible use of
facilities and equipment at the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,157 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
10. Reaffirms its resolution 59/296, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full
implementation of its relevant provisions and the relevant provisions of its resolution 60/266;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the Mission
is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the next performance report, to
report any savings or efficiencies resulting from the military operational audit of June 2005;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to reduce the cost of employing
General Service staff, to continue efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;158
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2007
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara the amount of 44,460,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2006
to 30 June 2007, inclusive of 42,619,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 1,520,300
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 320,300 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the amount of 14,820,000 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 31 October 2006, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2006 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
800,534 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 735,467 dollars approved
for the Mission, the prorated share of 57,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 8,067 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 29,640,000 dollars for the
period from 1 November 2006 to 30 June 2007, at a monthly rate of 3,705,000 dollars, in
_______________
158

A/60/634.

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 58/256, and taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2006 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B, and the scale of assessments for
2007,159 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18
above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,601,066 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 1,470,933 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated
share of 114,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 16,133 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
1,483,200 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 1,483,200 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2005, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides also that the decrease of 597,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2005 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 1,483,200 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating in
the Mission, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 60/281
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
160
(A/60/608/Add.4, para. 6)

60/281. Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special
political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
_______________
159
160

To be adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.

128

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and/or the Security Council,161 as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,162
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;161

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its reports;162
3. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of section I of its resolution 60/255 of 8 May 2006,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Approves the budgets of 59,647,600 United States dollars gross (54,744,100 dollars
net) for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the period from 1 April to
31 December 2006, 18,971,400 dollars gross (17,020,000 dollars net) for the International
Independent Investigation Commission for the period from 16 June to 31 December 2006 and
5,776,200 dollars gross (5,253,500 dollars net) for the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste for
the period from 21 June to 31 August 2006;
5. Takes note of the unencumbered balances in the amounts already appropriated for the
three missions totalling 6,043,400 dollars;
6. Decides to approve a charge of 51,908,500 dollars, corresponding to the unassigned
balance against the provision for special political missions, appropriated under section 3, Political
affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
7. Also decides to appropriate, under the procedure provided for in paragraph 11 of
annex I to its resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an amount of 19,065,700 dollars under
section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007 and an amount
of 7,377,600 dollars under section 35, Staff assessment, the latter to be offset by a corresponding
amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment.
RESOLUTION 60/282
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
163
(A/60/608/Add.6, para. 6)

60/282. Capital master plan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000,
56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001, 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution
57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution
60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolution 60/256 of 8 May 2006 and its decision 58/566 of
8 April 2004,
Having considered the second 164 and third 165 annual progress reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the capital master plan, the reports of the Secretary-General on
viable options for ensuring sufficient parking space at United Nations Headquarters,166 on plans
for three additional conference rooms and viable solutions for allowing natural light into the
_______________
161

A/60/585/Add.3 and 4.
A/60/7/Add.39 and 41. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session,
Supplement No. 7A.
163
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
164
A/59/441 and Add.1 and 2.
165
A/60/550 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1.
166
A/58/712.
162

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

rooms,167 on cooperation with the City and State of New York related to the capital master plan,168
on the status of possible funding arrangements for the capital master plan, 169 on a business
analysis of the possibility of constructing a new permanent building on the North Lawn,170 the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital
master plan for the biennium ended 31 December 2003,171 the report of the Board of Auditors for
the year ended 31 December 2004,172 the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the capital master plan for the period from August 2003 through July 2004173 and the period from
August 2004 through July 2005174 and the related written reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,175 as well as the oral report of the Chairman of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,176
1. Reiterates its serious concern about the hazards, risks and deficiencies of the current
conditions of the United Nations Headquarters Building, which endanger the safety, health and
well-being of staff, visitors, tourists and delegations, including high-level delegations;
2. Takes note of the second164 and third165 annual progress reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the capital master plan, the reports of the Secretary-General on
cooperation with the City and State of New York related to the capital master plan,168 on the status
of possible funding arrangements for the capital master plan169 and on the business analysis of the
possibility of constructing a new permanent building on the North Lawn;170
3. Decides to revert, at the main part of its sixty-first session, to the consideration of the
reports of the Secretary-General on viable options for ensuring sufficient parking space at United
Nations Headquarters166 and on plans for three additional conference rooms and viable solutions
for allowing natural light into the rooms,167 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the biennium ended 31 December
2003,171 the report of the Board of Auditors for the year ended 31 December 2004172 and the
reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the capital master plan for the period from
August 2003 through July 2004173 and the period from August 2004 through July 2005;174
4. Notes the benefits, including economic ones, accruing to host countries from the
presence of the United Nations, and the costs incurred;
5. Stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support for
United Nations Headquarters in New York;
6. Recalls the current practices of host Governments with regard to support for United
Nations headquarters and United Nations bodies located in their territories;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that no action is taken that would preclude
any decision that the General Assembly might take on the construction of a new permanent
building on the North Lawn at some future date;

_______________
167

A/58/556.
A/58/779.
169
A/58/729.
170
A/60/874.
171
A/59/161.
172
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/60/5), vol. V.
173
See A/59/420.
174
A/60/288.
175
A/59/556; and A/60/7/Add.38 (for the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session,
Supplement No. 7A).
176
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Fifth Committee, 53rd meeting
(A/C.5/59/SR.53), and corrigendum.
168

130

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Approves, effective 1 July 2006, the recommended strategy for the implementation of
the capital master plan, strategy IV (phased approach), contained in the third annual progress
report of the Secretary-General,165 including the phasing, swing space and cost, and decides to
review the updated projected costs at the main part of its sixty-first session;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session, through the Committee on Conferences, on the possible adjustment of meeting
schedules, including a change in venue of meetings for the United Nations intergovernmental
organs that normally meet at Headquarters for the period of the implementation of the capital
master plan;
10. Stresses the need for a long-term strategy for office accommodation at Headquarters;
11. Requests that a comprehensive study on the feasibility of the proposed construction of
a building on the North Lawn, including a number of other factors that have not been included in
the business analysis contained in the report of the Secretary-General,170 on security, architectural,
and host city and community issues, be included in the context of the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2008–2009;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, considering the need to continue to explore ways to
increase procurement opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries with
economies in transition, to take the provisions of its resolutions 54/14 of 29 October 1999, 55/247
of 12 April 2001 and 59/288 of 13 April 2005 on procurement reform fully into consideration in
the implementation of the capital master plan;
13. Notes that the Office of the Capital Master Plan will provide resources to the Office of
Internal Oversight Services in order to ensure an appropriate construction audit for the capital
master plan, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the findings thereon in the context of
the relevant reports, including the annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
throughout the phases of the project;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that procurement processes related to the
capital master plan are conducted in a transparent manner and in full compliance with relevant
General Assembly resolutions;
15. Welcomes the establishment of the capital master plan website;
16. Requests the Secretary-General ensure that financial disclosure statements are filed by
staff involved with the capital master plan in accordance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions;
17. Recognizes that the cash payment option, based on a one-time assessment or multiyear special assessments, would be the simplest and the most cost-effective approach for meeting
the cost of the capital master plan;
18. Decides to revert, at the main part of its sixty-first session, to the issue of the funding
plan for the capital master plan, including the credit facilities or instruments referred to in
paragraph 35 of the third annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the capital master plan177 as well as the feasibility of a one-time upfront payment option, and in
this context requests the Secretary-General to propose, inter alia, to the General Assembly, also at
the main part of its sixty-first session, a mechanism that would ensure that Member States that pay
their assessed contributions for the capital master plan in full and on time will not bear any
financial liabilities and/or other obligations derived from the possible utilization of those credit
facilities or instruments;

_______________
177

A/60/550 and Corr.1 and 2.

131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Also decides to convert the existing commitment authority of 77 million United States
dollars into an appropriation, with assessment on Member States in 2006 on the basis of the
regular budget scale of assessments in effect for the year;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session on the implementation of the provisions of the present resolution, in his fourth annual
progress report on the implementation of the capital master plan.
RESOLUTION 60/283
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 7 July 2006, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
178
(A/60/831/Add.1, para. 7)

60/283. Investing in the United Nations for a stronger Organization worldwide:
detailed report
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and
60/260 of 8 May 2006,
Reaffirming the role of the General Assembly and its relevant intergovernmental and expert
bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and
evaluation,
Stressing the need for Member States to participate in the budget preparation process, from
its early stages and throughout the process,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Investing in the United
Nations: for a stronger Organization worldwide: detailed report”179 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,180
1. Renews its appeal to Member States to demonstrate their commitment to the United
Nations by, inter alia, meeting their financial obligations on time, in full and without conditions, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in its report,180 subject to the provisions of the
present resolution;
I
Oversight and accountability
1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full operationalization of the Ethics
Office, including through the expeditious filling of vacancies;
2. Emphasizes the need for strengthening oversight in the Organization, and stresses the
importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of ensuring greater
accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the effective and efficient
implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and financial resources;
3. Looks forward to considering the results of the independent external evaluation of the
audit and oversight system of the United Nations, as well as other relevant reports in this regard,
_______________
178

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the Chairman of the Committee.
A/60/846 and Add.1-4.
180
A/60/870.
179

132

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and to taking action on proposals contained therein on, inter alia, ensuring the full operational
independence of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and strengthening the evaluation
capacity of the Office at the programme and subprogramme levels, as well as any budget
requirements;
4. Recalls section XIII, paragraph 4, of its resolution 60/248 of 23 December 2005,
whereby it established the Independent Audit Advisory Committee, and looks forward to
considering and taking action on its proposed terms of reference with a view to operationalizing it;
II
Information and communication technology
1. Decides to establish the post of Chief Information Technology Officer at the level of
Assistant Secretary-General in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to rejustify the level and resource requirements for the
post of Chief Information Technology Officer in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, in
the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009 to be considered at its
sixty-second session, taking fully into account the existing staffing structure and resources
dedicated to information and communication technology functions in the Organization;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly, at its resumed
sixty-first session, detailed information on the structure and staffing requirements of the envisaged
information and communication technology structure, as well as the lines of responsibility, the
functions of the proposed structure and its relationship with other information and communication
technology units in the Secretariat, offices away from Headquarters, regional commissions,
peacekeeping operations, special political missions and other field offices;
4. Decides to replace the Integrated Management Information System with a nextgeneration enterprise resource planning system or other comparable system;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its resumed
sixty-first session, the comprehensive report referred to in paragraphs 17 and 18 of his report,181
and to respond to relevant General Assembly resolutions, including on the following matters:
(a) Substantive improvements to the information and communication technology systems
that may be required, including the systems at offices away from Headquarters, the regional
commissions and peacekeeping operations;
(b) A detailed implementation plan, including on the user needs, scope, timetable, strategy
and detailed resource requirements and information technology needs arising from the adoption of
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards;
(c) The expected contribution of the information and communication technology system
to enhancing the effective and transparent use of the resources of the Organization;
(d) Any revisions to the existing information and communication technology strategy that
may be required, bearing in mind requests previously made by the General Assembly in its
consideration of the 2002 information and communication technology strategy, including its
resolutions 56/239 of 24 December 2001 and 57/304 of 15 April 2003;
(e)

Projected resource requirements over the life cycle of the project;

(f) A detailed explanation and concrete examples of how it is envisaged that the proposals
will enhance the effectiveness of the work of the Organization and address current deficiencies;
(g)

A clear definition of the terminologies and rationale for the proposals;

_______________
181

A/60/846/Add.1.

133

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(h) An assessment of previous investments in information and communication
technology, as well as lessons learned and expected time frames for introducing the proposed
system and arrangements for the continuation of the current system during the transitional period;
6. Decides to revert to the consideration of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on
policies of United Nations system organizations towards the use of open-source software in the
secretariats182 at its resumed sixty-first session;
III
Limited budgetary discretion
1. Recalls its resolution 59/275 of 23 December 2004, in which it set the priorities for the
Organization for the biennium 2006–2007;
2. Reaffirms the role and prerogative of Member States in setting the priorities of the
Organization, as reflected in legislative decisions;
3. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and
financial resources and policies with a view to ensuring full, effective and efficient
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
4. Emphasizes again that the resources proposed by the Secretary-General should be
commensurate with all mandated programmes and activities in order to ensure their full, efficient
and effective implementation;
5. Recalls paragraph 11 of its resolution 60/246 of 23 December 2005, whereby it
recognized the need for limited discretion in budgetary implementation for the Secretary-General,
within defined parameters to be agreed by the General Assembly along with clear accountability
mechanisms to the Assembly for its use;
6. Decides to authorize the Secretary-General, on an experimental basis, a limited
discretion for budgetary implementation for the bienniums 2006–2007 and 2008–2009, to enter
into commitments up to 20 million United States dollars in each biennium for positions and nonpost requirements for the purpose of meeting the evolving needs of the Organization in attaining
its mandated programmes and activities;
7. Also decides to authorize the Secretary-General to utilize the Working Capital Fund to
finance the implementation of the authorization referred to in paragraph 6 above, which shall be
offset by savings identified and attained, including through the efficient use and assignment of
resources, during the course of each biennium within the authorized appropriation level, as
reported in the performance reports;
8. Decides that the authorization referred to in paragraph 6 above shall be implemented
in accordance with the following principles:
(a) The experiment shall not be utilized for unforeseen and extraordinary expenses that
are authorized in respect of the maintenance of peace and security;
(b) The experiment shall not imply any changes in the human resources management
policies of the Organization;
(c) The proposed programme budget shall remain the principal instrument in which the
Secretary-General sets out the resources and staffing requirements of the Organization, including
the requirements for all reform proposals as agreed by Member States;

_______________
182

A/60/665.

134

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(d) The experiment shall in no way prevent the Secretary-General from requesting
additional posts during the course of the experiment;
(e) The experiment shall not be implemented in pursuance of General Assembly
resolutions calling for the implementation of decisions “within existing resources”;
(f) The experiment shall not imply any changes to the provisions guiding the use of the
contingency fund;
(g) The utilization of authorization shall be exercised with the prior concurrence of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions when the total amount utilized
exceeds 6 million dollars per biennium;
(h) The experiment shall not alter the priorities of the Organization as agreed by the
General Assembly;
(i) The utilization of the funds provided for under the experiment shall be subject to the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly, through the
Advisory Committee, in the context of the performance reports, on the utilization of all
commitments made within the context of the experiment, together with the circumstances relating
thereto, as well as the impact on programme delivery and the ability to meet the evolving needs of
the Organization;
10. Decides to review the experiment at its sixty-fourth session with a view to taking a
final decision on its continuation, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive
report on the implementation of the experiment for its consideration, including the following
aspects:
(a)

The utilization of the experiment during the course of the two bienniums;

(b) Implications, if any, for the human resources management policies and the Financial
Regulations and Rules;
(c) The impact on programme delivery, as well as on the priorities of the Organization as
set by Member States;
(d) The criteria used by the Secretary-General to define the evolving needs of the
Organization;
11. Recalls paragraph 14 of its resolution 58/270 of 23 December 2003 and paragraph 7 of
its resolution 60/246, decides that the experiment will not be extended beyond the current
biennium, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-second
session on the results of the experiment as well as lessons learned that can be applied to the
experiment referred to in paragraph 6 above;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously implement paragraph 8 of its
resolution 60/246 and to report thereon in the context of the first performance report on the
programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007;
13. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General to specifically define accountability as well
as clear accountability mechanisms, including to the General Assembly, and to propose clear
parameters for their application and the instruments for their rigorous enforcement, without
exception, at all levels;
14. Recognizes that it will consider the related report of the Secretary-General referred to
in paragraph 13 above at its sixty-first session with a view to taking decisions to strengthen
accountability in the Organization;

135

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

IV
Financial management practices
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
1. Decides to approve the adoption by the United Nations of the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards;
2. Approves the resources requested to permit the Secretary-General to begin
implementation of the Standards, bearing in mind paragraph 42 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;180
Working Capital Fund
3.

Recalls its resolution 60/250 of 23 December 2005;

4. Resolves that the Working Capital Fund for the biennium 2006–2007 shall be
increased to 150 million dollars effective from 1 January 2007;
5. Also resolves that Member States shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in
accordance with the scale of assessments to be adopted by the General Assembly for contributions
to the regular budget for the year 2007;
6.

Further resolves that there shall be set off against these advances:

(a)

The surplus balance of the programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005;

(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the Working Capital Fund for the biennium
2006–2007 in accordance with General Assembly resolution 60/250;
V
Improving reporting mechanisms: public access
to United Nations documentation
Comprehensive annual report
1. Emphasizes the importance of providing the information necessary to enable Member
States to make well-informed decisions;
2. Reaffirms that all reports pertaining to administrative and budgetary matters are subject
to the consideration of the Fifth Committee as the appropriate Main Committee of the General
Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for those matters;
3. Takes note of the intention of the Secretary-General to prepare a single comprehensive
annual report containing both financial and programme information, with the aim of enhancing
the transparency of the Organization and the accountability of the Secretariat to Member States;
4. Emphasizes that the report would be developed in the context of paragraphs 68 and 69
of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,180 bearing in
mind paragraph 2 above;
5. Also emphasizes that the report would be complementary in nature and would not
replace the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization required under
Article 98 of the Charter of the United Nations, nor reports that are subject to the consideration of
the Fifth Committee;
Public access
6. Notes the proposal of the Secretary-General on the policy for access to United Nations
documentation by Member States and the public and also the observations of the Advisory
Committee thereon, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
136

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

sixty-first session, for consideration and action, a comprehensive report containing detailed
parameters of the above proposal, including information on resource requirements, financing
mechanisms and the possibility of a fee structure, and also addressing the implementation of the
existing mandates governing the issue of facilitating the access of Member States and the public to
United Nations documentation and information materials, as contained in relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly;
VI
Procurement
Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments of up to 706,600 dollars to
strengthen the United Nations procurement system, including by enhancing internal controls and
developing business seminar programmes for vendors in developing countries, pending
consideration of and action on the report of the Secretary-General on procurement reform183 by
the General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
VII
Future consideration of management reform
1. Decides to defer consideration of the following proposals contained in the addendum
on financial management practices184 to the above-mentioned detailed report of the SecretaryGeneral as follows:
(a) Consolidation of peacekeeping accounts and increases in the Peacekeeping Reserve
Fund and commitment authority for peacekeeping operations (paragraphs 112 (b) to (l)) – until the
second part of its resumed sixty-first session;
(b) Establishment of a reserve fund (paragraphs 112 (p) and (q)) – within the context of
the programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009;
2.

Looks forward to considering at its sixty-first session proposals on:

(a)

Governance, oversight and accountability;

(b)

Human resources management;

(c)

Procurement;

(d)

Administration of justice;

3. Reaffirms its intention to continue the consideration of measures to fulfil the
commitments made by Heads of State and Government in the 2005 World Summit Outcome185 to
strengthen the United Nations by ensuring the efficient and effective functioning of the
Organization and a culture of accountability, transparency and integrity in the Secretariat;
4. Pledges to provide the United Nations with adequate resources, on a timely basis, to
enable the Organization to implement its mandates and achieve its objectives, having regard to the
priorities agreed by the General Assembly and the need to respect budget discipline;

_______________
183

A/60/846/Add.5 and Corr.1.
A/60/846/Add.3.
185
See resolution 60/1.
184

137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

VIII
Appropriation
1. Approves an additional appropriation of 4,433,100 dollars in the programme budget
for the biennium 2006–2007, broken down as follows:
Amount
(United States dollars)

Section

1.

Overall policymaking, direction and coordination

145 600

28A.

Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management

1 860 000

28B.

Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts

1 428 900

28D.

Office of Central Support Services

574 600

30.

Jointly financed administrative activities

424 000
Total

4 433 100

2. Also approves an additional appropriation in the amount of 127,300 dollars under
section 35, Staff assessment, to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income
from staff assessment.

138

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
60/402.

Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991......... 141
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 141

60/405.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination ..................................................... 141
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 141

60/409.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme .................................................. 142
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 142

60/411.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions ................................................................................. 142
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 142

60/416.

Election of forty-seven members of the Human Rights Council............................................................................... 142

60/417.

Election by the General Assembly of seven members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission......................................................................................................................................................... 143

60/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session................................................................ 144

60/419.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session.......................... 144
Decision A ........................................................................................................................................................... 144
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 144

60/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session....................................................... 144

60/421.

Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).................... 145

60/422.

Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 ................................. 145
Decision A ........................................................................................................................................................... 145
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 145
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60/502.

Organization of the sixtieth session ........................................................................................................................ 146
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 146

60/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ........................................................................................... 146
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 146

60/552.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal................................................................ 148

60/553.

Khmer Rouge trials............................................................................................................................................... 148

139

IV. Decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Page

60/554.

Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting and comprehensive review of the progress
achieved in realizing the targets set out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be convened from
31 May to 2 June 2006.......................................................................................................................................... 148

60/555.

Members of the Human Rights Council: staggering of terms of office...................................................................... 148

60/556.

Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries: high-level meeting on the midterm
comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001–2010 ..................................................................................................................... 149

60/557.

Additional speakers for the high-level meeting and comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing
the targets set out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS......................................................................... 149

60/558.

Organization of the high-level meeting to review progress achieved in realizing the commitments set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS: parallel segments................................................................................. 150

60/559.

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament........................................ 150

60/563.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects: report of the
Group of Legal Experts......................................................................................................................................... 150

60/564.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ............................................................................................. 150

60/565.

Strengthening of the United Nations system ........................................................................................................... 151

60/566.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations........................................................................................... 151

60/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor........................................................................................... 151

60/568.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters................................................................................................................................................................. 151
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

60/551.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................ 152
Decision B ........................................................................................................................................................... 152
Decision C ........................................................................................................................................................... 154

60/560.

Revised estimates arising in respect of Security Council resolution 1660 (2006) of 28 February 2006 on the
appointment of reserve judges at the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991............................................................................................................................................................ 156

60/561.

Expenditure authorization for the biennium 2006–2007 .......................................................................................... 157

60/562.

Additional office accommodation in Geneva for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights ...................................................................................................................................................... 157

140

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
60/402. Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
B1
At its 76th plenary meeting, on 13 April 2006, the General Assembly decided to endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General 2 that was endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1668 (2006) of 10 April 2006, namely that Judge Joaquín Martín Canivell may
continue to sit in the Krajišnik case beyond April 2006 and see the case through to its completion,
notwithstanding the fact that the cumulative period of his service in the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 would then attain and exceed
three years.
60/405. Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
B3
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 27 March 2006, the General Assembly, on the basis of the
nomination by the Economic and Social Council4 and in accordance with the annex to Council
resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976 and paragraph 1 of Council resolution 1987/94 of
4 December 1987, elected ISRAEL to fill one of the two remaining seats for a term of office
beginning on 27 March 2006 and expiring on 31 December 2008.
As a result, the Committee for Programme and Coordination is composed of the following
thirty-three Member States: ALGERIA,** ARGENTINA,*** ARMENIA,*** BAHAMAS,*
BELARUS,*** BENIN,*** BRAZIL,*** BULGARIA,*** CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,***
CHINA,** COMOROS,* CUBA,*** FRANCE,* GHANA,** INDIA,*** INDONESIA,*** IRAN
(ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),*** ISRAEL,*** ITALY,*** JAMAICA,** JAPAN,** KENYA,** MEXICO,*
PAKISTAN,*** PORTUGAL,*** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SENEGAL,***
SOUTH AFRICA,*** SWITZERLAND,*** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,* URUGUAY*** and
ZIMBABWE.*
At the same meeting, the General Assembly was informed that an election would be held at
a later date, on the basis of the nomination by the Economic and Social Council, to fill the
remaining seat on the Committee for Programme and Coordination.
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2006.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

_______________
1

Decision 60/402, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/60/49), vol.II, becomes decision 60/402 A.
2
See A/60/741-S/2006/199 and A/60/746-S/2006/231.
3
Decision 60/405, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/60/49), vol.II, becomes decision 60/405 A.
4
See A/60/216/Add.1. By its decision 2006/201 A of 7 February 2006, the Economic and Social Council postponed
the nomination of one member from the Group of Western European and Other States.

141

IV. Decisions

60/409. Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme
B5
At its 73rd plenary meeting, on 16 March 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
the Secretary-General,6 elected Mr. Achim STEINER as Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for a four-year term of office beginning on 15 June 2006 and ending on
14 June 2010.
60/411. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B7
At its 73rd plenary meeting, on 16 March 2006, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,8 appointed Mr. Gordon Eckersley as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 16 March 2006 and ending on
31 December 2007, as a result of the resignation of Mr. David Dutton.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Kenshiro
AKIMOTO (Japan),* Mr. Meshal AL-MANSOUR (Kuwait),* Mr. Petru DUMITRIU (Romania),*
Mr. Gordon ECKERSLEY (Australia),** Mr. Paul EKORONG À DONG (Cameroon),** Mr. Haile
Selassie GETACHEW (Ethiopia),* Ms. Sujata GHORAI (Germany),*** Mr. Bernardo GREIVER
(Uruguay),** Mr. Hassan Mohammed HASSAN (Nigeria),** Mr. Ihor V. HUMENNY (Ukraine),*
Mr. Eduardo IGLESIAS (Argentina),** Mr. David A. LEIS (United States of America),*
Mr. Vyacheslav A. LOGUTOV (Russian Federation),*** Mr. Richard MOON (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland),*** Mr. Hae-yun PARK (Republic of Korea),*** Mr. Eduardo
Manuel da Fonseca Fernandes RAMOS (Portugal),** Mr. Henrique da Silveira SARDINHA PINTO
(Brazil)*** and Mr. WU Gang (China).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2006.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

60/416. Election of forty-seven members of the Human Rights Council
At its 80th and 81st plenary meetings, on 9 May 2006, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, elected as members of the Human Rights Council for a term
of office beginning on 19 June 2006: 9 ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, BAHRAIN, CZECH REPUBLIC,
ECUADOR, FINLAND, INDIA, INDONESIA, MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, PHILIPPINES, POLAND,
SOUTH AFRICA and TUNISIA for a one-year term of office; BRAZIL, FRANCE, GABON, GHANA,
GUATEMALA, JAPAN, MALI, PAKISTAN, PERU, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, ROMANIA, SRI LANKA,
UKRAINE, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and ZAMBIA for a twoyear term of office; and AZERBAIJAN, BANGLADESH, CAMEROON, CANADA, CHINA, CUBA,
DJIBOUTI, GERMANY, JORDAN, MALAYSIA, MAURITIUS, MEXICO, NIGERIA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION,
SAUDI ARABIA, SENEGAL, SWITZERLAND and URUGUAY for a three-year term of office.

_______________
5
Decision 60/409, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/60/49), vol.II, becomes decision 60/409 A.
6
A/60/718, para.5.
7
Decision 60/411, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 49
(A/60/49), vol.II, becomes decision 60/411 A.
8
A/60/543/Add.1, para. 4.
9
In accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 60/251, the members of the Human Rights Council shall serve for a
period of three years and, in accordance with paragraph 14 of the same resolution, the terms of the membership shall
be staggered, and such decision shall be taken for the first election by the drawing of lots, taking into consideration
equitable geographical distribution. See also decision 60/555 of 9 May 2006.

142

IV. Decisions

As a result, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following forty-seven Member
States: ALGERIA,* ARGENTINA,* AZERBAIJAN,*** BAHRAIN,* BANGLADESH,*** BRAZIL,**
CAMEROON,*** CANADA,*** CHINA,*** CUBA,*** CZECH REPUBLIC,* DJIBOUTI,***
ECUADOR,* FINLAND,* FRANCE,** GABON,** GERMANY,*** GHANA,** GUATEMALA,**
INDIA,* INDONESIA,* JAPAN,** JORDAN,*** MALAYSIA,*** MALI,** MAURITIUS,***
MEXICO,*** MOROCCO,* NETHERLANDS,* NIGERIA,*** PAKISTAN,** PERU,** PHILIPPINES,*
POLAND,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** ROMANIA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*** SAUDI ARABIA,***
SENEGAL,*** SOUTH AFRICA,* SRI LANKA,** SWITZERLAND,*** TUNISIA,* UKRAINE,**
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,** URUGUAY*** and ZAMBIA.**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 18 June 2007.

**

Term of office expires on 18 June 2008.

***

Term of office expires on 18 June 2009.

60/417. Election by the General Assembly of seven members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 16 May 2006, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolutions 60/180 of 20 December 2005 and 60/261 of 8 May 2006, elected as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a term of office beginning on
23 June 2006, the day of the first meeting of the Committee:10 CROATIA and JAMAICA for a oneyear term of office; and BURUNDI, CHILE, EGYPT, EL SALVADOR and FIJI for a two-year term of
office.
Pursuant to paragraphs 4 (a) to (d) of resolution 60/180, twenty-four States have already
been elected and/or selected as members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission: CHINA, DENMARK, FRANCE, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA and UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA selected by the Security Council; ANGOLA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, GUINEA-BISSAU,
INDONESIA, POLAND and SRI LANKA elected by the Economic and Social Council; GERMANY,
ITALY, JAPAN, NETHERLANDS and NORWAY selected by and from among the top ten providers of
assessed contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions to United Nations
funds, programmes and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund; and BANGLADESH,
GHANA, INDIA, NIGERIA and PAKISTAN selected by and from among the top ten providers of
military personnel and civilian police to United Nations missions.
As a result, the Peacebuilding Commission is composed of the following thirty-one Member
States: ANGOLA,*** BANGLADESH,*** BELGIUM,*** BRAZIL,*** BURUNDI,*** CHILE,***
CHINA,*** CROATIA,** DENMARK,* EGYPT,*** EL SALVADOR,*** FIJI,*** FRANCE,***
GERMANY,*** GHANA,*** GUINEA-BISSAU,*** INDIA,*** INDONESIA,*** ITALY,*** JAMAICA,**
JAPAN,*** NETHERLANDS,*** NIGERIA,*** NORWAY,*** PAKISTAN,*** POLAND,*** RUSSIAN
FEDERATION,*** SRI LANKA,*** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND,*** UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA* and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2006 (see S/2006/25).

**

Term of office expires on 22 June 2007.

***

Term of office expires on 22 June 2008.

_______________
10

In accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 60/261, the members of the Organizational Committee shall serve for
a renewable term of two years, as applicable. In accordance with paragraph 6 of the same resolution, the term of
membership shall be staggered, and two members from different regional groups, drawn by lots in the first election,
shall serve for an initial period of one year.

143

IV. Decisions

60/418. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session11
At its 89th plenary meeting, on 8 June 2006, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly,12 elected by acclamation Ms. Haya Rashed AL-KHALIFA of Bahrain as President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session.
60/419. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session11
A
On 8 June 2006, four of the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a)13and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairmen.
At the 90th plenary meeting, on 8 June 2006, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of four of the six Main
Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session:
Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):

Mr. Madhu Raman ACHARYA (Nepal)

Second Committee:

Mrs. Tiina INTELMANN (Estonia)

Third Committee:

Mr. Hamid AL BAYATI (Iraq)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Juan Manuel GÓMEZ ROBLEDO (Mexico)
B

In accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
on 7 July 2006 the Fifth Committee elected its Chairman, and on 18 July 2006 the First
Committee elected its Chairman.
At the 94th plenary meeting, on 20 July 2006, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the other two Main
Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session:
First Committee:

Mrs. Mona JUUL (Norway)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Youcef YOUSFI (Algeria)

60/420. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session11
At its 90th plenary meeting, on 8 June 2006, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 and rule 30 of the
rules of procedure of the Assembly12 elected by acclamation the following twenty-one Member
States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-first session: BHUTAN, CAMEROON,
CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CROATIA, FRANCE, GUINEA, HAITI, INDONESIA, KUWAIT, LIBYAN
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, LIECHTENSTEIN, NETHERLANDS, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION, UGANDA, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA and ZIMBABWE.

_______________
11
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the six Main Committees.
12
Rule 30 was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.
13
Rule 99 (a) was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.

144

IV. Decisions

60/421. Election of the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 28 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General,14 elected Ms. Anna Kajumulo TIBAIJUKA (United Republic of Tanzania) as
Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) for a
further four-year term of office beginning on 1 September 2006 and ending on 31 August 2010.
60/422. Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994
A
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 28 June 2006, the General Assembly decided to endorse the
recommendation of the Secretary-General15 that was endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1684 (2006) of 13 June 2006 that, notwithstanding the provisions of article 12 bis of the
statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994, the
term of office of the following permanent judges of the International Tribunal for Rwanda at the
Tribunal be extended until 31 December 2008:
Mr. Charles Michael Dennis BYRON (Saint Kitts and Nevis)
Mr. Asoka DE SILVA (Sri Lanka)
Mr. Sergei Alekseevich EGOROV (Russian Federation)
Mr. Mehmet GÜNEY (Turkey)
Ms. Khalida Rachid KHAN (Pakistan)
Mr. Erik MØSE (Norway)
Ms. Arlete RAMAROSON (Madagascar)
Mr. Jai Ram REDDY (Fiji)
Mr. William Hussein SEKULE (United Republic of Tanzania)
Ms. Andrésa VAZ (Senegal)
Ms. Inés Mónica WEINBERG DE ROCA (Argentina)
B
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 29 August 2006, the General Assembly decided to endorse
the recommendation of the Secretary-General16 that was endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1705 (2006) of 29 August 2006 that, notwithstanding article 12 ter of the statute of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, and, notwithstanding that Judge Solomy Balungi Bossa’s
elected term as an ad litem judge of the Tribunal would, in accordance with article 12 ter of the
statute, end on 24 June 2007, she be authorized effective 28 August 2006 to continue to serve as a
judge in the Butare trial until its completion.

_______________
14

A/60/895, para. 3.
See A/60/878-S/2006/349.
16
See A/60/989-S/2006/688.
15

145

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60/502. Organization of the sixtieth session
B17
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 28 April 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,18 decided, without setting a precedent, to invite the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and United Nations Coordinator of International Cooperation on
Chernobyl, as well as the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund, to make
statements at the special commemorative meeting held on the same day in observance of the
twentieth anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe.
60/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B19
At its 70th plenary meeting, on 6 February 2006, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 71, entitled “Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, under heading D (Promotion of human rights), and to also consider it directly in
plenary meeting in order to consider expeditiously a draft decision.20 The Assembly further agreed
to proceed immediately to its consideration.
At its 73rd plenary meeting, on 16 March 2006, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113, entitled “Appointment of members of the
Committee on Contributions”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters),
in order to consider expeditiously a report of the Fifth Committee.21 The Assembly further agreed
to proceed immediately to the consideration of the sub-item.
At its 76th plenary meeting, on 13 April 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General,22 decided to include in the agenda of its sixtieth session an additional sub-item
entitled “Election of forty-seven members of the Human Rights Council” as sub-item (e) of
agenda item 112 entitled “Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,23
decided to include in the agenda of its sixtieth session an additional sub-item entitled “Election of
seven members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission” as sub-item
(f) of agenda item 112 entitled “Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other

_______________
17

Decision 60/502, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/60/49), vol. II, becomes decision 60/502 A.
18
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 77th meeting (A/60/PV.77), and
corrigendum.
19
Decision 60/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/60/49), vol. II, becomes decision 60/503 A.
20
A/60/L.47 and Add.1.
21
A/60/543/Add.1.
22
A/60/236, para. 2.
23
A/60/237, para. 2.

146

IV. Decisions

elections”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it
directly in plenary meeting.
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 28 April 2006, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 73, entitled “Strengthening of international
cooperation and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster”, under heading E (Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts),
in order to hold immediately a commemorative meeting in observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe.24
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 16 May 2006, the General Assembly decided to consider
directly in plenary meeting sub-item (a) of agenda item 55, entitled “Third United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries”, under heading B (Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), in order to consider expeditiously a
draft decision.25 The Assembly further agreed to proceed immediately to the consideration of subitem (a) to take action on the draft decision.
At its 88th plenary meeting, on 6 June 2006, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 54, entitled “International migration and
development”, under heading B (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences), in order to consider directly in plenary meeting a report of the
Secretary-General.26 The Assembly further agreed to proceed immediately to the consideration of
the sub-item.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 97, entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament”, under heading G (Disarmament), in order to consider expeditiously a
draft decision.27 The Assembly further agreed to consider the sub-item directly in plenary meeting
and to proceed immediately to its consideration.
Also at the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,28
having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure, decided to include in the
agenda of its sixtieth session an additional item entitled “Extension of the term of the permanent
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 29 August 2006, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of agenda item 161 entitled “Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, under
heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters ), in order to consider a request by the
Secretary-General.16 The Assembly further agreed to proceed immediately to its consideration.

_______________
24

Held pursuant to General Assembly resolution 60/14 of 14 November 2005.
A/60/L.54.
26
A/60/871.
27
A/60/L.55.
28
A/60/238.
25

147

IV. Decisions

60/552. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
At its 70th plenary meeting, on 6 February 2006, the General Assembly took note of the
solemn appeal made by the President of the General Assembly on 6 February 2006 in connection
with the observance of the Olympic Truce.29
60/553. Khmer Rouge trials
At its 70th plenary meeting, on 6 February 2006, on the proposal of a number of countries,20
the General Assembly concurred with the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report
on Khmer Rouge trials30 that the international judges, the international co-prosecutor and the
international co-investigating judge should be deemed officials of the United Nations for the
purposes of their terms and conditions of service and approved the granting of that status to them
for those purposes.
60/554. Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting and
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the targets set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be convened from 31 May to 2 June
2006
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 27 March 2006, on the proposal of its President,31 the
General Assembly decided to approve for participation in the high-level meeting and
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the targets set out in the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be convened from 31 May to 2 June 2006, the list of civil society
representatives contained in document A/60/CRP.2, which was drawn up by the President of the
Assembly pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution 60/224 of 23 December 2005.
60/555. Members of the Human Rights Council: staggering of terms of office
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 9 May 2006, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 14 of resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006 and on the proposal of its President, 32
approved the staggering of terms of the members of the Human Rights Council from each
regional group as set out in the following table:33
Number of seats for
Regional groups

One year

Two years

Three years

Total

African Group

4

4

5

13

Asian Group

4

4

5

13

Eastern European Group

2

2

2

6

Latin American and Caribbean Group

2

3

3

8

Western European and Others Group

2

2

3

7

14

15

18

47

Total seats

_______________
29

A/60/662.
A/60/565.
31
A/60/L.51.
32
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 80th meeting (A/60/PV.80), and
corrigendum.
33
See A/INF/60/6. See also decision 60/416.
30

148

IV. Decisions

60/556. Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries: high-level
meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 16 May 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,25
(a) Recalled its resolution 60/228 of 23 December 2005, in which it decided to convene a
high-level meeting on the midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, in New York
on 19 and 20 September 2006, to be chaired by the President of the General Assembly;
(b) Recalled also its resolution 57/301 of 13 March 2003, in accordance with which its
sixty-first regular session should open on 12 September 2006 and the general debate should be
held from 19 to 29 September 2006;
(c) Decided, instead, to convene the high-level meeting on the midterm comprehensive
global review of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001–2010 in New York on 18 September 2006, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., as well as on 19 September 2006, from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., to be chaired
by the President of the General Assembly.
60/557. Additional speakers for the high-level meeting and comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the targets set out in the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 30 May 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,34 recalling its resolution 60/224 of 23 December 2005, and, as part of the high-level
meeting and comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the targets set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be convened from 31 May to 2 June 2006, decided:
(a) To invite the following participants, in their capacity as rapporteurs for the panel
discussions, to present a summary of the discussions at the plenary meeting to be held on
Thursday, 1 June 2006:
Mr. Wu Zunyou, National Centre for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention (China)
Mrs. Sigrun Møgedal, HIV/AIDS Ambassador (Norway)
Ms. Keesha Effs, National Youth Ambassador for Positive Living (Jamaica)
Mr. Omolou Falobi, Journalists against AIDS (Nigeria)
Ms. Raminta Stuikyte, Director of the Central and Eastern European Harm Reduction
Network (Lithuania)
(b) To invite the following participants to make statements at the high-level plenary
meeting to be held on Friday, 2 June 2006:
(i)

At the opening of the meeting:

Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
Dr. Richard Feachem, Executive Director of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria
(ii)

In accordance with the principle of precedence:

_______________
34

A/60/L.56.

149

IV. Decisions

Ms. Khensani Mavasa, Deputy Chairperson, Treatment Action Campaign (South Africa),
accredited through the International Women’s Health Coalition, as a representative of civil
society
Mr.William Harvey Roedy, President, MTV Networks International and Chairman of the
Global Media AIDS Initiative (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), as a
representative of the private sector
60/558. Organization of the high-level meeting to review progress achieved in realizing the
commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS: parallel
segments
At its 85th plenary meeting, on 1 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,35 decided that, without setting a precedent, the high-level meeting on Friday, 2 June
2006, after the opening statements would be conducted in two parallel segments in separate
venues, which would be of equal status, with full conference services, and form an integral part of
the meeting. The high-level meeting would reconvene in one venue for consideration of the final
document and closing statements.
60/559. Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament
At its 88th plenary meeting, on 6 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
Indonesia,27 and recalling its resolution 59/71 of 3 December 2004 and its decision 60/518 of
8 December 2005, decided to establish, at a later date, an Open-ended Working Group to consider
the objectives and agenda, including the possible establishment of a preparatory committee, for
the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
60/563. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects: report of the Group of Legal Experts
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 8 September 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
its President,36 decided to postpone consideration of the report of the Group of Legal Experts37
until its sixty-first session to avail the Sixth Committee, at that session, of the opportunity to
consider the report, which was submitted pursuant to resolutions 59/300 of 22 June 2005 and
60/263 of 6 June 2006 that endorsed the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations in its respective reports.38
60/564. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2006, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the sponsor of the item,39 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-first session.

_______________
35
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 85th meeting (A/60/PV.85), and
corrigendum.
36
Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 99th meeting (A/60/PV.99), and corrigendum.
37
See A/60/980.
38
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1); and ibid.,
Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/60/19).
39
Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 100th meeting (A/60/PV.100), and corrigendum.

150

IV. Decisions

60/565. Strengthening of the United Nations system
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2006, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations system” and to include it
in the draft agenda of its sixty-first session.
60/566. Improving the financial situation of the United Nations
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2006, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Improving the financial situation of the United Nations” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-first session.
60/567. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 11 September 2006, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-first session.
60/568. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the
Security Council and related matters
At its 101st plenary meeting, on 11 September 2006, the General Assembly, recalling its
previous relevant resolutions and decisions, having considered the report of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership
of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council, which was established
pursuant to its resolution 48/26 of 3 December 1993, on its deliberations during the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly,40 bearing in mind the United Nations Millennium Declaration of
8 September 2000, adopted by Heads of State and Government,41 in which they resolved to
intensify their efforts to achieve a comprehensive reform of the Council in all its aspects, and
recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome of 16 September 2005,42 in which Heads of State and
Government expressed support for early reform of the Council and recommended that the Council
continue to adapt its working methods:
(a) Took note of the report of the Working Group on its work during the sixtieth session of
the General Assembly;40
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairman’s initiative to stimulate an active discussion
relating to the comprehensive reform of the Security Council by the Working Group;
(c) Urged the Working Group to continue to exert efforts during the sixty-first session,
aimed at achieving progress in the consideration of all issues relevant to the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Council;
(d) Decided that the question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Council should be considered
during the sixty-first session of the General Assembly;
(e) Also decided that the Working Group should continue its work, taking into account the
progress achieved during the forty-eighth to sixtieth sessions of the General Assembly and
drawing on the experience of the sixtieth session, as well as the views to be expressed during the
sixty-first session, taking into account paragraph 15 of the report,40 and also taking into

_______________
40

Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/60/47).
See resolution 55/2.
42
See resolution 60/1.
41

151

IV. Decisions

consideration the discussion on the process of implementation of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome;
(f) Further decided that the Working Group should submit a report to the General
Assembly before the end of its sixty-first session, including any agreed recommendations.

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

60/551. Questions deferred for future consideration
B43
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 8 May 2006, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee, 44 decided to defer until its sixty-first session consideration of the
following agenda items and related documents:
Item 124
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations
Report of the Secretary-General on a strengthened and unified security management system
for the United Nations45
Report of the Secretary-General on the coverage of staff by the malicious acts insurance
policy and on security spending by organizations of the United Nations system46
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the utilization and management of
funds approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions 58/295 and 59/276 for
strengthening the security and safety of United Nations premises, and note by the SecretaryGeneral transmitting his comments thereon47
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on a
strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations and coverage
of staff by the malicious acts insurance policy and on security spending by organizations of
the United Nations system48
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the global audit of field security
management49
Note by the Secretariat on information and communication technology security, business
continuity and disaster recovery50

_______________
43
Decision 60/551, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/60/49), vol. II, becomes decision 60/551 A.
44
A/60/609/Add.2, para. 5.
45
A/60/424.
46
A/60/317 and Corr.1.
47
A/60/291 and Add.1.
48
A/60/7/Add.9. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
49
A/59/702.
50
A/60/677.

152

IV. Decisions

Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
information and communication technology security, business continuity and disaster
recovery51
Report of the Secretary-General on a strengthened and unified security management system
for the United Nations: standardized access control52
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on a
strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations: standardized
access control53
Item 128
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Committee on Contributions on the work of its sixty-fifth session (6–24 June
2005)54
Report of the Secretary-General on unpaid assessed contributions of the former Yugoslavia55
Letter dated 27 December 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
General Assembly56
Note by the Secretary-General on outstanding assessed contributions of the former
Yugoslavia57
Item 131
United Nations common system
Report of the International Civil Service Commission for the year 200558
Statement submitted by the Secretary-General on administrative and financial implications
of the decisions and recommendations contained in the report of the International Civil
Service Commission for 200559
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in
the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 200560
Report of the Secretary-General on contractual arrangements61
Note by the Secretary-General on the Senior Management Network62
Report of the International Civil Service Commission for 200463

_______________
51

A/60/7/Add.33. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
A/60/695.
53
A/60/7/Add.35. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
54
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/60/11).
55
A/60/140 and Corr.1.
56
A/56/767.
57
A/58/189.
58
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 30 and corrigendum (A/60/30 and
Corr.1).
59
A/60/421 and Corr.1.
60
A/60/7/Add.3. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
61
A/59/263/Add.1.
62
A/60/209.
63
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/59/30), vol. II.
52

153

IV. Decisions

Note by the Secretariat transmitting the report of the Panel on the Strengthening of the
International Civil Service64
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Panel on the Strengthening of
the International Civil Service65
Item 133
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Ombudsman66
Report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice in the Secretariat: outcome of
the work of the Joint Appeals Board during 2003 and 2004; and statistics on the disposition
of cases and the work of the Panel of Counsel67
Report of the Secretary-General on the practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary
matters and cases of criminal behaviour, 1 January 2004–30 June 200568
Report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice in the Secretariat69
Letter dated 14 October 2005 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the
Chairman of the Fifth Committee70
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
administration of justice in the Secretariat71
C
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 7 July 2006, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the Fifth Committee, 72 decided to defer until its sixty-first session consideration of the
following agenda items and related documents:
Item 124
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Report of the Board of Auditors for the year ended 31 December 2004 on the capital master
plan73
Report of the Secretary-General on plans for three additional conference rooms and viable
solutions for allowing natural light into the rooms74
Report of the Secretary-General on viable options for ensuring sufficient parking space at
United Nations Headquarters75
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital
master plan for the biennium ended 31 December 200376

_______________
64

A/59/153.
A/59/399.
66
A/60/376.
67
A/60/72 and Corr.1.
68
A/60/315.
69
A/59/883.
70
A/C.5/60/10.
71
A/60/7/Add.1. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
72
A/60/609/Add.3, para. 5.
73
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/60/5), vol. V.
74
A/58/556.
75
A/58/712.
76
A/59/161.
65

154

IV. Decisions

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the capital master plan for the period from August 2003 through July 200477
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
capital master plan78
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the capital master plan for the period
from August 2004 to July 200579
Item 136
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping
missions as at 30 June 200580
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the
updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions81
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the standard costs applied
to Headquarters overhead82
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the global review of discipline in field
missions led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations83
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the comprehensive management audit
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations84
Report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the investigation conducted by the
Investigations Task Force into fraud and corruption allegations at Pristina Airport85
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments on the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the investigation conducted by the Investigations Task Force
into fraud and corruption allegations at Pristina Airport86
Item 46
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields
Item 118
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Item 120
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Item 122
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations

_______________
77

A/59/420.
A/59/556.
79
A/60/288.
80
A/60/437.
81
A/60/551.
82
A/60/682.
83
A/60/713.
84
A/60/717.
85
A/60/720 and Corr.1.
86
A/60/720/Add.1.
78

155

IV. Decisions

Item 124
Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007
Item 128
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Item 129
Human resources management
Item 136
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in the United Nations for a stronger
Organization worldwide: detailed report on financial management practices87
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in the United Nations for a stronger
Organization worldwide: detailed report on procurement reform88
Report of the Secretary-General on investing in the United Nations for a stronger
Organization worldwide: detailed report on updated terms of reference for the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee89
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on policies
of United Nations system organizations towards the use of open source software in the
secretariats90
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on policies of United Nations system organizations towards the use of open source software
in the secretariats91
Reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions92
60/560. Revised estimates arising in respect of Security Council resolution 1660 (2006) of
28 February 2006 on the appointment of reserve judges at the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,93 having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the revised estimates arising in respect of Security Council resolution 1660 (2006) of
28 February 2006 on the appointment of reserve judges at the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law

_______________
87

A/60/846/Add.3.
A/60/846/Add.5 and Corr.1.
89
A/60/846/Add.7.
90
A/60/665.
91
A/60/665/Add.1.
92
A/60/870, A/60/903 and A/60/904.
93
A/60/606/Add.1, para. 6.
88

156

IV. Decisions

Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 199194 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95 decided:
(a)

To take note of the report of the Secretary-General;94

(b) To request the Secretary-General to report on any additional requirements arising from
the appointment of the three reserve judges in the context of the second performance report for the
biennium 2006–2007.
60/561. Expenditure authorization for the biennium 2006–2007
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,96 having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the expenditure authorization for the biennium 2006–200797 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 98 decided to authorize
expenditure of the remaining funds appropriated in resolution 60/247 A of 23 December 2005.
60/562. Additional office accommodation in Geneva for the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 30 June 2006, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,99 having considered the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Additional office accommodation in Geneva for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights: revised estimates to the programme budget for the biennium
2006–2007”, 100 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions:101
(a) Welcomed with appreciation the intention of the host Government to contribute
financial resources towards meeting the initial rental obligations as well as the cost of exterior
perimeter security protection for compliance with Headquarters Minimum Operating Security
Standards;
(b) Authorized the Secretary-General to enter into commitments of up to 4,975,900
United States dollars, comprising 2,191,500 dollars under section 28E, Administration, Geneva,
1,592,800 dollars under section 32, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance,
1,191,600 dollars under section 33, Safety and security, and 232,000 dollars under section 35,
Staff assessment, to be offset by an equal amount under income section 1, Income from staff
assessment, under the programme budget for the biennium 2006–2007.

_______________
94

A/60/844.
A/60/854.
96
A/60/608/Add.3, para. 8.
97
A/60/889.
98
A/60/7/Add.40. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
99
A/60/608/Add.5, para. 6.
100
A/60/899.
101
A/60/7/Add.42. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 7A.
95

157

Annex I
Allocation of agenda items1
1

1. The following items, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, were also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixtieth session, under heading B
(Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):2
54. Globalization and interdependence:3
(c)

International migration and development.

55. Groups of countries in special situations:4
(a)

Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

2. The following item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixtieth session, under heading D (Promotion of
human rights):2
71. Human rights questions:5
(b)

Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

3. The following item, which had been allocated to the First Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixtieth session, under heading G (Disarmament):2
97. General and complete disarmament:3
(i)

Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.

4. The following additional item was considered directly in plenary meeting, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), during the resumed sixtieth session of the
General Assembly:2
112. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections:6
(e)

Election of forty-seven members of the Human Rights Council;

(f)

Election of seven members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

5. The following item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixtieth session, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters):2
113. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions.

_______________
1
Further to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, agenda items are organized under headings corresponding to the
priorities of the Organization.
2
See decision 60/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.
3
A/60/252/Add.8.
4
A/60/252/Add.7.
5 A/60/252/Add.5.
6 A/60/252/Add.6.

159

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

6. The following additional item was considered directly in plenary meeting, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), during the resumed sixtieth session of the
General Assembly:2
161. Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.3

160

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

138

92nd

30 June 2006

47

145

92nd

30 June 2006

50

140

92nd

30 June 2006

54

151

92nd

30 June 2006

57

121

92nd

30 June 2006

61

Resolution B.........................................................................

127

79th

8 May 2006

62

60/251.

Human Rights Council........................................................

46 and 120

72nd

15 March 2006

2

60/252.

World Summit on the Information Society ........................

49

74th

27 March 2006

5

60/253.

Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies............................................................

10

78th

2 May 2006

7

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations.......................

122

79th

8 May 2006

68

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2006–2007.....................................................

124

79th

8 May 2006

71

60/256.

Capital master plan ..............................................................

124

79th

8 May 2006

74

60/257.

Programme planning ...........................................................

125

79th

8 May 2006

75

60/258.

Joint Inspection Unit............................................................

130

79th

8 May 2006

78

60/259.

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services .................................

132

79th

8 May 2006

79

60/17.

Title

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Resolution B.........................................................................

60/18.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Resolution B.........................................................................

60/121.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Resolution B.........................................................................

60/122.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
Resolution B.........................................................................

60/234.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B.........................................................................

60/236.

60/254.
60/255.

Pattern of conferences

161

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

46
118
120
122
124
128
129
136

79th

8 May 2006

81

Election of seven members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission ..................

112 (f)

79th

8 May 2006

9

60/262.

Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS....................................

45

87th

2 June 2006

11

60/263.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.......................

32

88th

6 June 2006

42

Admission of the Republic of Montenegro to
membership in the United Nations .....................................

114

91st

28 June 2006

17

Follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005
World Summit, including the Millennium Development
Goals and the other internationally agreed development
goals......................................................................................

46 and 120

92nd

30 June 2006

17

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues ..............................................................

136

92nd

30 June 2006

87

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy........................................................................

136

92nd

30 June 2006

92

60/268.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ...................

136

92nd

30 June 2006

95

60/269.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi ....

137

92nd

30 June 2006

98

60/270.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus...................................................................................

139

92nd

30 June 2006

101

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor ............................................................................

142

92nd

30 June 2006

104

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea.............................................................................

143

92nd

30 June 2006

105

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia .................................................................................

144

92nd

30 June 2006

108

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission............................................................

146 (a)

92nd

30 June 2006

111

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo...............................................................

147

92nd

30 June 2006

112

60/276.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia .........

148

92nd

30 June 2006

115

60/277.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.....................................................................

149 (a)

92nd

30 June 2006

118

60/260.

60/261.

60/264.
60/265.

60/266.

60/267.

60/271.
60/272.
60/273.
60/274.
60/275.

162

Title

Investing in the United Nations: for a stronger
Organization worldwide......................................................

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon ................................................................................

149 (b)

92nd

30 June 2006

120

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone ....................................................................................

150

92nd

30 June 2006

124

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara...........................................

152

92nd

30 June 2006

126

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council.................

124

92nd

30 June 2006

128

60/282.

Capital master plan ..............................................................

124

92nd

30 June 2006

129

60/283.

Investing in the United Nations for a stronger
Organization worldwide: detailed report............................

46
118
120
122
124
128
129
136

93rd

7 July 2006

132

60/278.
60/279.
60/280.
60/281.

60/284.

Prevention of armed conflict...............................................

12

98th

7 September 2006

26

60/285.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan......

40

98th

7 September 2006

27

60/286.

Revitalization of the General Assembly.............................

116

99th

8 September 2006

27

60/287.

The Peacebuilding Fund......................................................

46 and 120

99th

8 September 2006

31

60/288.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

46 and 120

99th

8 September 2006

31

60/289.

Comprehensive review of a strategy to eliminate future
sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations......................................................

32

99th

8 September 2006

43

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

157

76th

13 April 2006

141

112 (a)

74th

27 March 2006

141

112 (c)

73rd

16 March 2006

142

Decisions
Decision
No.

60/402.

Title

Election of judges of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Decision B ...........................................................................

60/405.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Decision B ...........................................................................

60/409.

Election of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme
Decision B ...........................................................................

163

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

60/411.

60/416.

60/417.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Decision B ...........................................................................

113 (b)

73rd

16 March 2006

142

Election of forty-seven members of the Human Rights
Council.................................................................................

112 (e)

80th
81st

9 May 2006
9 May 2006

142

Title

Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions

Election by the General Assembly of seven members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.........................................................................

112 (f)

82nd

16 May 2006

143

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session.................................................................

4

89th

8 June 2006

144

Decision A ...........................................................................

5

90th

8 June 2006

144

Decision B ...........................................................................

5

94th

20 July 2006

144

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session ......................................

6

90th

8 June 2006

144

Election of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)

112 (d)

91st

28 June 2006

145

Decision A ...........................................................................

161

91st

28 June 2006

145

.

Decision B ...........................................................................

161

97th

29 August 2006

145

60/502.

Organization of the sixtieth session
7

77th
99th
100th

28 April 2006
8 September 2006
11 September 2006

146

70th
73rd
76th
77th
82nd
88th
97th

6 February 2006
16 March 2006
13 April 2006
28 April 2006
16 May 2006
6 June 2006
29 August 2006

146

60/418.
60/419.

60/420.
60/421.
60/422.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of
the General Assembly at its sixty-first session

Extension of the term of the permanent judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

Decision B ...........................................................................

60/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B ...........................................................................

164

7

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Decision B ...........................................................................

122

79th

8 May 2006

152

Decision C ...........................................................................

122

93rd

7 July 2006

154

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal................................................................

48 (a)

70th

6 February 2006

148

60/553.

Khmer Rouge trials.............................................................

71 (b)

70th

6 February 2006

148

60/554.

Participation of civil society representatives in the highlevel meeting and comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the targets set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, to be
convened from 31 May to 2 June 2006.............................

45

74th

27 March 2006

148

Members of the Human Rights Council: staggering of
terms of office......................................................................

112 (e)

80th

9 May 2006

148

Third United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries: high-level meeting on
the midterm comprehensive global review of the
implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2001–2010...........................................................................

55 (a)

82nd

16 May 2006

149

Additional speakers for the high-level meeting and
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in
realizing the targets set out in the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS...............................................

45

83rd

30 May 2006

149

Organization of the high-level meeting to review
progress achieved in realizing the commitments set out
in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS:
parallel segments.................................................................

45

85th

1 June 2006

150

Convening of the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament....................................

97 (i)

88th

6 June 2006

150

Revised estimates arising in respect of Security Council
resolution 1660 (2006) of 28 February 2006 on the
appointment of reserve judges at the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991............................................................................

135

92nd

30 June 2006

156

60/561.

Expenditure authorization for the biennium 2006–2007

124

92nd

30 June 2006

157

60/562.

Additional office accommodation in Geneva for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights .....................................................................

124

92nd

30 June 2006

157

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects: report of
the Group of Legal Experts ................................................

32

99th

8 September 2006

150

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.....

40

100th

11 September 2006

150

60/551.

60/552.

60/555.
60/556.

60/557.

60/558.

60/559.
60/560.

60/563.

60/564.

Title

Questions deferred for future consideration

165

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

60/565.

Strengthening of the United Nations system.....................

119

100th

11 September 2006

151

60/566.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations

126

100th

11 September 2006

151

60/567.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

141

100th

11 September 2006

151

60/568.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and related
matters..................................................................................

117

101st

11 September 2006

151

166
