S/2002/1138

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 October 2002
English
Original: French

Letter dated 10 October 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of a communication dated 29
August 2002, which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-63600 (E)

141002

*0263600*

141002

S/2002/1138

Annex
Letter dated 29 August 2002 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
[Original: English]
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the July
monthly report on SFOR operations (see enclosure). I would appreciate your making
this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2002/1138

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 July 2002) there were just over 16,300 troops
deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia with contributions from the NATO
allies and from 15 non-NATO countries.
2.
During the period under review, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remained stable.
Security
3.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continues to contribute towards the
maintenance of a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina; monitor
compliance by the Entity Armed Forces; conduct inspections and consolidation of
weapons storage sites; provide support to the international organizations working in
theatre, and to the Federation authorities in collecting weapons and ammunition in
the framework of Operation Harvest; and monitor possible terrorist-related threats
throughout the country.
4.
SFOR is continuing an operation, which began on 21 May, in the eastern part
of the Republika Srpska to encourage the local population to provide information on
the location and movement of persons indicted for war crimes, and to cooperate in
their capture. On 2 July, SFOR troops searched one of the Karadzic family homes on
the outskirts of Pale, and seized documents, computer disks, videotapes, and three
pistols. This search operation created very little public interest. On 3 July, leaflets
were dropped over the towns of Han Pijesak, Visegrad and Vlasenica. 1
5.
On 7 July, in Bratunac, SFOR detained Miroslav Deronjic, indicted by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for violations of the laws or
customs of war and for crimes against humanity (persecutions and murder) carried
out in May 1992. On 9 July, SFOR detained Radovan Stankovic, indicted by the
Tribunal for enslavement, rape, inhumane treatment and outrages upon the personal
dignity of non-Serb civilians during the siege of Foca in 1992. Both men were
subsequently transferred to The Hague.1
6.
SFOR continued Operation Harvest during July and significantly increased the
amount of items collected. In the period from 1 January to 31 July 2002, the total
number of weapons and ammunition collected amounted to 5,399 small arms (rifles,
pistols and revolvers); 1,320,242 rounds of ammunition less than 20 mm; 12,901
rounds of ammunition between 20 mm and 76 mm; 2,220 rounds of ammunition
more than 76 mm; 21,482 hand grenades; 2,988 mines; 6,008 explosives; and 38,029
other items (mortars, mortar rounds, rifle grenades, and hand-made ordnance).
7.
Following the unannounced inspections carried out in May at the Bosnian Serb
(VRS) Lisina air force site and the VRS Air Force headquarters at Zaluzani, SFOR
conducted unannounced inspections of two Federation electronic warfare sites on 16
July — one at the Bosniac site of Bihac, and another at the Bosnian Croat site of
Jajce. As a result of documents found at Jajce, SFOR carried out another inspection
__________________
1 The Russian Federation reserves its special position on these matters.

3

S/2002/1138

at the 88 Military Intelligence Battalion headquarters in Mostar, and is currently
analysing documents taken from there.
8.
By another inspection carried out on a camouflaged radio relay station between
Gorazde and Praca on 27 July, SFOR has established that no illegal monitoring of its
activities has been carried out at that particular site.
9.
In the period from 4 to 10 July SFOR carried out a road safety campaign
emphasizing, inter alia, speed limits, wearing of seatbelts, and preparation of first
aid kits, with the aim of reducing the number of deaths, injuries and material
damage in traffic accidents.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
10. Throughout the month of July the Entity Armed Forces carried out regular
training activities which were generally in compliance with the military provisions
of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
11. During the period under review, SFOR monitored a total of 318 training and
movement activities: 138 Bosnian Serb; 42 Bosniac; 84 Bosnian Croat; and 14
Federation.
12. A total of 773 mine-clearing activities were monitored over this period: 326
Bosnian Serb; 317 Bosniac; and 130 Bosnian Croat.
13. SFOR also carried out 98 inspections and verifications of weapons storage
sites: 48 Bosnian Serb; 19 Bosniac; 15 Bosnian Croat; and 16 Federation.
14. On 23 July, 31 Scorpion 7.65 automatic pistols were reported missing from a
Bosnian Serb weapons storage site at Bogaz near Han Pijesak (30 km west of
Srebrenica). 2 Instead of imposing a ban on training outside barracks, as had been
done in other cases of stolen weapons reported earlier this year, the Commander of
SFOR accepted the plan of the Bosnian Serbs to investigate the theft. On 31 July,
the Commander of SFOR discussed the outcome of the investigation with the
Commander of the Republika Srpska’s fifth Corps. The Commander stated that the
theft had been criminally motivated, that he had removed those responsible for the
lack of security, and had given his assurance that corrective measures would be
taken to improve the situation.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Police Task Force
(IPTF), the Office of the High Representative, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
16. During the reporting period, SFOR provided support to IPTF during a
demonstration in Zenica on 3 July, during a general strike in Lukavac and Tuzla on 4
July, and during ceremonies in Srebrenica on 5 and 11 July. On 15 July, SFOR
__________________
2 The latest theft of weapons is the fifth of its kind to have been reported in Bosnia and

Herzegovina this year — previous cases included two from Bosnian Serb sites and two from
Bosnian Croat sites.

4

S/2002/1138

patrols were increased in the Travnik, Zenika and Sarajevo areas following a report
from the Government that extremists had acquired four surface-to-air missiles and
were planning to attack Javier Solana, or the aircraft used by the Presidents of
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to attend the three-nation
presidential summit.
17. On 19 July, SFOR also provided support to IPTF during an investigation of an
alleged border violation at Kostajnica bridge, an area disputed by Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina. 3
18. Assistance continues to be provided by SFOR to the Office of the High
Representative in monitoring the situation in the Dobrinja area.
19. SFOR provided support to the Tribunal during exhumations in and around
Gorazde, Sarajevo, Kotor Varos and Zvornik.
20. Following talks between NATO and ICAO on matters of airspace
normalization, amended civil special instructions will be published on 1 August for
the operation of three airways between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Thereafter, Air Bosnia will begin a direct, regular passenger
service between Sarajevo and Belgrade.
21. In discussions led by the Office of the High Representative and the Federation
Minister of Transportation on the handover of Sarajevo airport, SFOR has indicated
its willingness to offer some interim support once the Federation has offered a
timetable and firm commitment to take over airport operations.
Outlook
22. The security situation is expected to remain stable. Preparations for the general
elections to be held in October have so far been low key.

__________________
3 The Croatian and Bosnian authorities signed a draft agreement on 23 July, calling for a joint

checkpoint on the Kostajnica bridge and a customs point on the disputed island formed by the
Uncica and Una Rivers. The agreement has to be finalized by Sarajevo and Zagreb.

5
