Re1olutions adopted on the reporb of the Second Committee

2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
report, to consult Member States, the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency and
other international organizations concerned, and invites
them to co-operate with the Secretary-General in carrying out the task entrusted to him under the present
resolution ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider the report of the Secretary-General at one of
its 1970 sessions and to transmit the report with its
comments to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth
session.
1751st plenary meeting.
20 December 1968.

2459 (XXIII). The role of the co-operative
movement in economic and 1ocial development
The General Assembl)',
Taking into consideration the necessity of mobilizing
all means aimed at the economic and social development
of individual countries, and in particular developing
countries,
Recognizing the important role of the co-operative
movement in the development of various fields of production and distribution, including agriculture, animal
husbandry, fisheries, manufacturing, housing, credit
institutions, education and health services,
Recognizing that the promotion of the co-operative
movement in accordance with local needs could contribute to the implementation of the goals of the Second
United Nations Development Decade,
Recognizing also that a lack of skilled and experienced personnel is at present one of the most important
obstacles to the development of the co-operative movement in developing countries,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider. in connexion with the preparatio1ts for the
Second United Nations Development Decade, the question of the role of the co-operative movement in economic and social development;
2. Invites Member States that have traditions and
experience in that regard to provide increasing help,
including staff teaching, to developing countries which
request it in the field of co-operative movement;
3. Requests the International Labour Organisation,
other specialized agencies concerned and the International Co-operative Alliance to render increased
assistance within their possibilities in the realization of
the objectives of the present resolution.
1751st plenary •meetino.
20 December 1968.
2460 (XXIII). Human resources for development
The General Assembly.
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1353 (XLV) of 2 August 1968, in whid1 the Council
recognized the great contribution that the enthusiasm
and energy of youth everywhere and the;r concern for
peace and justice can make to the realization of the
ideals and purposes of the United Nations. in particular
with regard to economic and social development and
human rights,

SS

Recalling also Commission for Social Development
resolution 1 (XIX) of 19 February 1968,47 in which
the Commission, inter alia, recommended that high
priority should be given to proposals to promote ways
of enlisting popular participation in development and to
involve more actively all groups of the population,
Convinced that the United Nations could respond
imaginatively to the desire of individuals-and in
particular of youth, irrespective of country. class, race,
religion, sex, age, economic level or social status-to
dedicate a certain period of their lives to the cause
of development, and could offer them a positive means
of translating their concern for their fellow-men into an
effective force for economic and social progress throughout the world,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to study
the feasibility of creating an international corps of volunteers for develop.ment and to include in its annual
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth
session, if possible, appropriate conclusions and recommendations deriving from its study.
1751st plenary meeting.
20 December 1968.

2461 (XXIII). International monetary reform
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 2208 (XXI) of 17 December
1966 entitled "International monetary reform" in which,
inter alia, it recognized the need for a reform of the
international monetary system that would 11111ke it more
responsive to the requirements of the economic growth
of both developed and developing countries,
H' cl coming the agreement reached during the 1967
annual meeting of the Board of Governors of the International Monetary Fund on the establishment in the
Fund of a new facility based on special drawing rights
to meet the need, as and when it arises. for a supplement to existing reserve assets,
:Voti11g decision 32 (II) taken on 28 :March 1968 by
the l! nited Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its second session, 48
Ta!:i11f! inln ,,ao1111t the report of the Executive Directors oi t!,
,ternational l\fonetary FuncP 9 containing
the propo.,c ! amendment of the Fund's Articles of
Agreement, which established the special drawing rights
facility and introduced certain changes in the Fund's
rules and practices,
Calls upo11 the Governments of the States members
of the International :'.\Ionetary Fund to take the necessary steps for the early ratification and activation of the
special drawing rights facility, which is intended to
improve the functioning of the world economy, including. inter alia, the pro\'ision of additional resources to
developing countries.
1751st plenar>' mectin,(f.
20 Dccrn,ber 1968.
47 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Co1mcil,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/4467), para. 51.
4 8 See Proceedings of the United Nations C onfcrcnce on
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l
and Add.1, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication,
Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 43.
40 International Monetary Fund, Annual Report, 1968 (Washington, D.C.); transmitted by a note of the Secretary-General
(E/4596).
