21

FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTH
MEETING

QUATRE CENT CINQUIEME SEANCE

Held at Lakv. Success, Ntiw York,
on Thursday, 27 January 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenlle d Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi 27 janvier 1949, 15 heures.

President: General

a

(Canada).

President: Le gelleral McNAUGHTON (Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, Fnll1ce, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socia[~
ist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents.' Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietiqtte
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques soeialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

TIt!! agemla was that of the 404th meeting
[SIAgllllda 404].

IS/Agenda 404].

McNAUGHTON

4. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question
At the £nvitaliol1 of the President, Mr, Hood,
representatIve of Australia; Mr. Vatf Langenhove,
representative of Belgium; U So Nyn, repre-

sentative of Burma; Sir Benegal Romo Ratt,
representative of India; Mr. van Roijw, representative of the Nethulands; Mr. It/g/es, representative of the Pkilippines: and Mr. Palar,
repnsl!1ltative of the Republic of Indonesia, took
their places at the SecuritY,COUlfCil table.

The PRI1S:DENT: As usual, the interpretation

will be consecutive for the members of the
Security Council and siri1Ultaneous for all other
speakers.

USa NYUN (Burma): On behalf of the Government of the Union of Burma, I wish to make
a further statement in the light of the situation
created by the submission of a joint resolution
[S/1219j by the representatives of China, Cuba,
Norway and the United States of America,
which is now before the Security Council.
I make this statement against the background
of an event of great significance, namely, the
Conference on Indonesia recently held in New
Delhi, our interest in which has naturally been
heig,htclled by the fact that the Primer- Minister
of my Government more than a month ago--to
be more precise, on 21 December last-sent a
message to the Prime Minister of India, Pandit
Nehru, in' which he not only expressed his sense
of horror and indignation at the Netherlands
aggression and the arrest of the Indonesian
leaders and associated himself with a public
statement made by Pandit Nehru in connexion
with these events, but also suggested that India
should take the initiative in holding, immediately,
a conference of all countries, particularly Asian
countries, which were opposed to the Nether~
lands aggression, to consider what steps should
be taken to assist the Indonesian Republic in its
valiant and righteous struggle against aggressive
imperialism. The Prime Minister of my Government, in that message, further expressed the
readiness of Burma to play its full part in whatever measures were decided upon. My Govern~
ment was, therefore, particularly happy to be
represented ilt and to participate in the Confer~
ence recently held in New Delhi and to be associated with the passage of the resolution of that
Conference on 22 January, a copy of which is

L' ordre dll jottr est cl/lui de la 404 eme seance

4. Snite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne
Sur l'inviialt·olf dl! President, 111. Hood, l'eprisentant de l'A1J..Stmlie; M. va11 Lange1lhove, reprcsentmlt de la Belgil]lte; If So NYII1~, representant
de la Birmatlie; Sir B/megal Rama Rail, representant de r Inde; M. van Roijen, reprcsmtant
df!s Pays-Bas; M. InglJs, representant dt!S Ph1'Uppines, et M. Palar, representant' tie la Repu~
blique d'lndonesie, pennent place la table Glt

ConSilii:

a

Le PJlESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Comme
d'habitude, le systeme d'interpretation consecutive sera employe pour les interventions des
membres du Conseil de secl1rite. et le systeme
d'interpn~tation simultanee pour celles des autres
orateurs.
U So NYUN (Birmanie) (traduit de I'atlglais):
Au nom de mon Gouvernement, je voudrais {aire
une nouvelle declaration, a cause de la situation
Creel" par'1a presentation d'un projet de resolution
commun [S/1219] par 1es representants de la
Chine, de Cuba, .de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis'
d'Amerique.
Je fais cette declaration eu ega:rd a un ,evenement historique d'une grande portee: la Conference qui a ell lieu dernierement a New-Delhi
au sujet de la question de j'Indonesie. L'interet
que la Birman:e a attache a cette Conference
s'est naturellement trouve accm du fait que son
Premier Ministre. a adresse, il y a plus d'un
mois - le 21 decembre dernier, pour etre exact
- un message au Pandit Nehru, Premier Ministre de l'Inde, message, dans lequel, non seulemellt il exprimait son horreur et son indignation
devant l'agression neerla.ndaise et l'arrestation
des chefs indonesiens et s'associait ala declaration
que le Pandit Nehru avait faite publiquementa
Cl" sujet, mais encore il suggerait que 1'Inde prit
I'initiative de reunir immMiatemcnt l1ne conference i laquelle participeraient tous les pays et notamment les pays d'Asie - qui condamnaient
l'agression neerlandaise. A cette conference devaient etre examinees 1es mesures a prendre pour
aider la Republique d'Indonesic dans sa lutte
courageuse et legitime contre UI1 imperialisme
agressif: Le Premier Ministre de mon pays dedarait en outre, dans Cl" message, que la Binnanie
etait prete a cooperer p1eillement a tonte mesure
qui serait adoptee. Mon Gouvernement a donc
ete particulierement heureux d'etre repn~sente a
la Conference qui s'est ,tenue recemment a New·
Delhi, de participer a ses trravaux et de s'associer

22
now before the Sec.l1rity Council [5/1222] and
which the representative of the United Kingdom
generously referred to as a document that was
entitled to respect [403rd meeting].

i la resolution qu'elle a adoptee le 22 janvier
[5/1222]. Nous avons en ce moment devant
nous le texte de celte resolution, dont le representant dtt Royaume-Uni a eu la generosite de
dire [403eme seance] que c.'etait t10 document
rligne de re~pert.

The representative of Australia, who was the
last to speak before we adjourned this morning,
made, if I may so, a very' able analysis ol the
New Delhi resolution. He went further and
made a very useful comparative study of the
New Ddhi resolution and the present joint resolution. 1 can do no better than to follow in his
footsteps and urge the Security Council to incorporate in thel final form of the joint resolu~
tion now under disc.ussion the mn.ny constructive
yet very moderate proposals contained in the
resollltion ol the New ~lhi Conference.

Le representant de l'Australie, qui a ete le
dernier orateur it prendre la parole ce matin, a
fait une excel1ente analyse de cette resolution.
De plus, il a fait une etude comparative fort 'Jtile,
et qui sera cl'une grande aide, de la resolution
adoptee i New-Delhi et du projet de resolution
commun actuelIement soumis au Conseil. Je ne
peux faire mieux que de le suivre clans cette
voie et d'engager le Conseil
trouver le moyen
d'incorporer atl projet de resolution commun
qu'il examine actttellement les nombreuses propositions constructives et c.ependant tres mode
rees que contient la resolution de la Con£erenc.e
de New·Delhi.

I am encouraged in this task by the tone and
substance ol the speeches of several members of
the Security Council. It was very gratifying to
hear from the representative of the United
K,ingdom that the authors of the prese'nt joint
resoluticn and those who sat in conference at
New Delhi approached this question originally in
much the same way and on mLlc.h the same lines,
and that there was, in fact, no fundameniaI difference initially between the two; all agreed in
principle that the Netherlands forces should be
withdrawn, and, lurther, that it was wrong to
hotd elections in a country under the oc.cupation
of foreign troops. The point of divergen~e was
in respect of the time factor, and the authors of
the present resolution were moved by caution
against the danger of "going too far and against
expecting to achieve too mltch in the process of
reconciling the two opposing sides. After hearing
. tbe United Kingdom representative's speech. one
was left with the impression that the present
joint resolution was not beyond revision or modification, and that he would welcome any improvement, provided it was within the bounds of
practicability.

Le ton et le fond meme des interventions de
plusienrs memhres du Consei\ m'encouragent i
le faire. IJ m'a ete tres agreable d'entendre le
representant du Royaume-Uni dire que les autcurs du projet de resolution commun et les
rnembres de la Conference de New-Delhi avaient
ahorM la question it peu pres de 1<, rneme maniere
qu'ils l'avaient consideree all debt:t, presque sous
le meme angle, et qu'en fait il o'y avait pas, i
I'origine, de divergenc.e essentielle entre les uns et
les autres; en effet l tous etaient d'ac.cord -sur le
prindpe du retrait des troupes neerlandaises et
estimaient, en princ.ipe, que c'etait uue erreur
de proceder ii des elections dans un pays occape
par des troupes etrang~re.:i. C'est en ce qui
conc.erne le facteur temps que les points de vue
diffhaient; la prudence a c.onseillt'i aux aulturs
dtl projet de resolution commun de ne pas trop
s'avancer et de ne pas nOtlrrir de trop grands
espoirs en ce qui cancerne la rp.wtlCiliation des
parties adverses. Apres avoir entendu le representant du Royaume-Uni, on avait I'impression
qu'une revision ou modification du projet de
resolution commun n'etait pas impossible et qu'il
acctleillerait volontiers toute amelioration du
texte, pOLlrvu qtle I'application en hit pratiquement realisable.

The speec.h of the representative of the United
States was no less encouraging in this regard,
for he ir::dicated that the joint resolution was intended to represent just another stage-and not
necessarily the final stage:----in these deliberations,
and that the sponsors of the present resolution
would welcome a fllll exchange of views and
other stlggestions, implying therebv th~t the
possibility of modification was certainly not ruted
out. I am !!Jad that my assumptions have been
confirmed; we have had tlOtice only this morning
of certain amendments to be moved by the
sponsors ot the joint resolution, about which I
511a11 do no more at this stage than merely
observe that the sponsors of the joint resolution
have shown a willingness to respond to the requests for modifications which have been repeatedly m.ade by several speakers who have preceded
me. It is a move, but only a move; T will' not
place it higher than that. It is a move in the right
direction, which might be further explored.

Dans son cJiscours, le representant des EtatsUnis n'a pas ete mains encourageant d cet egard.
En effet, il a montre que, dans I'intention de ses
auteurs, le projet de resolution commun ne constituait qu'une etape des deliberations du Conseil
et n'en marquait pas nec.essairement la fin. Il
a ajoute que les auteurs du projet seraient heureux
qU'\1n ecllange de vues :::omplet ait lieu et que de
nouvelles suggestions scient bites. On peltt en
ccnc1ure avec certitude qu'il n'exclllait pas la
possibilite de modifier ce projet. Je suis hettreux
que mes suppositions se soient confirmees. En
diet, nous avons appris ce matin meme que les
auteurs de cc projet de resolution commun devalent presenter certains amendell1ents. Je me
110rTlerai a faire remarquer, pour le moment, qtle
les auteurs de ce projet ont montre ainsi leur
Clesir de tenir compte des demandes de modi
fications formulees a diverses rt;prises par plu
sieurs des orateurs qui m'ont precede. C'est un
pas en avant, mais liD pas seulement. J e n'y yois
rien de plus. C'est un pas dam la bonne voie,
ceIle que nous pounions c.ontinuer it suivre.

a

4

4

4

23
Where there is already so much understanding,
so much appreciation of one another's views, so
much similarity of approach, so much agreement
on principles, so much goodwill, anel such a
genuine eagerness to arrive at a definitive solution of the problem, we refuse to believe that a
satisfactory and reasonable settlement is not
within sight.

Devant une Idle comprehension, un te! respect du point de vue d'autmi, une telle similitude
dans la maniere d'aborder la question, une telle
concordance de vues sur les questions de prin~
cipe, devant tant de bonne volonte, dev.a.nt un
desir si ardent et si sincere de trOllVer une
solution definitive au probleme, no us nons refusons it croire qu'un reglement satisfaisant et raisonnable dl! probU:me ne soit pas proche.

I have referred to the New Delhi resolution as
J'ai deja fait a11mion au caractere modere de
a moderate one. I shnll come back to it when I la resoltltion "doptee it New~Delhi. T'y reviendrai
make a more elaborate examination of its terms lorsque j'examinerai de plus pres ies termes de
with a view to pleading for a modification of the cette resolution pour demander que le projet
present joint resolution. At this stage I would de resolution commun soit modifie. Pour le mo~
merely say that the New Delhi resolution was ment, je dirai seulement que c'est dessein que
deliberately moderate because the framers of the ceHe resolution a ete redigee en termes modercs,
proposals contained in that resolution were re- parce que les auteurs des propositions qu'elle ren~
sponsible, serious-minded statesmen-l might ferme etaient des hommes d'Etat conscients de
even say, with all respect, sober-minded states- leurs responsabilitt~s, a !'esprit serieux, je dirai
men. As representatives of nineteen countries meme pondere. En qualite de representants de
representing more than half the human raCe, they dix-neuf pays reunissant plus de la moitie de la
had foregathered to grapple, in a most realistic population du glob~ ils s'etaient reunis pour
manner, with a problem which threatened to dis- s'attaquer d'une maniere tres realiste it un proturb not only the peace of the East but also the bleme qui menar;ait de troubler la paix, non seupeace of the entire world, and to help to solve it lement en Orient, mais clans le monde entier, et
in accordance with the prindples of the Charter pour contribuer a sa solution, conformement nux
of the United Nations, with f\.1lt consciousness of principes de la Charte des Nations Unies, en
the authority of the Security Council and a full ayant pleinement conscience de l'autorite du
sense of the responsibilities and obligations which Consei! de securite ainsi que des responsabilites
the countries they represent owe to the United et des obligations de leurs pays envers l'OrganiNations,
satioll des Nations Unies.

a

All right-minded people wil] agree that t11is is
no time for fault-finding, accusations or recriminations, In the heat of the indignation generated
by the unwarranted aggression, every country
which felt justified in making harsh utterances
has already made them, but we have now passed
that stage. We now come to brass tacks. Let liS
have no more post-mortems, hut let us get on
with the serious task that is before us. The
problem has assumed a new and 'fresh aspect by
virtue of the present joint draft :resolution considered :lg:linst the uackground of the New Delhi
Conference, and we are here to assist the SectTrity
Council and to co-operate with it in adjusting the
differences that still undeniably exist.

Tout esprit sense conviendra que l'heure n'est
pas aux critiques, aux accusations ou aux: recriminations, Sous le coup de l'indignation provoquee par une agression injustifiee, tous les pays
qui estimaient avoir le droit de faire d'acerbes
critiques les ont deja faites. Cc stade est franchi.
Maintenant, nous en venons aux. faits. Ne reve~
nons pillS en arriere. Avan<;ons maintenant dans
la tache importante qu'il nous but accomp1ir. Le
probleme a pris un aspect tout nouveau depuis la
presentation du projet de resoltltion COmm11n qu'i1
faut etudier en tenant compte de b Conference
de New-Delhi. Nous sommes id pour aider le
Conseil de securite et cooperer it aplanir les
divergences qui existent encore, incontestab1ement.

Let us start with the situation as it is, without
commenting or analysing the events that have
led up to it. What is the present situation? The
present situation is that the most vital parts of
the Republican territory, including the Residency
of ]ogjakarta, are under the oCcLlpation of Neth~
erlands- troops; the President, the Premier and
other leaders and officials of the Indonesian Republic 11ave llot yet been released; the Republican
Government has been dismpted in several areas;
the legality or legal existence of the Republicnn
Government is being questioned; the Republican
Government has been entirely cut off from the
outside world; the Netherlands authorities have
imposed trade restrictions virtually amounting to
an economic blockade. anel Netherlands forces
are still conducting military opemtions,

Examinons d'abord la situation telle qu'elle se
presente, sans commenter ni analyser les evenements qui l'ont fait naitre, Quelle est ceUe situa~
Hon? La voici : les regions vitales par excellence
du territoire republicain, y compris la Residence
de Djokjakarta, sont occupees par les troupes
neerland:lises; le President, le Premier Ministre,
ainsi que d'autres dirigeants 'et des hauts fonctionnaires de la RepulJlique d'Indonesie n'ont pas
encore ete mis en liberte; dans plusieurs regions,
le Gouvemement repub1ic:ain est comp1etement
desorganise, et sa legalite ou son existence en
droit est mise en doute. Le GOllvernement republicain a ete entierement isoJe du reste clu monde,
Les al1torites neerlandaises ont impose au commerce des restrictions ql1i equivalent en fait a
un bloClls economique, et !es armees needandaises
poursl1ivcnt leurs operations militaires.

On the other side of the pictnre what dd we
find? We find that Republican forces have been
reported as attempting to regain occupied territory;- "scorched earth" policy is being pursued;
guerrilla warfare is being carried on; bridges are

Ql1el est l'autre aspect de cette situation? On
nous affirme que les forces republicaines tachent
de reprendre le territoire occupe, qu'eHes pratiquent la politique de la "terre bnllee" et qu'elles
se livrent a des operations de guerilla. 011 nOllS

24
being blown up i other acts of sabotage are being
coml:litted; roads are being rendered unsafe for
the movement of Netherlands forces, and re~
prisals aloe taking pbf:"e. Gen(>r,,\\y, speaking,
there is little law and order and a great deal of
economic distress ill occupied territories, and tr.e
Netherlands forces are inadequate fo!· giving
protection to the civilian populatkm in these
areas; in fact, civil administration has broken
down in occupied territories.

dit qu'on fait sauter les ponts, que d'autres ades
de sabotage sont commis, que les routes ne sont
plus sures pour les troupes tleerlandaises et que
1'0:1 1I".1" de: represa;l1es. On affirme que, d'une
fa~on generale, l'ordre public n'est guere mamtenu, que la situation economique est lamentable
dans les territoires occ:lpes, que les forces neer':'
landaises ne reussissent pas a assurer la protectio:l de la population civile de ces regions et que,
en fait, l'administration civile a cesse d'exister
dans les territoiles occupes.

How' are we to reassamble these broken pieces
and construct something that can be considered
to be structurally safe under the emotional stress
that will immediately follow the transition? The
first thing that Dlust be done is to retease the
political leaders and officials who have been under
arrest, and to give them fuU freedom, and nct
merely the "limited" freedom tJ:at the Netherlands would like to give them, so that they may
assume once again their proper functions and
exercise their proper authority. No true negotiations can proceed, and no proper relations can be
established betweer. the two parties, if one of
them is in fetters or is enjoying, merely a vel;leer
of freedom;

Comment alloOl:;-nous asserr.bler ces morceaux
epar:; d edifier unc structure qui puisse etre consideree comme suffisamment solide pour resister
a la violence des sentiments qtli se manifesteront
immediatement apres la periode de transition?
I1 :aut, tout d'abord, liberer les chefs politiques
et les hauts fonctionnaires arretes et leur donner
une tlberte entiere, et non la liberre "limitee" que
les HoIlandais voudraient lcur accorder, afin
qu'ils puissent assumer de nouveau les fonctions
qui leur reviennt·nt et exercer l'autorite qui leur
appartient; car i\ ne peut y ll.voir de veritables
negociations, et les rapports com·enables ne
peuvent s'etablir entre les deux parties, si I'une
d'elles est enchainee DU si elle ne jouit que d'un
semblant de liberte.

As the re?resentative of t]le United Kingdom
quite properly remarked in one of his earlier
speeches [400th meeting], it is unfortunate that
we should ha.ve to insist publicly upon the release
of those leaders and officials, for it is the least
that can and should be clone as an earnest 0:
good faith. The representative of the U oited
States has also remarked [402nd meeting] tllat
the first essential towards negotiations is to reestablish the Indonesian side in apasitioll in which
their leaders can negotiate freely with the other
side. This is basic COmmon sense; for, unless the
Indonesian leaders are immediately and ,1nconditionally released, no start can be made-far less
can anything: be achieved. In fact, their release
is long overdue.. for 1 submit with respect that
neither. the present joint-dr'aft resolution nor the
New Delhi resolution should have been drafted
without their knowledge and in their absence.

Comme l'a fait tn~s justement remarquer le
rep:-esentant du Royaume-Uni, dans une de ses
interventions prececlentes [400eme seance], it
cst regrettabk que IlOU5 SOYOll~ obliges de
redamer publiquement la mise en liberte des dirigeants et des hauts fonctionnaires indonesiens.
car leur liberation est le mains que la partie
adverse puis se et doive faire pour prouver sa
bonne foL Le representant des Etats-Unis a egalement fait remarquer [402eme .seance] que la
premiere condition indispensable pour entreprendre des ne[oeiations est que le Gouvemement
repnhlicain soit place de nouveau da.ns une situ3tian qui pennette a .!ies chefs de negocier librement avec J'autre partie. C'est hi lllle question
de simple ban sens, car, si les dirigeants indonesiens ne sont pas remis en liberte immb:liaterrtent
et sans conditions, den ne peut etre entrepris
et moins encore realise. En fait, j] y alongte:itps
qu'ils devraient etre en liberte et, q\l'il me soit
permis de le dire, ni le projet de resolution commun, ni la resoh1tion adoptee a la Conference
de )Jew-Delhi n'auraient dt1 etre rediges a leur
inst.: et cn leur absence,

The next fact that stands out is that :nost of
the vital ·parts of the Republican territory are
under the occupation of foreign troops. It is
perfectly obvious-and it seems to me so elemen!aT)-' that it is pain:ully needless to have to say
It-that no country can commence nego:iations,
far less enter into any agreement, unner :1olitical
duress of this nature. Everybody is therefore
agree? in principle that Netherlands troops must
be w:thdrawn from occupied Republica:l terri.
tory; so.me s.a)' immediately~ others say eventu~
ally, whde st1l1 others of nlOderate opinicn, with
whom my Government is associated are of the
view.that the. withd:awal. s~ollld tak~ place progresslVely, \\-"lth a tlme-bmlt fixed for its completion. There is, however, one exception and
that :s in respect of Jogjakarta, from ;"hich
troops should be .withdrawn immediately. And
~hen we say JogJak~rta, we mea~ not only the
Clty, but also the Residency of ] ogJakarta, which

Le deuxieme fait saillant est le suivl1.nt: la plu~
part des parties vitales du ter:-itoire republicain
son1 occupees par des troupes etrangeres. 11 va.
de soi - et je deplore d'avoir i exprimer une
verite qui me pa:"ait si elementalre - qu'auc\ln
pays ne peut engager de negotiations, et encore
moins condure d'accords, sous l'empire d'l.:me
contrainte politique de cette nature. C'est pourquoi tout le rnonde reconnait, en principe, que res
troupes neerlandaises doivent se retirer un territoire republicain qu'elles occupent; ce retrait doit
s'effectuer immediatemen1 selcn les nns, dterieurement d'apres les alltres, tandis que cert3ins,
d'opinion moderee, avec lesque1s ::;e range mon
Gouvernement, estiment qtte ce retrait devra.it
s'effectuer progressivement et qu'il faudrait fixer
une date a laquelle il devrait etre termine. Il faut
cependant iaire une exception en ce qui conceme
Djokjakarta, dont I'occupation devrait cesser
imn:ediatement. Lorsque nous diSOl1S Djokja-

25
·should be handed back to the Re:ll1blie luuuedi'ately. '1l1e city cannot function without the Resi'deney, which feeds it in every sense of the word,
and the city, without the Residency, may just as
well not exist at all so far as the Indonesian
·Republic is cOllcerned.

With regard to the rest of the territory under
occupation, the very moderate request of the
New Delhi Conferer,ce is that the Netherlands
forces 5hould he withdrawn progressively, and
,not imrr,ediately, and under conditions to be pre,scribed by an agency to be appointed by the
Security Council-with this proviso, that a target
da.te should be fixed and ((lat that date should
be 15 March 1949.
The question of withdrawal seems to be the
p:vot on whicl', the wholE' p:oblem revolves.' It is
therefore very unfo:tunate that the joint-draft
resolution makes no specific mention of the with,d!"i1wal of Netherlands troups, but leaves it to
our imagination to infer from the preamble and
from certain operative parts of the draft resolution that eventual withdrawal at some undetermined date, in the unforeseeable future, :s understood 'l:ld intended. In fact, the representati·/e
of the United States specifically stated in his last
speech :402ltd meeting] that the problem for the
Security Council wtS not whether the Neth'er~
Ic.nds troops shml1c1 be withdrawn, bllt rather the
method and time of the withdrawal. A:l important question such as that of withdrawal should,
in our opinior, be specifically stated in the resolution ;md nct merely lef: to imagina:ion and
inference. The representative of Egypt wa:;
therefore per£ectly justified, in our opinion, in
being dissatisfied with the fact tJ-.at the question
of the withdrawal of troops was dealt with
"rather shyly", as he put it, "in an almost hidden
corner . . . of the draft resolution" [403rd
'meeting].

It must be obvious that the continued occupafon of Rcp'jblican h~rritory by Ne::herlands
troops is incompatible with the avowed intention
to return such territory to the Republic, a:ld
with the eqtl~lly avowed desire to hold free
elections,
'While both the joint draft resolution and the
New Delhi resolution are agreed that an interim
government should be set up by 15 Ma:ch 1949,
and while the New Delhi resolution has recomoended that the withdrawal of Netherlands
troops should be completed by that same date, the
joint draft resolution has fixed no time-limit, and
i: is difficult to conceive how any interim govern~
Dlent with any sem1:::1ance of autr.ority can functkin properly with foreign troops Dloving about
in areaS, within its jurisdiction.
Again, both the joint draft resoltuion and the
New Delhi resolution have fixed 1 October 1949
as the target date fer the electiors. While under
the New Delhi recommendation there will be no
Netherlands troops in Republican territory by
that time, under the joint draft resolution Ne:herlands troops will Fohably still )t in occupation
of son:e part or parts of Republican territory,
thl1s indirectly and ?erhaps unnoticeab1y, but in-

karta, ce n'est pas sculement a la ville g:Je nouS
pensons, wais aussi i la Resilh:llce du mblle
nOm qui devrait imlTediatement faire retour
la Repub1ique. La ville ne peut vivre sans la.
Residence, qui I'alimentc dans toute l'acceptatio:l
du terme. D'ailleurs, du point de vue de la Repuhlique dJIndonesie, la ville, privee de la Resi~
dcnce, pDurrait tont a:lssi bien ne pas exister.
En ce qui concerne les autres parties du terri~
to:re occupe, la Conference de ·~ew-Delhi se
borne a demar.der que les forces neerlandaises
soient retirees, :lOll pas immediatement, mais progressivement, dans cles conditions prescrites par
ur. organisme quedes:gnerait le Conseil de securite, etant entendu qu'une date lim:te serait Jixee
et que ce serait le IS mars 1949.

a

Le retrait des troupes semble etre le pivot de
tOllre la question indonesienne. Il est done tces
regrettable que le projet de resolution comml1rJ
,ne mentionne pas expressement le retrait des
troupes neerlandaises d l<iisse a notre imagination
le soin de conc!ue, des considerauts et de certaines
parties du dispositif de ce projet, que le relridt ulte~
ritur de ces troupes, i Llne date indeterminee' et
dnns ltn avenir qu'ilest inip05sible de prevoir, est
sDtls-entendu, et que c'est hi le but v:se. En fait, le
representant des Etati-Unis n'a-t-il pas declare
explicitcmcnt clans 3a 'dernierc intervention
[402~me seance] que la question qui se PDS\,
peur le (onseil de secltrite n'est pas de savoir si
les troupes neerlandaises doivent etre retirees,
mais p!ut6t comment et a quelle date !eUT retrair
s'eltecttiera? U:le question aussi i1l1portante que
ceae du :etrait des trcupes ncerlandaises devrait,
i llotreavis, Ctrc cxp~csscmcnt mcntionnce dans
la resolu~ion, et ne pas ctre laissee l'imagination
et au raisollnement. 1: est done legitime, i notre
avis, que le representant de l'Egypte ait eprouve
un certa:n mecontentement a voir cettc question
du retrait des troupes "timidement" traitee, seIon
ses propres termes, "et releguee clans un des
cuins ks plus obseuTs ... du projct de resolution
commun" [403eme seance].
De tonte evidence, l'occupation prolongee da
territoire repuulicain par :es troupes rleerlan~
daises est incompatible avec l'irltention dec1aree
de rendre ce territoire a la Republiquc et le desir,
ff«llement exprime, Ue proceder e. des elections
libres.
Le projet de resolution commun et la resolution
de New-Delhi demandent tOllS deux qu'un gOtlvernement proyisoire soit institue avant le 15 mars
1949; mais, alors que la resolution de N ew~Delhi
recommande que le retrait des troupes neerla.ndliises soit :lcheve a ceUe date, le ;Jrojet df' n~go­
h:tiOll commun ne fixe pas de date lirnite, et 1'0n
con"oit difficilement qU'U11 gOLlvemement provisoire ayant un semhlant d'autorite puisse fonctbnner convenablement 10rsqtl'il y a des mouvements cc troupe.!! elrangeres dan~ des regio:ls
soumises i Sa juridiction.
En outre, le projct de resoltltion commtln et
1<'. resolution de New-Delhi fi,..,en: tous deux le
ler octobre r949 comme date ['mite pour les
elections; mais, bndi, que la resolution de NewDelhi prevoit qu'il n'y aura plus ce moment de
troupes neerJandaises sur le territoire republicain,
selon le projet de resolution l:OlllmUn, ces troupes
occuperont !;:llcore certaines parties de ce territoire, si bien que, de fa~on indirecte, et peut-etre

a

a

26
evitabty influencing the fortunes of the election
at the 'point of the gtm. We are perfectly satisfied that nothing could have been farther from
the minds of the authors of joint draft resolution, but the result, which we fear would follow
from leaving the date of withdrawal undetermined, would he inevitable. I go further in my
apprehensions; 1 feel that, in the absence of .11
fixed date for the withdrawal 0 f troc-ps, there tS
no guarantee in theory-I repeat, in theory at
least-under the terms of the joint draft resolution whatever the intentions of the authors
may be, and however it may work out in practice,
that there will be a complete withdrawal of Netherlands troops even after the transfer of sovereignty envisaged in the joint draft resolution.

meme sans que I'on s'en rende compte, la menace
des fusils influerait inevitablement sur le resuI~
tat des elections. Nous avons la certitude que rien
ne pouvait ctre plus eloigne ue la pellsee des
aUleurs du projet de resolution commun, mais le
resultat que nons craignons de voir se produire
si I'on ne fi.x,ait pas la date du retrait d~~ trotlpe~
serait inevitable. Mes craintes ne s'arretent pas
lit; j'estime que si une date n'est pas fixee pour
le retrait des troupes, rien ne garantit, du moins
theoriquement. aux termes du projet de resolution
commun, que les troupes m~erlalldaises seront
entierement retirees; meme lorsque le tr:lllsfert
de souverainete que prevoit le projet de resol\]tion commun sera effeetue, quelles qu'aient ete
les intentions des auteurs de ee projet et les
autres effets de son application.

Comin~. now to the question of transfer of
sovereignty, the draft resolution has provided for
a certain amount of elasticity, as the representative of India h.;,.<; put it [403rd meeting], and has
fixed 1 Tuly 1950 as the target date, while the
New Dclhi resolution has fixed a specific timelimit, namely, 1 January 1950. It is nearly a
year from now to the New Delhi time-limit, and
this gives ample time for accomplishing the
transfer if there is a genuine will to do so, The
history of colonial rule all over the world has
taught us that once an Administering Power haS
decided to want independence to a Non-SelfGoverning Territory under its charge, the sooner
such a decision is put into effect, the better,
Burma, India and Pakistan still remember the
nauseating effects of the British promise of the
progressive realization of self-government as the
goal of British policy, the indeterminate nature
of which, far from having a mollifying, effect,
only helped to fan the unrest and agitation during the anxious period of waiting and to intensify
the struggle for freedom,

J'en arrive maintenant it la question du trans·
fert de souverainere; le projet de resolution com·
mun, aiosi que I'a fait remarquer le representant
de 1'Inde [403eme seance], est assez souple a eet
egard et fixe le 1er j uillet 1950 comrne dat~
extreme pour ce transfert, tandis que la resolution
de New-Delhi fixe categoriquement la c"-te timite
au ler janvier 1950, On dispose done de pres
d'tm an, si ron prend la date Iimite de la resolution de New-Delhi, ce qui donne largement le
temps d'efFeetuer ee transfert, si on desire reeIlement le faire. L'histoire des regimes coloniaux
du monde entier nous a enseigne que, des I'instant
ou une Puissance coloniale a decide d'accorder
I'independance it un territoire non autonome dont
elle a la charge, plus tot cette decision est appliquee, mieux cela vant. La Birmanie, l'Inde et
le Pakistan se souviennent encore de I'impression
de malaise suscitee par les promesses donoees
par le Royaume-Uni de donner progressivement
I'autonomie. En chercllant 11 re:l.hser cette autonomie progressivement, la politique britallllique.
loin d'avoir une influence apaisante, n'a fait, par
son caractere indecis, qu'at1gmenter les troubles
et I'agitation pendant la periode d'attente aTlxie-ll.~e
et intet1~ifier la lutte pour l'independance,

While a certain amount of caution is understandable where feelings have run, and arc still
running, very high, we should not-if I may
borrow from the language of the representative
of Egypt [403rd meeting] -fa1l into the error of
displaying a spirit of exaggerated accommodation and appeasement.

Nom comprenons qu'uoe certaine prudence
soit neeessaire lorsque les passions ont ete et sont
encore surexcitees, mais nous ne devons pas, et
j'emprunte id les termes employes par le represantant de l'Egypte [403 C111e seance L comm~ttre
l'erreur de faire preuve d'un trop grand esprit de
compromis et de conciliation,

Ishollld like to offer one observation in respect
of the proposed interim government. No interim
governm~nt ttnilaterally established by the Netherlands, that -is, without the Indonesian Republic,
will command any measure of respect, support,
or eyen recognition. The negotiations for any
interim government should be with the Indonesian Republic; that is, on bilateral lines.

]e voudrais faire une remarque, en ;::e Clui
concerne le projet de gOtlVCrnement provisoire.
Aucun gouvcmement provisojre que] qu'il soit
etabli d'une maniere unilaterale par les Hollandais, et sans la participation de la Republique
d'Indonesie, ne sera respecte, soutenu Oll meme
reconnu. Les negociations tendallt it etablir un
gouvernement provisoire, quel qu'il soit, doivent
etre menees avec la Republique d'Indonesie, c'est·
a-dire qu'elles doivent presenter un caractere
bilateral.

Another part of the joint draft resolution
which admittedly bristles with difficulties is the
(jlll."Mion of thl." rlisrontillllance of rnilitlry ope-ra_
tions on the part of the Netherlands, and of the
cessation of guerilla warfare on the part of
Republican Indonesia. This question, together
with the question of the withdrawal of Netherlands troops and the qnestion of a political settlement, are all inextricably linked togetl1er. An:

Doe autre partie du projet de resolution commun q\li, tout le monde ton convient, est l1 eris,see
de difficultes, est celle qui :t trait a In ~ssatj(Jn
des operations militaires, du cote neerlandais,.e!
11 la cessation des operations de gueriIla, du cote
des republicains indOllesiens, Cette question, celle
du retrait des troupes neerlandaises et celle que
pose le reglement de la situation politiqLle, sont
!iees d'une maniere inextricable. n faudrait insti-

27
effertive guarantee should be provided co see that tuer une garantie efficace, afin d'empeeher les
military operations on the part of the Dutcb, Hollandais de reprendre, sous le couvert du
even after their technical cessation, do not reap~ maintien de l'ordre public, les operation.~ miHpear in allother form under the cloak of the taires sons une forme clifferente, lorsquc celles-ci
maintenance of law and order,
auront cesse en principe.
A formula musl also be found for the treatI1 faudrait egalement trouver une formule
ment of guerillas when they cease to operate. applicable awe partisans, lorsqtle ceux-ci atu-olit
r ask you, who are the guerillas? Are they not cesse de c:ombattre. Qui sont les partisans, je
Indonesian Nationalists struggling for freedom, vous le demande? Ne sont-ce pas des nationaeven as the Dutch were resisting the Nazis? listes indonesiens qui luttent pour leur indeM
When will they cease to fight? When can one pendance, comme l'ont fait les Hollandais
~asonabJy expect them to stop fighting? Will, lorsqu'ils ant resiste al1X nazis? Quand cessea general amnesty be granted to them? Will they ront-ils de combattrc? Ql1and peut-on raison~
agree to be disanned, and ntn the risk of being nablement compter qu'ils cesseront le combat?
rendered helpless in the event of a recrudescence Une amnistie generale leur sera-t-elle accordee?
of Netherlands military operations, in any form Consentiront-ils a se laisser deseramer et a
whatsoever and for any reason whatsoever? We couri!' le risque de se trouver impuissants en
presume, from the tenns of the joint draft reso- cas de recrudescence des operations militaires
lution, that the Netherlands troops, or at least des Hollandais, sous quelque forme que ce soil ou
considerable portions of them will not be dis-' pour quelque raison que ce soit? Nous presumons,
armed even after they have discontinued military -d'apres les tcrmes du projet de resolution com~
operations, but will be ret.ained, even though mun, que les troupes neerlandaises, ou tout au
temporarily, to assist in the mainte~ance of law moins une partie appreciable de celles-d, meOle
and order. Is it open to the Netherlands to lorsqu'elles auront cesse leurs operations milipreach a life of virtue to those whom it has dis- ' taires, ne seront pas desannees, ,mais seront con~
servees, ne serait-ee que pour un temps, pour
possessed?
aider au malotien ell'. l'ordre public. Est-it permis
aux Hollandais de precher la vertu a ceux qu'ils
ont depossedes?
Ccs questions seront resolues si le retrait des
The answers to the questions r have asked lie
in the withdrawal of Netherlands troops at an troupes neerlandaises s'effectue a une date pro~
early and foreseeable date, as suggested in the chaine et previsil>le, comme le propose la resoNew Delhi resolution, and not in the postpone- lution de New-Delhi, el ne le seront pas si ce
ment ef that withdrawal to all undetermined date retrait est reporte a une date indeterminee dans
in the unforeseeable future, which can end only un avenir imprevisible, cc qui ne peut avoir d'autre consequence que d'empecher d'arriver a un
in failure to reach a political settlement
reglcmcnt de la situation politique.
There are many other points in the joint draft
11 y a beaucaup d'autres points du projet de
resolution on which I should like to address the la resolution comll1un dont je vou<lrais parler
Cot1lJcil at a later date. For the present, how- plus tard au Conseil. Pour le moment, je me
ever, 1 shall content myself with one more point. bornerai a traiter llO seul de ces points.
I fully associate myself with the ouservations
Je m'associe entierement aux observations formade by the representative 'of Australia at the mulees par le representant de l'Austl-aEe a la
404th 'meeting in regard to', the point I have in , 404eme seance au sujet de ce point. Le projet de
mind. The joint draft resolution has provided: resolution commun prevoit que la Commission
that the United Nations Commission for Indo M des Nations Unies pour 1'1ndonesie poul'ra nesia may recommend economic meaSlIfcs-I j'insiste sur ce mot - indure dans ses recomwould emphasize the word "may"-for the well- mandations des QisJXIsitiol1s visant, sur le plan
beir.g of the population of the areas to be re- economique, au bien-etre de la populatlon _des
stored to the Republic_ This provision is totally regions qui doivent, etre restitllees a la Repu~
inadequate. It should he mandatory and not blique. CeUe disposition est tout a. fait insuffisante.
merely discretionary. All the world knows that Elle devrait avail' !.in caractere imperatif, et non
the Netherlands has imposed many trade reM pas purement facultatif. Le monde entier sait
strictions against the Republic, which have the que les Hol1andais ant impose au commerce de
virtual effect of a stifling economic blockade. All la Republique de nombreuses restrictior.s qui
such restrictions should immediately be removed, ont des effets identiques it. ceux d'un blacus ecoand economic resources shonld be provided for nomique total. Toutes ces restrictions devraient
the Republic to enable it to function,
etre immediatcment levees, et des ressources
economiques devraient etre assurees .a la Republique pour lui permettre de vivre.
Dans mu recente declaration [400eme seance],
In my earlier statement l400th meeting] I have
already paid a tribute to the recorded history j'ai deja rendu hommage a l'histoire de la culture
of Dutch culture and Dutch civilization, I do et de la civilisation neerlanonises, Je ne crois pas
not think it is too much to expect the Dutch to qu'il soit excessif de compter que les Hollandais
grant to others that freedom which they have aceorderont aux autres la liberte qu'i1s ont euxcherished so much for themselves and to promote, mf01es defendue comme un tresor, et qu'ils favo~
in the Far East, that peace and security which ri~eront l'avenenlent en Extreme-Orient de cette
they are even now planning for themselves nearer paix et de cette securite qu'eux-memes s'efforcent
home. Greater empires than theirs that have not acttlellement encore de s'assmer pres de leur
heeded the writing on the wall in the past have mere patrie. Des empires plus vastes que le leur
come to ignominious disaster in the history of the et qui, dans le passe, n'ont pas pris garde aux

28
human race. No one can noW' stem the tide of
national CO:lseiousness which has been sweeping
over the w~.ole of the East. The Dlttch will leave
behind them, like all" other empires, the imprint
of their tlllture and civilization in the lands
where they have r'.lled for so ma.y years, and the
territories that have been under their charge will
not, I am sure, fail to acknowledge their grati.tude for the benefits tha: have flowed from the
administrative experience and technical kno\v~
ledge imp~rted to them during the period of
colonial administration. The Dutch have, in the
past, reaped where they had sown. r ask you:
is it too much to assume that it will not be the
least happy of their recollections, in te:minating
.their charge, that they have also 30wn where they
do not intend to reap?

avertissements du destin, se sont 19nomtnleusetnent eff'ondres au Cours de I'histoil'e de la racl':
humaine. Personne ne peut maintenant arreter
le flot eu sentiment national qui a submerge
1'Orient tout entier. Comme :OU5 les autres empires, les Pays-Bas laisseront la marque de leur
culture et de let:r civilisation clans les pays qu'ils
or:t gouvern~s pendant tant d'annees; et les tef1-j~
toires dO:lt ils ont eu la charge ne manqlleront
pas, j'en 3uis sU:, d'etre reconnaissants de I'avantage qu'ils ont eu d'acql1erir, pendant la periode
coloniale, 1'experience [le l'aJmiuisLr<!tiun et cerbines connaissances techniques. Dans le passe,
les Holbndais ont reeolte OU ils avaient seme.
Ne peut-on pas di:e, je vous le demancle, q'Je ce
ne sera pas le 17l01OS bon de leurs souvenirs, au
moment ou ils mettent fin a leur administration
de penser qu'ils auront egalement seme ou il~
n'avaient pas ['intention de recolte:-?

The PRESIDENT: Speaking, as the representa~
.five of CANADA, I now wish to make a brief state~
ment on the joint draft resolution on the Indonesian question which has been submitted to the
Security ·Council by the delegations of China,
Cuba, Norway and the United States of America.

Le PRESIDENT (tra-djlit de l'anglois) : Je desire
rnaintenant faire, en tant que representart du
CANADA, une breve declaration all sujet du projet de resolution commun relatif a la question
indonesienne qui a ete soumis au Conseil de
seCllrite par les delegaLons de la Chine, de Cuba,
de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

In the consideration of the Indonesian dispute
by the Security Council, as in the case of other
.disputes which have come- lo this Council, the
Canadian delegation has supported proposals
which have sought to br:ng abo'lt a cessation of
bostilities and the restoration of peace and order
as essential preliminary conditions to a negoti~
ated sett1e:nent. In particular, it has been our
"desire to see the fighting stopped in Indonesia
and conditions established there which would
enable negotiations to be resumed between the
parties for a solution of their present difficulties.
WJlat we seek is that these resumed negotiations
should res:.lIt in the establishment, with the least
.possible delay, of a democratic and independent
government in Indonesia, in association with the
Kingdom Df the Netherlands. We believe that
.t he joint draft resolution is Cirected to these
objectives, and the Canadian delegation will
therefore support it.-

A l'occasion de I'examen par le Conseil de
securite du differend indonesien, comme ce fut
le cas pourles autres clifferends dont le Conseii
a ete saisi, la delegation du Canada a donne son
appui aux propositions qui visaient a faire cesser
les hostilites et a retablir la paix et l'ordre, Ces
conditions etant considerees comme indispemables
at: reglement de la question p.c,r voie de negotiations. Nous avons souhaite, en particulier, que
le combat cesse en Indonesie, et qu'i} s'y etaJIisse
des conditions l;ui permettent aux parties de reprendre les negociatioflS en vue de resoudre leurs
difficultes actl1elles. Ce que nous vocdrions, c'est
que ces nOl1velles negociations aboutissent a l'etabEssement en Indonesie, dans le plus bref delai
possible, d'un gouverncment dernocratiqt:e d
independant, associe au Rnyaume d~s Pays-Bas.
Nous pensons que ce sont les buts vises par le
projet de resolution comrnun, et, par consequent,
la delegation du Canada l'ap;miera..

_ With regard to the draft amendments which
have been circulated by the sponsors [S/1230],
these commend themselves to us as clarifications
and improvements which should be adopted. In
this connexion, I have some douhts concerning
the real me<llling to be attributed to paragraph
4 Cl): of the draft resolution, and for the purA
pose of clarification I shall myself propose an
amendment wllen this paragraph is under consideration. Meanwhile, 1 would ask the Secretariat ta circulate my proposal [S/1232].

En ce qui concerne les projets d'amendement~
dont les auteurs du projet de resolution nous
ont donr.e communication [S/1230], ils ont
nos yeux le rnerite de rer.dre le texte p1u.'i
clair et de l'ametiorer, et devraient etre adoptc.9.
A cet egard, je ne vois pas tres bie:l que1 est le.
veritable sens de l'alinea e) du par<lgraphe 4 du
projet de resolt:tion, et, pour plus de precision,
je proposerai :J.ussi un amendement a ce para~
graphe lorsque .:et alinea sera exami1H'~. En attendant, je demancerai au Secretariat de distribuer
le texte de ma proposition [S/1232~.

I need only add that the Canadian delegAtion
fully recognizes that the effecti....eness of this or
of any resolution in helping to reach a lasting
settlement in Indonesia eepends upon its acceptance by bo~h parties and upon their co-operation
in lalplementillg its terns. Before giving this
draf: reso1'.1t10n our wpport, we have carefully
examined it from the point of view of whether
it offers a reasor.able and practicable basis for
both parties to work toward tl:is lasting settlement. We believe that the resolution does pro~

]'ajO\lterai seulelllent que la delegation du
Canada a pleille'l1t:nt conscience du fait que cette
resolution ou tOllte alltre ne peut effectivement
contrilmer a un reglemcnt durable de la question
indonesie:me qui si elIe est acccptee par les deux:
parties et si celles~ci cooperent it la mise en
~uvre de ses dispositions. Avant de donner notre
appui a ce projet de resolution, nous J'avons examine attentive-ment «fin Ile ·lair s'J oITrait ou
mm une )ase ralsonnable et pratique sur laquelle
les deux parties puissent s'efforcer de regler la

a

29

vide this practical basis for a settlement and 'Ye
shall therefore vote for it, and we commend Its
acceptance to both parties.

Que:;tioll d'une fa~on durallle, Xmas IlCflSlll1$ que
1[\ resolution fotlrnit cette ba:,;c pratique I"mr un
regkment durable, c'cst [ll1urqlloi 1l0US \'nterons
en sa f,wetlr et recollllllandoll:' :lUX t!l'u", rk'trties
de I'accepter.

Mr. VAN LANGENHOVE (Belgium) (trallslated

M. \'A~ L.... XGE.s:WI\"); (Iklgi(IUC): J'~li ~1I1\"1
ayec tine profollde attClltioll le,; d{;bats lju'a snscites, all sein c1u COllScil de sceurilt:, I~' pwjet
COIllIl1UIl de rcwlutiol1 prc:,ente par Il':'; drJ;;.I.:<llIII/IS
de la Chine, de Cuha, des Et.,ts-Vni~ ll'AI1l{:ri1ItlC
et de la Norn:"·ge.

from FYelICh): I have followed very clo~ely the

discussion to which the joint draft resolutlOn ~uo­
mitted by the delegations of China, Cub~, UnJ~ed
States of America and Norway has gIven fiSC
in the Secnrity Council.
I have been impressed by the prominent part
which the Member States belonging to the continent of Asia have played in this debate; their
speeches have echoed the. recent New Del.hi C;onference. Their illterventlOns have been inspired
by trlJly generous feelings: an understandable
and legitimate sympathy towtlrds the people of
Indonesia. May I be permitted to point out in
that".re'speet that though they may feel it more
strongly than others, that sentiment is by no
means peculiar to them but is undoubtedly shared
by everyone at this table,

J'ai ctc frappe p<lr 1<1 part ill1portantc <ju'ont
prises, clans ces dcbats, les EtatR :\Irmbrt''' qui
appartiennent <1\1 continent a~iatiqlle et par l'echo
de la rfcente Conference de New-Delhi que nom;
avons cntendll d::ms lenrs discOllrs, I.£urs interventions sont illspirces par tin sentimwt ~ll1in<.'m­
ment genereux; Itne comprchelJsibl(~ et li'gilil11l"
sympathie pour les peuples de l'fndone;;ie. Qu'il
me soit pennis de constater, a cc prtlp()S, (Jue
si ce sentiment existe chez CIlX :l un degre plus
grand gue chez d'autres, il ne Icur <.~st nullement
particulier et qu'il n'est sans doute p("rsnnne
autour de cette table qui ne l'cpfOu\'c egalrrnent.

A second fact arises from the debate, The
Security Council has seldom so clearly appeared
what it in fact is: a political organ above all,
rather than a juridical or quasi-juridical hody.
Its members are moved above all by feelings such
as I have just mentioned: sympathies arising
from racial affinity, from similarity of position or
from the e:<istence of coihmon prejudices, Some
of them are also governed by ideological considerations or political opportunism. Moreover,
the rules laid down by the Charter, which could
be applicable in this case, have hardly been mentioned at all. There appears to be an almost
complete lack of any anxiety to respect internationallaw, or, in any cas~, it has heen relegated
to the background. For having drawn attention
to it, the Belgian delegation has been treated with
irony, if not actual severity, as though it were
attempting to introduce irrelevant or out-moded
considerations into the discussion.

Uoe seconde constatation se dcgage du debal.
Rarement le Conseil de. sccuritc est da"antage
apparu tel qu'i1 es.t en fait, a savoir, non pas tin
organe judiciaire 011 guasi judicia-ire, mai:-; nvant
tont un orgnne politiquc. Scs memhrl's nllCisscllt,
avant tout, a des sentiments tels que ceu=<: que je
',liens d'evoQuer: s),lIlJlatllie due line parrnte de
race, a une analngic de situation ou i de.~ prt:ventions communes; certains obcis~ent Jlll';si :i. des
consideratio:ls d'ordre iMologiques ()u c1'opp·ortunisme poJitique. Par contre, c'est ;\ peinc si les
regles que la Ch."lrte formulc, et <jui pourrail'Tlt
etre applicab1es cn l'espccc, furcnt cV()qu~-e$. J.a
preoccupation de respecter k droit inttl'national
semble a peu pn!s absente, Qll, ell tout C,lS, die
est refoulee a l'arricrc-plan. L1 delegation belge
pOllr en avoir fait etat, a ctr. tr<lil{:C 'l\'(,~ ironic,
sinon avec scvcritc, comme si die tentait de
hire intervenir dans )[\ discussio!l des {'!cments
qui y scraicnt etrangers nu des consideratioD3
surannees.

That attitude is of course understandable and
to a certain extent inevitable. The Governments
which we are representing here are anxious to
satisfy the tides of public opinion which Pllt them
in office. But, though that tendency is understandable and cannot be entirely suppressed, it
nevertheless presents dangers; :it is exposing the
Security Council to the risk of taking precipitate
or arbitrary decisions and of meeting with failures which impair its authority.

Certes, on peut comprendre cetlc tcmlance, ('t
elle est, dans une certaine mcsure incvitahle. U!l
Gouvernements que nOlts rcpresentnns ici ont le
soud de donner s:1tisfaction aux courants de
I'opinion publique dont ils soot \lne emanation,
Mais, si cette tendanec est compn;hellsihlc et Ile
saurait etre entieremcnt reprimee. ell~ n'en offrc
pas mains des dangers; elle expoSe le Com:eil de
secllrite au risque de prendre des decisions incollsiderees Otl arbitraires et de . . uhi[ de$ echecs
qui compromettent son alltoritC.

The Charter states specifically that it is in con·
formity with the principles of justice and international law that the United Nations must maintain international peace and security. That is a
fundamental rule which is only too easily forgotten; yet it is found at the very beginning of
the Charter,

La Cllarte dit expressrment que e'est cnn fnrmement aux: principes de la justice et du drnit
international que les NJtioll~ t'nies dlJiYent poursui ne le maintien de la pllix et dl' la :,;eturitc;
c'est Ull regIe fondamentn1c. qu'oo n'a que trop
tenclance a. oublier; elle est pourtant in:,;critc au
fronton de la Chartc.

Now I should like to make a third point. The
difficulties with which we are confronted in the
Indonesian question do not concern the goal we
are pursuing but the methods to be used for its
attainment. Nobody disputes the fact that the
aill1 is the emancipation and independence of the

Je voudrais faire a present tine trnisiellH: cons·
tatation. Les cliffic1l1tes avec le;;qud~ nous
sommes aux prises dans I'affaire d'Imlllllcsic ne
portent pas sur le but poursuivi, mais sur les
moyens a employer pour l'atteindre. Persrlnne ne
conteste que le but soit l'emancipation et r'inde~

a

j

30
peoples of Indonesia; opmlons differ, however,
as to the best means to attain it. Even in that
respect they only differ essentially on one point:
the magnitttde of the part which the Government
of the Republic of Indonesia is to play in the
emancipation. Some think that it must play a
predominant part; others do not agree. There is,
in fact, a means of determining as objectively as
possible what part the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia should play: that method,
which has not been used u~ to now, i:> that of
free elections. It is nOW generally admitted that
they should be held at an early date.

pendance des peuples de l'Inclonesie; rnais les
opinions different sur la voie a suivre pour arriver
a ce but. Meme a cet egard, el1es ne Cifferent
essentiellement que sur un point: l'importance
du role que doit jouer, dans ceite emancipation,
le Gouverneme:1t de la Republique d'Indonesie.
Certains pensent que ce role doh etre predominant, d'autres n'en sont pas convaincl1s. En
realite, il y a un mo}"en de ceterminer aussi
objectivement que possible I'importance du role
du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Inconesie,
moyen auque[ ce1ui·ci n'a pas eu recours jusq,u'a
present: de libres elections; tout le enonde admet
a present qu'il convient d'y proceder .i breve
echeance.

II resulte de la qu'il n'y a pas de dissentiment
Hence, there is no disagreement with regard
to the successive phases of the solution which sur !es phases successives de la solution qui de~
should be found: the constitution of a provisional vrait intervenir: constitution d'un gouvefllement
government, free elections, the setting up of a provisoire, libres elections, constitution d'un Etat
federal State, and the transfer of slJ'vereignty to federal. Non seulement il n'y a pas de disser:timent
that federal State. Not only is there no disagree- au sujet des pha3es de la solution, mais i1 n'y en a
ment with regard to the different phases of the guere davantage sur leur ordre chronologique
solution bllt there is hardly anyl with regard to et leurs dates. Ennn, malgfl~ les reserves SUT la
their chronological order, eithe:,. Nor, in spite competence du Conseil de securite, qui ontete
of the reservations which have been expressly maintenues expressement, i1 n'y a pas d'ob;ection
maintained with regard to the competence of the non plus au sujet du concours que, par un moyen
Security Council, is there any objection regard- approprie, le Conseil apporterait a la realisation
ing toe assistance which the Council would bring, , de la solution.
by a suitable means, to the realization of the
solution.
,
Mais si le terrain d'entente est si large, d'ou
If, then, there is such a wide area o~agree­
ment, what is the orig:n of the serious difficul- proviennent les serieuses difficultes auxquelles
ties with whi6 we are confronted? In rr.y mind naus nou:> heurtons? Elles portent principalement,
they arise ma:nly in connexion with the way in a mon avis, sur les l1lodalites de l'intervention
which the Council .o;hould intervene.
du Conseil.
The sponsors of the joint draft resolution have
indeed shown great moderation. Nevertheless,
besides the essential elements to which I have
referred, they have kept, in the te-xt, elements
which in relation to the aim of tie resolution are
secondary and which can but give rise to complications and difficulties. Some members would
like to add new ones; some would wish to give
the .resolution a. threatening cha~acter,

The Council has already had the experience
of resolutions of a threatening character in con~
nexion with the Palest:ne question. It thought
that it would command respect solety by the
firmness of its words; in reality, however, the
only result that it achieved in bat way was to
draw attention to its powerlessness to implement
its threats, thus impairing its prestige.

Ceries, les auteurs du projet commun de n~so~
lution ont accompli ttn effort de moderation. It
n'empecne qu'ils ont maintenu dans !eur texte,
a cote des elements essentiels auxquels j'ai fait
allusion, des elements secondaires par rapport
au but poursuivi et qui ne petlvent que causer
des complications et des difficultes. Et certains
membres voudraient enccre en ajouter de nouveaux; certains voudraient donner a la resolution
un caractere comminatoire.
Le Conseil a deja fait l'experience de reso1~­
tions comminatoires dans }'affaire de Palestine;
il a cru qu'il impressionnerait par nne fe:,mete
purement verbale, En rea lite, le seul resultat qu'il
ait atteint dans cette voie £ut de mettre en relief·
son impuissance a executer ses menaces et d'affaiblir ainsi son prestige.

The Council has been more cautious in dealing with. the question of Kashmir· and. that
caution has recently resulted in success. There
too, it had come up against obstacles ar.d had
even encounte:,ed refusals. Nevertheless the
United Nations Commission for India and Pakis~
tan did not deem it necessary to adopt a denunei~tory attitude. It acted witi: patience with
discretion, and with diplomacy. ,\$ far as'I am
concerned, it is my hope that the organ of the
Sectlrity Council in Indonesia will take that
Commission as its model and ,that it will understand above all that its functions are not those of
a kind of public prosecutor.

Le Consei! a montre plus de prudence dans
une autre affaire, c.elle dt! Cachemire, etcette.
prudence vient d'etre couronnee de succes. La
aussi, il s'etait heurte i des obstacles; il s'etait
meme heurte a des refus. La Commission des
Nations Unies pOllr l'lnde e.t le Pakistan n'a pas
cru pour cela devGir prendre un ton cornmina:oire.
Elle a agi avec patience, avec prudence, avec
diplomatie. Je souhaite, pour ma part, lJlle 1'organe du Conseil de securite en Indonesie la
prenne comme mcdele et qL1'il se ga~de surtol1t de
comprendre son role COlT. me celui d'une sorte
d'accusateur public.

The Council has to deal with extremely delicate .qllestions, which rouse the feelings of the
pubhc and excite public opinion, though not

Les questions dont le Conseil a a s'occuper sont
infinimen: delicates. Elles mettent en jeu les
sentiments publics: elles e.:>ccitent les opirjons

31
everywhere to the same degree. In ev.ery nation
there are varying trends, some relatively ten:·
;Jerate, white othe~s are extremist. The C~llncII
[lOci its organs n:ust take care not to stIr up
extremist trends, but ratber to encourage those
that are moderate. Tllat aim is certainly not
pursued by all. With a cons.istency and frankn~ss
whic11 we cannot bllt recogmze, the representahve
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has
always l1nrcserved~y encollraged tlte extremist elements. The majority of the members of the
Council, however, are not governed by the samr:
considerations: They should therefore ask then;.
selves, in this cOllne-xion, what the effect of their
decisions will be.

I am not as familiar with t:1e political situation
in Inc;oncsia as with that of the Netherlanus, but,
as a natiof'.a! of an adjacent COI1:1try, I know
how parliamentary and democratic institutions
function in the Netherlands. Mr. Palar knows
that also and he knows it even better than do
mQ!';t of us. These institutions have been rooted
in the Netherlands, as in my own cour.try, for
centuries. We belong to countries of a Jor.gstand:ng democracy.

publiques; elles ne les rxcih'nt pas ccpendant
parlollt au memc pQint. Dam. tMb les p~r:-;, il y
a des tendnnct's di,·crses, !{'S I1nes relatlvement
n,oderees, les <llltres cxtremistl's. Le C(]n~eil et
ses organcs cJoivcnt :' 'appli{lller :\ Il~ point fourn:r d'aliment aux It'IH!::Ull'eS .... "tn..llllstcs et a en~
courager, au contraire, le~ tendallCt's ll1od~'re\,:;.
eertes, ce ll'e~t pas le but que tOllS pnurslll\'t.'nt.
Avcc \llle constanc..: et tine franehis\' <lu'nll doit
recol1llaitre, le reprelient,JIl[ de l'UllirJll dt:" Rcpubliqnes socinlistes s()"i~tiqlll's a to\ljours enCO\l~
rage S<lns rCSCl'"I"e !e" c1CllIdlb (,'xfr~f\li$tt,:,. ;'Ibis
cc ·n'est POi~1t al;x menw:; Jlr{-ncctlpn.~;(}n:; !lll'llh~is­
s~nt la lllaJorite elt'S membres elu lUrl.<;cll. II lm~
porte, des !c,rs, f1u'i]s: se dcmafHlenl que! ,.,<:r'-l, ;i.
cet egard, t'effet de lcurs rlccisi(Jn~.

La situation politique el1 Imlon~sjc m' Ill'est
pas allssi falllilicre que c,elle (jui rcgn~ ~\;x ,I'a}'~~
Bas, lifais, ilppartenant a \111 p:IYS \·01$111, J"

~~IS

comment fOllctionnent, aux l'ay:;·lbs, les insti~
t~tion;; parlemelltnires d dellwcratiqu~'.,. },1, l'nJar
le sa.it egatement, et le sait rneme micux que la
plllpart d'er.tre nOl1S. Ces institutions se sont
i,nplantees inx P;l)'s-Has, CUlllmc duns lll()f) e·Ys,
ecpn is des sieclcs. N ous S0I11111('S des pays de vlt'IIle
democratic,

uu

May I ask members of the Co~mcil to think
Over one f<lct. The policy of the Netherlands
Government in Indonesia-and r am not at this
moment considering to what extent it is good or
bad-h:J.s not heen decided arbitrarily. It has the
support of almost the whole of the Parliament.
It does not therefore lie with the Govt::l"lllm:nt lo
change that policy if those upon whose confidence
it relies do not COnsider it expedient. That is as
much a factor aT the question as are the aspirations of the people of Indonesia, If the Council
wishes to accomplish a useful task, it cannot
ignore that fact. Let it understand that its part
is not to try and impose more or less arbitrary
decisions, but to scek, with pcrsevcr,;;ncc and
patience, solutions which will be truly constructive, taking into account all the factors of the
question. Let it act with full consciollsness of
its responsibilities, and, l~arr.ing from the lessons
of the past, bear in n1ind both the happy and
unhappy experiences wbich it has had recently.

Te dcmandc aux lllembre."
C{,]meil de rcfJechir
un [::lit: la politiquc clll (louvernemwt
neerlandais en Indollesie - et je ne n'ux pas
examiner en cc mOlllent rlans qlleUe lllt'SUrC dIe
peut etre bonlle Oil 111;J.U\·aise - n'a pas et~ arrcte.e
arbitraircmcnt. Ellc a l'applli de la qtHlSI UI1.alllmitt r.:u I'arlcment. Il ne [lepend (l"m~ ":'IS du
Goun:rnemcnt de la l1lodifl~r, si CCllX donI la
conftallcc h!i est ncces~aire n\'ll reconlla.i5~cnt
pas l'opportLmite. Ce fait est \llle dl)nrl';;~ du llro~
~leme all meme titre qtle Jl..'~ aspimtinll~ des
peuples de I'ImllJue.;ii..... Ll..' C()I1~eil, ~'il "ellt hire
ceuvr~ utile, ne petit l'igllnn:r, Qu'il compr('nne
que son r6:e a'est pas de lenter d'irn[;n:-;er des
decisions plus ou lIloins Mbitraires, nmi:; de
rechercher, :lvec persc\'er;mce et avec patience,
des solutions qui, tt'nant compte lk tnlJS les
elements du problcmc, ~\(Iici\t vcrita1Jl{'ment COllStructives, Qu'it ngisse nvc.c 1>1 plciut' clllIsril'nce
de scs respoilsabilitcs et que, S'll1lipi1'l\l1l des
lelions du r<lsse, iI tiennc cnlllpte, ClI particl1lier,
des experiences IwurellSl..'1i et nmlhc\lre\lse~ qll'it
a bites recemmcnt,

My country :s no longer a member of the
Security Council and my words may seem presumptuous, but 1 trust that the Council will Ltur
with my frankness and will recog;nir.e my sincerity,

Man pays u'est pillS I1\clllhrc du Cnnseil de
secnrite, et mnn langagc l)(.'ut pnrailre preslImptuellX, mais j'ai cOllfiallce qU'OJ1 <:x<:u~~rn sa
fr,:tnchisc et qu'on t"econnaitra ~a sincerile,

. Mr. VAN ROIJEN (Netherlands): This mornmg a document containing several important
ame:Jdments [5/12301 was submitted to the
Security Council. I have been tr)'i!~g to get in
~ntact witl1 my Government over tile telephone
In the mtervnl between 1 ar:d 3 p,m., ir. order to
obtain its opinion on those amendments, but I
am sorry 10 sav that for technical reasons the
~ircuils being Otit of crder, I was not able t~ get
mto communication with The Hngue. I should
appreciate it very mtlch if I were able to make
~ny statement 011 the joint draft resoltlt:on which
IS before the Security Council in the light of my
Government's attitl1de to these new amendments.
I should therefore be grateflll to the Security
Conllcil if, after these amendments have been

a

111. VAN ROl]l::Y (Paj"s-Hns) ({,aduit de i'an-

glais); Un doculiIcnt [5/1230] contcnant pi\!sieurs alllcnd",ment::; importants n cte sotUllis ce
matil1 <1l1 Conseil de stcllril&. Ann de c{Jtlnaitre
l'opinioll de mOll GOllnrllt'nl('nt tt l'cgmd de ccs
amendclllents, j ',11 eS::lnyc cl 'entr~1" ClI ("ultlmot UYl'C
lui par teteph{HlC entre 13 l't 15 hl'llft'S, Jllais,
pour des laisom technique, - :e~ hJ-!I1l'~ ,:lant
en derangement - je ll'ai )1u avolf la ClIlllllluoication avec L'l Have. ;e sernis hC\It('\1X s'illll'hait
possible de hire· mol ded<iratiul1 cnn('\'rn':ll~t le
projcl de resolu tiotl nctt\el1erncnt liotlll1is au COIlseil
de sccmite ell tCll<111t compte ue la pusLticJI\ vrise
par mon GOllVCl"TlCmcnt ft l'cgard de ce:; II011\"l.'aUx.
amcnd<;ments. Aussi s<Lurai-jc gre all COIlSe:! de
seem'ite s'il pouvait ll1'aecorder "ingt-guatrc hcu-

32
elucidated and explained to us by their sponsors,
I could be accorded a delay of twenty-four hours
before making my statement.

res de delai pour faire ma declaration lorsque
les auteurs de ces amendements nous auront fourni
des eclairdssements et des explications a leur
egard.

The PlI.r;:SIDENT: Representatives on the Council
will have heard the statement of the representative of the Netherlands e:"plaining the difficulty
he jg in. Under rule 33, a motion for simple
adjournment shall be decided without debate.
In this cage, however, we are also governed by
rule 38, which says that the vote can be taken
only at the request of a representative on the
Security Council itself. It seems to me, as President of the Council, that the proper procedure
for us to follow in this instance would be'ta hear
from their sponsors an explanation of the purport and scope of the various amendments which
have been proposed, and the reasons for them.
Following that explanation, it seems to me that
it would be only reasonable to accord to the
representative of the Netherlands the opportunity
tb communicate to his Government not only the
amendments but also the explanations which will
have been given. After the presentation of those
amendments, we might then postpone our further
discussion and our vote upon them until tomorrow afternoon, which seems to allow an
appropriate time. Unless there is any objection,
I sball proceed with that course and call next
upon the sponsors of the amendments to explain
the various points at issue.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' (tflgrais) : Les rnem·
bres du Conseil ont entendu la declaration du
representant des Pays-Bas qui nOllS a expose la
difficulte devant laquelle il se trouve. Aux termes
de I'article 33 du reglement interieur, il est statue
sans debat sur une proposition touchant le simple
ajournement de la seance. Cependant, dans le
present cas, l'artic1e 38 s'applique egalement, qui
parte que la mise aux voix ne peut avoir lieu que
si un representant du Conseil de securite en hit
la demande. I1 me semble, en tant que President
du Conseil de securite, qtle la procedure gu'i!
c:onviendrait de suivie dans ce cas seraitd'entendre
les explications des auteurs des divers amendements proposes sur le sens et la portee de ceux-ci,
et 1es raisons qui les ont incites a les presenter.
Apres quoi, il me semble gu'il ne serait que juste
d'accorder au representant des Pays-Bas la possibiEte de communiquer son Gouvernement, non
seulement la tenenr de ces amendements, mais
egalement les exp1icatiolls qui auront ete fommes.
Ces amendcments une fais presentes, 110US pourrions remettre leur discussion uTterieure et le vote
a lenr sujet a. dcmain apres-midi, ce qui me parait
laisser un delai raisonnable. Si aucune objection
n'est presentee, je procederai rainsi, et j'inviterai
maintenant les auteurs des amendements it. fournir des exp1ications sur les differents points dont
i1 est question.

Mr. TSIANG (China): Since the delegations
of China, Cuba, Norway tl.nd the United States
of America introduced the joint draft resolution
a week ago [402114 meeting], we have had a full
and constructive deb<Lte in the Security Council.
In addition, we have had the benefit of an important communication [5/1222J from the Prime
Min(ster of India who, as chairman of the Conference held in New Delhi, sent us the ternts
oLthe resolution passed by that Conference. The
5ponsors of the draft resolution have agreed to
place before the Security Council some amendments, which are embodied in document 5/1230.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais):
Depuis que les delegations de la Chine, de Cuba,
de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique ont
presente, il y a huit jours [402 eme sem,ce L leur
projet commun de resolution, une discussion
approfondie, et qui a eu des resu ltats constructifs,
s'est deroulee au Conseil de securite. Nous avons
eu, de plus, l'avantage de recevoir une communication importante [S/1222] du Premier Ministre
de l'Inde qui, en tant que president de la Conference qui s'est tenue a New-Delhi, nous a envoye
le texte de la resolution adoptee par celte Confererice. Les auteurs du projet de resolution sont
conventls de presenter an Conseil de securite que!ques amcndemenls, qui figurent au document

a

Sj1230.
As is shown in this document, we are proposing to revise three paragraphs of the draft resolution. The nrst revision occurs in paragraph 2
and involves in fact two points. Whereas originaTly we say, after referring to the release of
politica.l prisoners, "and to permit the officials of
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia to
return at or.ce to Jogjakarta", we should now like
to chang~ that language to "and to facilitate the
immediate return of officials of the Government
of the Republic of Indonesia..." This change is
a mattet of language and it is proposed in order
to improve the style of the resolution. We think
that the proposed new language is more con·
sistent with the dignity of the persons involved.

The second change in this paragraph involves
the passage in which we originally said that the
officials of the Government of the Republic
should resume their functions, "including ad-

Comme on le voit dans ce document, nous nOllS;
proposons de reviser trois paragraphes du projet
de resolution. La premiere modification interesse
le paragraphe 2 et porte, en fait, sur deux points.
A10rs que, dans le texte original, nous dision~,
apres avoir parle de la mise en Jiber'te des pnsormiers politiques:
et a.laisser les fonctionnaires du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie retourner sans dela; it Djokjakarta", nous
voudrions maintenant remplacer ce membre de
phrase par: "... et it faci1iter le retour immediat
it Djokjakarta des fonctionnaires du Gouvernement de la Republique d'Indonesie". It S'aglt
d'une modification de forme qui vise a ameliorer
le style de la resolution. Nous estimons que la
nouvelle rMaction proposee s'accorde mieux avec
la dignite des personnalites dont il est question.
La seconde modification proposee dans ce paragraphe porte sur le passage 0 U i1 est dit, dans
le texte original, que les fonctionnaires du Gouvernement de la Republique reprendraient I'exer·
H •••

33.

ministration o-f the city of ]ogjakarta". Instead
of "the city of ]ogjakarta" We now propose to
Say "the Jogjakarta area":

cice des taches qui leu, incombrnt, "notammel1t
l'administration de la ville de Djokja1«'l.rta". All"
lieu de. "la ville de Djokjakarta", nOtts proposons
maintenant de dire "la region de Djokjakarta".

Represectatives on the Council will have noticec. that the resollltion passed by the New Delhi
Conference used the phr;l.se "the residency of
Jogjakarta". The sponsors of the resolution are
not quite clear as to the exact meaning of that
phrase and we ~.ere propose to use the phrase
"the Jogjakarta area" which is defined so as to
include the city of Jogjakarta and its immediate
surroundings.

Les representants au Conseil de securite auront
remarque que, clans la resolution adoptee par la
COllfe:enee de New-Delhi, on a employe l'expression "Residence de Djokjakarta". Les autettrs de
la. resolution ne sont pas tres surs du-sens exact,
de cette expression, et nOllS proposons mainter.ant
d'employer le tert:1e "region de Djokjakarta",
qui doit s'entendre eomrr:e englobant 1a vilte de'
Djokjakarta et ses environs immMiats.

Next we propose a revision of paragraph 4 (d).
There the idea is again related to what I call the
manners of the :::esolut:on. Originally we said:
"represent2.tives of suer. areas may be permitted
to participate. , ." Since the phrase "may ue permitted" might be construed as not being in harmony with the dignity of the persons concerned,
we propose to substitute the Fhrase: "and to invite representatives of such areas. . ." That
change corresponds to the change in paragraph 2
which I h"ve just explained.

Nous proposons ensuite tine revision de ['alinea d) du paragr~phe 4. :1 s'agi: encore id d'une,
modif.cation de style. Le texte original- portait:
roles represe:J.tants de ce~ regions pourront Stre
autorlses prendre part...." Les termes "pourront etre autorises" pcuvant etre :nterpretes
comme ne s'accoidant pas avec la dignite des
personnalites UUI,t il g'agit, nou:> proposons de
remplacer le membre de phrase: en question par
le suivant: "et a inviter :es representants de ces
regions . . ." Cette modification corre.spond la
modihation du paragraphe 2 que je viens
d'exp:iquer.

Then we also propose to revise paragraph

Notls proposons ega1ement de reviser l'alinea f) du paragraphe 4. Au milieu de ce paragraphe, le texte original du projet de resolution
portait que la commission pourrait "inclUl"e dans
seg recommandations des clispositions visant, sur
le plan economiql1e, au bien-etre de la popula:ion
des regions interessees". ::rous proposcns de mo~
difi(Cr rette phrase et ele la completer camme suit;
"La Comml3sion pourra :nclure, clans ses recommandations, des dispositions visant a assurer, sur
le plan ec.onomique, les mesures requises pour le
bon ionctionnement de l'administratiQ;l ainsl que
le bien-etre de la popu:ation des regions interesse.es" .

4 (t). In the middle of that paragraph in the
original draft remlutior., it was provided that the
"recommendatior.s of the Commission may include
provision for the eco:lOmic well-being of the
population of the areas involved". We propo~e
to add to that sentel:ce this phrase "for the
proper fU~lctioning of the administration".

a

a

In the long debate we have had here, various
representatives have called our attention to the
inadequacy of the original language in this economic :'I..Sf:ect. It was originally our intention that
the restoration of the civil administration should
be effective and that it should really fltnction.
Wr>. rlirl not mean a restoration on paper. Of
course, art effective administration would require
certain economic measures, and this revision provices for that. Therefore, we propose to the
Council that this particular sentence should inch.:de the additional phrase "as are required for
the proper functioning of the adm~nistration".

Au cours du long ctew~ qui ~'tst derou1c au sein
du ConseD, plusieurs repn':sentants ont appel6
notre attention sur la :acune que presentait le
texte original au point de vue economique. n etait,
des l'abord, dans notre intention que l'adrninis·
tration civile fut effectiYement rctabI:e et qu'elle
fonctionn;1t reellement. Nous n'entendions pas
que cc retablisserr.ent n'"it lieu que sllr le papier.
Evidemment, pour qu'tllle administration soit efficace, certaines mesures eeonomiques sont r.ecessaires, et c'est a eette condition que repond la
revision que nous proposons. Nom proposons
done au Conseil que la phrase en question comporte: cette addition: "les meWlTes requises pour
le bDn fondionnement de l'admilli~tr.atiOll . . ."

I have explained in bri"ef the changes which we
have placed before tr.e Council. In submitting
these amendments to the Council on behalf of the
sponsors, r recommend them because, in my
opinion, :hey are both reasonable and useful.

J'ai mahtenant explique brievement les modi..
fications que nous avons soumises au Consei1 de
secllri,te. En presentant ces amen::lemenls au
Conseil au nom des auteurs du projet de resoluticn original, je recmr.mancle leur adoption, car
ils sont, scion moi, a la fris r!1.i.<;onnab1es et
utiles.

The PRESIDE:''l': T1:e Council wilt observe that
the Canadian delegation has now circulated a
proposed amendment to paragraph 4 (8) of the
joint resolution contained in document S/12l9.
This proposed amendment is contained in ducument 5/1232. The intention of this ame:1dment
is, as I hD-ve said, simply to clarify the wording

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla4s) : Les mem·
bres dtt Consei! de securite remarqueront que la
delegation du Canada. .a ma.inten<l.nt fail distribuer
un projet d'a01e:lderp.ent
l'atinea e) du paragraphc 4 du projet de resolution CQ~tenll daDS le
document 5/12] 9.. Ce projet d'amendement porte
la cute 5/1232. Comme je l'ai dit, il vise simpJe-

a

34
of the draft resolution and to make its meaning
more precise. No change in substance is involved.
After examining the present text of the draft
resolution, the Canadian delegation is of the
opinion that paragraph 4 (e) as it stands is open
to possible misinterpretation.
My understanding of the intention of the
sponsors was that the commission should be
authorized to observe elections throughout the
whole of Indonesia in so far as this is practicable,
However, I believe I interpret the intentions of
the sponsors correctly in stating that these recommendations should be confined to the areas in
dispute between the Government of the Netherlands and the Government of the Republic of
~ndonesiii. In this connexion, I should like to
draw the attention of the Council to the fourth
of the six additional Renville principles [Sj649,
appe1tdix V IJ1] agreed to by both parties in
January 1948, The relevant portion of this article
reads:

,if

"Within a period of not less than six months
nor more than one year from the signing of this
agreement, a plebiscite will be held to determine
whether the populations of the various territories
of Java, Madura and Sumatra wish their terri~
tory to form part of the Republic of Indonesia
or of another State within the United States of
Indonesia..."
In my judgment this is the clearest definition
that we have of the areas in dispute between the
two parties, and accordingly I propose that the
joint draft resolution should be amended in such
a manner that the authority of the commission
to make recommendations is limited to these three
islands, while it retains the authority to observe
the elections throughout the whole of Indonesia,
, Mr. JESSUP (United States of America): I
had had the intention of making a brief statement today. I was prepared to waive that state~
ment in order to conserve the time of the Council
if it should have proved possible for us to pro~
ceed to a vote upon the draft resolution this
afternoon. In view of the President's statement a
few moments aRo in regard to the schedule of the
Council, I take it that it is not contemplated that
the Council will proceed to a vote today. I wish
it could have been possible for us to vote now
but, in the light of tlle general situation and th~
fact that we have now had a rather full discus'sion of this draft resolution, I assume that it will
be possible for the Council to proceed to a vote
upon the resolution with its amendments at our
meeting tomorrow.

1 would also ask the President to consider
whether it would be possible for us to meet tomorrow morning instead of tomorrow afternoon
in c~se any of the statements which remain t~
be made in the discussion are of such length as
to occupy a considerable period of the COl1ncil's
meeting. As I have alreadJ' said, ,md now repeat, il is tile hope of mv delegation that the
COl1ncil may be prepared t~ proceed to a vote at
its meeting tomorrow.

ment a clarifier la redaction du texle du projet de
resolution et a en preciser le sens. II ne comporte
aucune modification de fond. Apres avoir examine
le texte actuel du projet de resolution, la delegation du Canada a estime que la redaction de
I'aline.. e) du paragraphe 4 pourrait prefer a nne
erreur d'interpretation.
Je crois comprendre que les auteurs du projet
de resolution entendaient qlTe la commission fut
autorisee a observer les ejections sur la totalite
du territoire de l'Indonesie, dans la mesure DU
ceci est possible. Toutefois, en ce qui concerne
les recommandations au Conseil, je crois interpreter correctement les intentions des auteurs dn
projet de resolution en declarant ql1e ces recommandations doivent porter seulement sur les
territoires faisant robjet du differend entre le
Gouvernement des Pays-Bas et le Gouvernement
de la Republique d'Indonesie. A ce sujet, je voudrals attirer l'attention du Conseil sur le quatrieme des six principes complementaires du
Renville [Sj649, annexe- VIII] dont les deux
parties sont convenues en janvier 1948. La
partie de l'article ayant trait a la question est ainsi
con<;ue;
"Au cours d'une periode de six mois au moins
et d'un an au plus a dater de la signature de cet
accord, un plebiscite aura lieu pour determiner
si les populations des divers territoires de Java,
Madoura et Sumatra desirent que leur territoire
fasse partie de la Republigue d'Indonesie ou d'un
autre Etats a l'interieur des Etats·Unis d'Indo, . ..• "
neSle
A mon avis, cette definition est la plus claire
que nous ayons des territoires faisant 1'objet du
differend entre les deux parties; je propose done
que le projet commun de resolution soit rnodifie
de telle fa<;on que les pouvoirs de la Commission
en matiere de recommandations soient lirnites
a ces trois iles, cependant qu'elle gardera le pouvoir d'observer les elections sur l'ensemble du
territoire de l'Indonesie.
M. JESSUP (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad1lit
de l'anglais): J'avais eu l'intention de faire aujourd'hui une breve declaration, mais j'etais pret it
y renoncer, afin de ne pas prendre sur le temps
du Conseil, s'il avait ete possible d'en venir cet
apres·midi au vote sur le pro jet de resolution.
Etant donne la declaration que le President vient
de faire, il y a quelques instants, au sujet de
I'ordre des travaux du Conseil, je condus que
1'0n n'envisage pas que le Conseil passe au vote
('.ujourcl'hui meme. J'aurais aime qltC nous ayons
pu en venir all vote aujourd'hui, mais, en raison
de la :;ituation generale ct du fait que nous avons
maintenant discute d'une fa'Yon assez approfondie
ce rrojet de resolution, je presume que le Conseil
sera en mesure de proceder effectivement all vote
sur 1('. resolution et ses amendements a sa seance.
de demain.
Je voudrais demander egalement au President
d'examiner la possibilite de noltS rettnir dcmain
matin au lieu de demain arres-midi en prevision
du cas ou certaincs des declarations qui doivent
encore etre faites prendraient, en raison de leur
longueur, lme assez grande partie de la seance.
Comme je j'ai deja dit et le repete, ma deleg<1tion
espere gue le Conseil pourra passer au vote a
sa seance de demain.

35
In view of the situation, I shall venture to
take up a few minutes of the Council's time for
the purpose of commenting upon the results of
the significnot conference recently held i.n New
Delhi, At our meeting last Tuesday (403rd] we
heard the statements of the representatives of
India, Egypt, and the Philippines, and toda.y we
have heard further comments on the resolution
of that Conference by the representatives of the
Republic of Indonesia, Australia and Burma. My
delegation, in the meantime, has also had an
opportunity-of which it has taken advantageto study that resolution with care.

En raison de la situation, je me permettrai de
retenir encore l'attention du Conseil pendant
quelques minutes, en particulier, pour commen·
ter les resu1tats de l'importante Conference qui
s'est tenue recemment a New-Delhi. A notre
reunion de mardi dernier [403hne se<1nce], nous
avons entendu 1es decLarations des representant~
de l'Inde, de l'Egypte et des Philippines et,
aujourd'hui, nous avons entendu les representants
de la Republique cl'Indonesie, de l'Australic et
de la Birmanie discuter a le.ur tour la resolution
adoptee a. cette Conference. Ce delai a permis a
ma delc~gation d'etudier avec soin cette resolution.

I think it is clear to all--and this point has
already been touched upon by others who have
spoken on the point in the Council-that the objectives of that Conference at New Delhi and the
objective of a majority of the members of the
Sectlrity Council are the same. The States which
were represented at New Delhi were fully aware
of their position as Members of the United
Nations. They devoted themselves to seeking to
draft a statement of tlleir views which might
prove to be of assistance to the SeCltrity Council
which, [IS Pandit Nehnt recalls in this letter to
the President of this Council [5/1222], under
Article 24 of the Charter, acts on behalf of all the
Members of the United Nations.

Je pense qu'il est parfaitement clair pour taus
- ce point a deja ete aborde par les orateurs
qui ont pris la parole a ce sujet au sein du Conseil
- que les objectifs de la Conference de New~
Delhi ct le but poursuiv: par la majorite des mem~
bres clu Conseil de securite sont identiques. Les
Etats qui etaient representes ii New-Delhi avaient
parfaitement con.science de lell!" qualite de Membres de l'Organisation cles Nations Unies. Its se
sont appliques a exprimer leurs vues dans une
declaration qui puisse etre utile atl Conseil de
securite qui, ainsi que le Pandit Nehru le rappelle
dans la Icttre qu'il a adressee au President du
Conseil [S/1222], agit, con{onnement a 1'Arlicle 24 de h Charte, au nom de taus les Membres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

It is in the light of that background of the
New Delhi Conference, which the spokesman of
the Conference himself has explained, that we
have studied the resolution and the comments
upon it. 1 think it is clear that the representa~
tives of the nineteen Governments at New Delhi
had in mind that the ultimate settlement of the
Indonesian question would be arrived at when
the Government of the Netherlands transfers
sovereignty to the United States of Indonesia. It
also appears obvious that, worldng back from
this point, the Governments represented at the
Conference considered that there were a number
of measures which would have to be effected before that final step could be taken. Many of
these measures are the very ones which the
sponSOrs of the draft resolution now before the
Security Council, after their own deliberations
and consultations, also recognized, would have
to be provided for in any practical approach to
a solution.

Ccst en tenant compte de ceUe preoccupation
de la Conference de New-Delhi -- qui nous a ete
exposee par le porte-paroles de la Conference que nous' avons etudie la resolution et les cam·
mentaires <1uxque!s elle a"\'ait donne lieu. nest
clair, a nos yeux, que les representants des di~~
neufGol.lvernements reunis a. New-Delhi estlmaient que la question indonesienne serait defi.nitivement reglee lorsque le GOllvernement des
Pays-Bas transfererait la souverainete aux Etats~
Uoies d'Indonesie. It apparait egalement evident,
si nous reprenons les chases en partant de ce
point, 'lue les Gouvernements representes a cette
Conference cstimaient qu'uo certain nombre. de
mesures devraient e:tre prises avant que I'on plllSse
passer a cette e'bpe finale. Ces mesures sont en
grande partie cetJes~la memes que, apfl'.s leurs
deliberations et consultations, les auteufS du projet de resolution actuellement soumis all Conseil
de securite avaient egalement reconnnes comffie
devant etre prises pour qu'on puisse s'attaqller
d'une maniere pratique a la solution dlt problcme.

There are, of course, some differences between
the two resolutions. No two separate interna·
tional groups could possibly have reached iclell:
tieal conclusions. For example, the New Delhl
resolution calls for the complete transfer of
power over tlte whole of Indonesia. by 1 January 1950. The draft resolution subnH.tted by the
four members of the Security Counctl calls for
the transfer of soveignty to the Unitecl St~tes of
Indonesia at the earliest possible date but In any
case not later than 1 July 1950.

I1 y (J naturdlement quelques differences .entre
les deux resolutions. Jamais deux grol11Jes ternationaux n'auraicnt pu arriver a des concluslOns
identiques. Par exemple, la resohltion de NewDelhi demande Cllle le transfert integral de J'autorite sur l'ensemble de l'Indonesie nit lieu avant
le ler janvier 1950. Le projet de resolution sourr:i~
par les quatre membres du, Co.oseil de, s~cunte
demande que la souver3inete SOlI transferee aux
Etats.Unis d'Indonesie a la date la plus rappro·
chee possible et, en tout cas, le 1er jllillet 1950 au
plus tard.
Ainsi que d'alltres repres~ntants ~es P~issa~ces
qui sont les auteurs du proJe~ de reso~ut~on 10';t
fait remarquer avec franchtse, celu:-cl repr:sente, it certains egards, un compr?ml~. Je SlllS
persuade que to.utes l~s personnes reume.s a~to~r
de rette table almeralent que la sonveramete fut
transferee aux Etats-Unis d'Indonesie au plus

As other representatives of the sponsoringPowers have frankly pointed Ollt, the pres~nt
draft resolution is in some respects a compromIse.
r am sure that everyone round this table would
like to see the transfer of sovereignty to the
United States of Indonesia accomplished at least
by 1 January 1950. However, we took into con-

lr:

36
sidcration a number of matters which will have
to be eealt with by an interim federal governmen t for Indonesia and by the Government of the
Netherlands before the actual transfer tan take
pla.ce. For inst:tnce, the first time a fully representative elected body will come into being in
Indonesia under tl-.e terms of this draft resobtion will be following the elections which are
to' be r.eld by 1 October 1949. For the first time
there will then be in existence a democratically
elected body ".,hil;h is fully rcpres~nta~ive of all
Indonesia. It is only after such a body comes
into being that the final tex~s of ir.st111ments
which will ccncem be whole of Indonesiasuch as the sta:uteof tne Netherlands-Indonesian
Union-can be negotiated with the Government
of the Netherlands.

tard, le ler janvier 1950. Cepennant, nous avons
teuu compte d'un certa:n mmbre de questions qui
doivent ctre traitees entre un gouvernement federal provisoire pDur l'Indoncsie et le Gouvernement
des Pays-Bas avallt que le transfert de Souve~
rainete puisse Hre effectivemer.t opere. Par
e..'(emple, aux termes du projet de resolution, ce
ne sera qu'apres les elections qu: doivent avoir
liet: avant le ler octabre 1949 qu'i] existera pDur
la premiere fois en Indonesie une assemblee elue
qui repn~sente entierement le pay3. Pour la premiere fois, il y aura alors U:le assembh~e issue
d'elections democratiques, representant parfaitement toute l'Indonesie. Ce :-I'est que lorsqu'un
tel organe aura ete consti:ue que les textes definitifs des :nstTuments qui concerneront l'ensemble de l'Indor::esie, tet que le slatut ue l'union
entre les Etats-Unis d'Indonesie et les Pays-Bas,
pOl1rrO:lt e:re negocies avec le Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas.

Although such a stattite is envisaged in both
the Linggadjati 1 and RenvUlc [S/649, apPendices
XII t:nd VIII] Ag:reements, ant although the
principles itwill irlclude llave been the subject of
discussions 'between the Netherlands and the
Republicans 0:1 the one hand and 6e Netherlands
and the :5"ederalists 011 the other, it is obv;otl~
that an instn:.mf'r.t of such fundame:r:tal significance for all Indonesia is one which can be appropeiately conduded only by elected representatives
of all Indonesia.

Bien que ce statut soit ;Jrevu i la fois dans les
Aecores de Linggaujati1 d du Renville [S/M9,
allnexes XJJJ et VIllL et bien que If's principes
dO:Jt i: doit s'inspirer aient fait l'objet de discU3sions entre leg Pays-Bas et les republicains,
d'une parI, et les Pays-3as et les federalistes,
d'alltre part, il est evident qu'un i:Jstnme:lt d'une
portee fondamentale pour toute l'Indo:lesie comme
l'est celui-ci ne saurait e:re legitimement condu
que par des representants elus de toute l'IJldo~
nesie.

Wc cor:sidcr that it is impossible at this st:l.gf to
be certain that such final negotiations could he
satisfactorily cOllsllmmated in a period. of three
monfls: Ilamely, between 1 October 1949 and
1 Jantlary 1950. \-v'e feel sure that such negotiat:on could be satisfactorily accor.1plished within
hine months. For this and for similar INSOllS,
we selected the date of 1 July 1950 as the date
t,y w::tich there is reasonable certainty tha: all the
t:e<::essary preliminaries to an orderly transfer can
be completed.

NCJ1:5 estimons qu'il est impossible, au ~ade
actuel, d'avoir la certitude que des negociations
fir.ales de Cl" genre puissent aboutir en l'espace
de trois mois, c'est~a-clire eatre le lel· octobre
lS49 et le ler janvier 1950. En revanche, nous
sommes persuades ill,e ces negociations pourront
al'uutir un n~.surw.t satisb.is.'lnt <Lvant neuf mols.
C'est l'une des raisons pour lesqtlelles nous avoils
choisi la datl' du ler jllillet 1950 comRle etant
cdIe pour laquelle on aura pu, selon toute vrais~mblance, prendrf' les mesures preliminaires
indispens<.bles pour que le transfert de souverainete s'effectue dans I'ordre.

. Under the dnft reSOltltiDn, the t:'ansfer will
take place by I January 1950, if the necessary
arrallgements can be made by that time. We
slum· th<,: hope which has, inc.eed.been expressed
by the ~etherlands represer.tative at tbis table
that it can take place by that date, but \ve recog:lize thE possibility that more time will be
required.

Aux termes du projet de resolution, ~e transfert aura lieu le ler janvier 1950 au plus tard, si
les dispositions necessaires ont pr. etre prises
pour cette date. No~s partageons l'espoir, deja
exprime id par le representant des ])ays-Bns, ql1e:
Cl' transfert pourra avoir lieu avant cette date~
mais nons reconnaissons qu'il est possible qu'il
demande plus ele terTlps.

In :'ll1Citllf'.r area of major importance, it is clear
that the objectives of the members of the Conierence at New Delhi and those who support the
present draft before the Secllrity CO'meil are the
same. Both the New Delhi resolution and the
draft resolution ~efore us accept the principle of
progressive withdrawal of Netherlands forces
[rom Repub:ican areas. From our point of view
this prir.ciple is based On the conviction that th~
Secllrity CO~lncil cannot at this distance decide
on a speciijc date by which the withdrawals are
to be completed, In a previous statemellt to the
Council [402nd meeting], we have suggested
some of the practical problems which will have
to be faced. We be:ieve that our commission on

. Apropos d'une autre question d'importance
capita le, i1 est evident que reS buts vises, aussi bien
par les ,nembres de la Conference de l\ew~Delhi
que par cet:.x qui appllient le projet dont le:
Conseil de securite est aetuellelllent saisi, sont
iclelltiques. La reso1t:tion adoptee a New-Delhi et
1<: projet de resolution soumis ~l.l CO!1!'.('.il reconnaissent tous deux le prindpe de l'evacuation
progressive du territoire republicair. par les troupe,; neerlancaises. En ce qui nous cone-erne, ce
prineipe repose sur la conviction que le COllseil
<le securite est incapable de determiner,
une
telle distance, la date p:'ecise a laquel1e le retrait
des :roupes doit s'Dchel'er. D:ms une precedente
declaration bite au Conseil [402eme seance] ..

'See The Politic"l Evenr" i}~ Ihe Reftrtblic of {'tdDN...th~r1atld.l Tnfnrmatinn R,I-rfa.l:, NfW York,
page 34.

~11h1ie par le Bureau d'information des PaYs~Bas, New~

n~$;C,

a

a

'Voir Political Events ill the Republic of Indonesia

York, page 34.

37
the spot, having- taken into account the several
considerations which the draft resolution enumerates in this regard, can and should fix the time
for the withdrawals. It seems to us that once
the principle has been accepted that representatives on the spot ShOltld decide 01't the manner and
timing of withdrawal, as it is in both the resolt1~
tions I am discussing, it is [ogical to avoid se:ting
a specific date for them to meet. I would like
to invite the attention of the Coundl, however,
to the fact that under the draft resolution, the
commission is directed to assist in arnieving "the
earliest possible restoration of the civil adminis~
tration of the Republic", and that "to this end",
it shall make its recommendations reg,arding the
progressive withdrawals. The joint draftresolu~
tion thus makes it perfectly clear tp the commis~
sion that the Securi:y Council desires the earliest
possible wi6.drawat' of Netherlands forces which
is- consistent with reasonable requIrements of
public security and the protection of life and
property.

nous avans indique quelques-uns des prehlemes
pratiques qu'il faudra resoudre. N ous sommes
convaincus que notre commission qui sera sur
place pent et doit fixer la date de ce retrait, en
tenant compte des differentes comiderations que
le projet de reso:ution enumere a ce snjet. Des
~u'on a\ITa admis le prineipe enonce dans les deux
resolutions dont je parle, a savoir de laisser aux:
representants qui se trouvent sur les lieux le soin
ee determiner les modalites et la date du retrait,
11 est logique de ne pas lenr im"Joser une date
fixee. Je voudrais toutefois attirer I'attention
cu Conseil sur le fait que, aux termes du projet
de resolution, la commission est chargee de preter
son concours "en vue de retab:ir le plus tot
possible l'administration civile de la Repu~lique"
et, "a cette fin", de faire des recommandations
relatives au retrait progressif des troupes. Ainsi,
le projet de resolution commun indique d'une
mani~re ln~sclaire a la commission que le Consei!
cc securite desire que le retrait des troupes neer~
landaises s'effectue dans le plus bref ctelai qui
soit compatible avec les r:ecessites de la securlte
publiql1e et de la protection de la vie et des biens
des habitants.

Dans la declaration qu'il a bite i l'avantThe representative of India indicated in his
statemtmt at the last [403rd] meeting that the derniere seance [403 eme seance J :e representant
Council should camider whether it will be possi- de l'Inde a dit que le Conseil devrait examiner la
ble for the newly released Republic:m leaders. to question de savoir si les dirigcants rcpublicains
induce their JoIlowers to cease guerrilla activity qui viennent d'etre mis en liberte sont en mesure
until and on condition that Netherlands troops c'amener teurs partisans a ce5ser les operations
are withdrawn from tne area formerly occupied de guerilla jusqu',i ce que, et a la condition que,
by the Republican Government. This illbject has les troupes neerlandaises se retirent de la region
been dealt with this morning by the representa~ precederllment occupee par le Gouvernement reputive of the Republic of Indonesia also, In this blicain. (ette question a He egalement tra:tee ce
connexion, 1 invite the attention of the Secl1rity . matin par le repn~sentant de la Republiquc cl'IndoCouncil to paragraph 14 of the report of the nesie, A cd egard, j'attire l'attention du Conseil
Committee of Good Offices dated 24 January of de seCllri:e sur le parag-raphe 14 dll rapport de la
this year [5/1223j. The Committee states in Commission de bons office3 en date du 24 janvier
unequivocable language the principle llpon which ]949 [S(1223]. La Commission enonce, dans
the fOllr sponsoring Governments acted, I be- des termes qui ne laisserit place a aucune equi~
lieve, in drafting paragraph 1 of the joint resolu- vogue, le prindpe dont se sont inspires, je le crois,
tion. I wish to quote some sentences from para- les quat~ Gouver:lemeuts atlt~ur5 de la res<Jtution,
graph 14 of the report:
en redigeant ie paragraphe prem:er de la reso';'
lution commune. le voudrais vous -'citeI' quelques
phrases dti paragraphe 14 du rapport:
"14.. To be completely enective, tI cessation of
hostilities nccessari:y must be agreed upon by
both parties. Since the Republican Government
has been prevented from functioning, there is no
authority on the Republican side to .implement
the Security Council's resolution directing both
parties to 'cease hmtilities'. Despite the Netherlands order to its troops to 'cease hostilities', such
cessation has not been, and cannot be, attained in
the present sitnation."

"14. Pour etre absolument effectif, un arret
des hostilites devrait necessairement etre accepte
par les deux partlf's_ Rtant donne que le Gouvernement republicam a ete mis dam I'impossibilite
d'exercer ses fonctions, il n'existe, du cote rep!l~
blicain, aucune autorite qui soit en lllesure de
mettre en ceuvre :a. resolu:ion du Conseil de seeurite donnant pour instructions aux deux: parties
de "cesser les hostilites". Bien que les Pays-Bas
aient ordorme a leurs troupf'.~ de "cesser les hostilites", celles-ci n'ont pas cesse et, dans les conditions actuelles, ne peuvent cesser."

The Committee, with all its expedence on the
spot, is convinced :hat a cessation of hostilities
must necessarily be agreed upon by both p2rties
if it is to be completely e:ffective. We also are
convinced of this, and that is why paragraph 1
of the joint resolution states that the Government
the Netherlands must discontinue all military
operations and that the Government of the Republic must order its armed adherents to cease
guerilla warfare simultaneously. Unless and
until these thing-s are done ;imultaneoll~lj' by
both parties, fighting will go on. As the representative of China succinctly stated the other day

La Cocnmission, qui connait bien les cor.ditions
locales, est perswLdee que, pour e(re efficace, une
cessation des hostilites doit necessairement faire
l'ob-jet d'un acco::,d entre les deux: parties, Nous
en sommes egalement convaincus, et c'est pourquoi le paragraphe premier de la resolutilin commune parte que le Gouvernement des Pays-Bas
doit cesser tou tes operations mttitaires et que le
Gouvernement de la Republique doit, en meme
temps, donner ordre a ses partisans de mettre fin
aux operations de guerilla. Tant que ces conditions
ne seront pas remplies simultanement par les
deux parties, les combats se poursuivront. Le

of

38
[402nd meeting] : "The use of force by one party
necessarily involves the use of force by the other
party. This chain reaction must be stopped once
.and for all. It is in the interests or both that it
shall be so".

representant de la Chine a resume succinctement
cette situation lorsqu'il a dit l'autre jour [402eme
seance]: "L'emploi de la force par l'une des
parties entraine necessaire;nent l'emploi de la.
force par l'autre partie. CeHe reaction en chaine
doH s'arreter une fois pour toutes. I1 doit en etre
ainsi clans l'interet des deux parties."

I1 existe un autre domaine itpportant dans lequel
There is yet one other broad area in which I
wish to note the striking similarity between the je dois indiquer ia similitude frappante entre 1es
objectives or the New De:1hi resolution and those buts que vise la resolution de New-Delhi et ceux
incorporated in the present draft resolution. I qui sor,t exposes clans le projet de resolution actuel.
refer to the restoration of the economic viability Je veux parler du retablissernent de conditions
of the Republic, a subject which has been touched economiques qui perrnettent it. la Republique de
upon by a number of speakers. As the repre- vivre, question q\li a deja ete mentionnee par un
sentative of ,India, for example, observed at our certain nombre d'orateurs. Ainsi que I'a indique
last [403rd] meeting, the Republican Government le representant de l'Inde a I'avant~derniere seance
would in all likelihood have few resources at its [403eme seance}, le Gouvernement republicairi
comll1tlnd with which to resume its functions. ne disposera vrai~emhlablement que tie pell de
The representative of China has just called atten- ressources au moment all i1 reprendra ses fonc';'
tion to an amendment in paragraph 4 (f) and has tions. Le representant de la Chine vient d'attirer
explained the reasons why the sponsors have sug- notre attention sur un amcndernent a I'alinea 4 f) ;
gested this amendment to take care of this il a donne les raisons qui ont conduit les auteurs
problem more adequately in the joint draft reso- , de la resolution a proposer eet amendement qui
lution.
est de~tine a comp1eter le projet de resolution
commun i l'egard de cc probleme.

- In speaking of the amendments to this dra~t;
En ce qui coneerne les amendements 11 ce projet
resolution which have been laid before us now, de resolution qui nous ont ete presenles, je suis
I have the authorization of the other three spon- autorise par les trois autres Gouverncments ausoring Governments to say that the amendments teursde la resolution - et c'est en leur nom que
which you, Mc. President, have suggested and je pa.rle - a declarer que les quatre Liouvemewhich yOll have just exr;lained (S/1232J, can be ments auteurs de la resolution sont disposes a.
accepted by the sponsoring Governments.
accepter les amendements que le President a pro-.
pose [5/1232] en nOllS donnant l'explication:
Pour condure, je voudrais mettre ce nouveau
In concltlsion, I shoulc1 like to emphasize again,
the fact which has been touched upon . often in eri evidence le fait, auquel on a souvent fait
these debates, which, in this phase of the Indo- allusion au cours des debats qui se ~oursuivent
nesian qtlestion, have no", been goir.g on for o\-er depuis plus d'un mois sur cette phase de la quesa month, that seldom in a subject before the tion indonesienne, qu'iI est rare, qu'a propos d'une
Security Council has there been such a broad question soumise au Conseil de securite, les Etats
are~.of agreement among all interested States on
int6resses soient d'accord dans une si large rnesure
the ullimale ubjeclives to be attained. Differences sur les objectifs Ena1s a attcindre. Des divergence$
in detail should not obscure this broad measure de detail ne doivent pas nous faire perdre de
of agreement. Anyone individu'al or anyone' vue cet accord aussi ftendu. N'importe qui ou
Government would no doubt draft a resolution n'importe que! Gouvernement pourrait sans doute'
which would differ from both these texts before rediger une resolution qui serait differente de chathe Security Council. The Security Council, 1I0w- ' cun des deux textes en presence desqueis se trouve
ever, representing all Members of the United le Conseil de securite. Toutefois, elant danne que
Nations, necessarily acts through a consolidation' le Conseil de securite represente tous 1es Memof various views. We hope that all members of bres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, ses
the Council, cognizant of this fact, will agree that decisions constitllent forc.ement un compromis
the dmft resolution before us, even though not entre les points de vue diffecents. Nous esperons
incorporating all their own views, deserves their que taus les inembres du Conseil, conscients de ce
support because it represents a, conscienlious fait; recunnaitront que le pruj et de resolution qui
combined effort to contribute to a solution of the nous est soumis, bien qu'il·ne representc pas entieIndonesian question. We hope that, for the same rement le point de vue personnel de chacun d'eux.
reason, both partiess, neither of whom finds in merite nemmoins 1eur appui, parce qu'il'constitue
the draft resolution all that it desires, will co- un effort conscienciellx accompli en commun afin
operate loyally in making it effective.
de contriLuer a la solLltiol1 de la question indonesienne. Pour la meme raison, nons esperons que
les deux parties, dont ni l'une ni j'autre ne trouve
dans le projet de resolution tout ce qu'elle desirerait y voir, coIIaboreront loyalement en vue de
la rendre efficace.
. ~r. PALlIR (~ndonesia); I have asked tu say
i1 lew words WIth regard to the request of the
representative of the Netherlands to have twentyfour hours to learn his Government's attitude on
the amendments which have just been submitted,

M. PALAR (Indonesie) (Iraduit de l'ang{(lis):
J'ai dem:mde la parole pOltr dire que1ques mots
au sujet de la demande dll representant des PaysBas tel1d::mt a cbtenir un deIai de vingt-quatre
heures pour connaitre l'attitude de son Gouver-.
ncment a J'egard des amendements qui vienneitt
d'etre presentes.

39
I fully understand Mr. van Roijen's need for
complete ir.-foTmatiol1 on every point which is to'
be discussed here by the' Security Council. What
I do not u:ldersland is thH his Government has
not yet seen fit lo allow cne or two representatives of our Goven:ment 10 come fa Lake Success,
and give tile Security Council arid myself infor~
mation,
I <101 very sorry to have to say this.
The other day, Mr. var- Roijen accused some
of the speakers here of using two weights and
two measures. I am afraid that Mr. van Roijen
is now, unconsciously, also using two weights and
two measures.

Je c::onlprf'ncls parfaitemcnt que M. van Roijen
ait besoin d'obtenir des renseigriements camplets
sur tcutes 1es questions qui seront diseute-es par le
Conseil de securitr. Ce que jf ne comprends pas,
c'est que son Gouven:el1lcnt n'ait pM Uti, jusqu'a
present, devo:r permettre a Wl ou deux representants de mon Gouvernemenl de venir a Lake
Success pour me donner, ainsi qu'au Conseil de
secude, les renseignements necessai~es,
Je regrette d'avoir a mentionner ce fait.
L'autre jour, M. ,van Roijtn a accuse certains
orateurs d'avoir deux poids e: deux mesures. Or,
me semble-t-i:, M. va:l Roijen, sans donte inconsciemment, a, lui aussi, dell'lf p()ins- et deux
mesures.

M. MALIK. (Union des RCjJtlbliques sociaii~tes
Mr. MALIK (t:nion of Soviet Socialist Republics) (t-ranslaled from Ru.r.rian): I should sovie:ique5) (tmduit du rus.',e): Je voudrais poser
like to put two qnestions to the authors of the , deux questiol:S aux aeteurs du projet de resolutioll'
draft resolution and of the amendments. To : et des amendements. A en juger par le docurr,en1.
judge by document 5/1230, they have made a 5/1230, les wteurs de la re.oolution ont apporte
number of amendments to paragraph 2 of the quelques modific<i.tions au paragraphe 2 du projet
joint draft resolution. These amendments intro- de n2solution commun. Cette modification parte,
duce a new conception, re:erence being made not en particu1ie~, Sur llne nouvelle notion. A la
to the "city" of Jogjakarta but to tbe "i'.rea" of "viUe" de Ujokjakarta, on substitue :a "region"
]ogjakarta, which includes the city and its im~ , de Djokjakarta, qui comprenc la ville de Djokjamediate environs. WJ1at i5 meant by "its immedi~ ,karta et ses enviro:lS immediats. Que faut~i1
date environs"? What radius does this imply? 'entendre par "environs immecJiats"? Quel est le
A radius of, say, five miles, or fifty' miles? Is rayon de ces "environs"? Est-ce, par exemple, un
this expression "immediate environs" sufficiently rayon de cinq milles OtI de <:inquante milles?
c1e[l.!'? I should like to ask tlle autnors of the L'expression "environs immediats" constitue-t-elle
tesolution tu throw some light on this question, une notion suffisamrr.ent c1aire? Je voudrais de~
manc'.er aux: auteurs du projet de resolution une
explication a ce sujet.
The secCfm! ql:estion which interests me is
whether t~.is new version 0 f paragraph 2 is to be
interpretec to mean that Netherlands fotces remaiil in the Jogj<Jknrta area or are to be withdrawn from tllat area immediately.

L'autre question qui m'interesse est la suivante:
D'apriis la nouvelle redaction du pa,agraphe 2,
les troupes neerlanuaises doivent-el1es rester clans
la region de Djokj.Jw.rm Olt doivent-elIes etre
immediatement retirees de cdte region?

I should be glad if the authors of the resolution could explain this point.

J e voudrais dern ar.der aux auteurs de la reso·
lution d'apporfer des preeisions a ce sujet.

The PRESIDENT: With the assent of the repre·
:;entativ(;' of Egypt, I shall ask the representative
of. Cfuina to answer the questions which have just
been put by the representative of the USSR.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit d,: l'anglais) : Avec le
consentfimenr du representtnt de l'Egypte, je
demanderai au representant de la Chine de reponere <lUX qt1estior.~ que viellt de ltli poser le
representant de l'URSS.

Mr. TSIANG (China-) : The phrase "the Jogja~
karta area" evidently means more than the city
of Jogjakarta. It includes tbe city and certain
surronnding territory, V'lhether or not :hat certain territory should comprise a particular radius
is left to the commission on the spot..

M. TSJA~G (Chine) (traduit de l'mfglais):
I1 est evident qUi: l'~xpressir:m "region ne Djokjal{arta" signifie plus que la ,'ilIe de Elj.okjaKattii.
proprement dite, Ce terme englobe la vl}le et une
certaine region avoisinante. 11 appartJent a' la
commission qui sera sur place de decidel· si celte
regJon doit WOtt un rayon defini.

The second question concernecl the wi:harawal
of troops. I should like to call the attention of
the Security Council to the preamble of this resolution which says that "continued' occtlpatiotl of
the territory of tLe Republic of rndones~a by the
armed forces of the Nether-lands is incompatible
with the restoration of good relations befween tile
parties :lI~cl with the final achievement of a just
and lasting settlement of the Indonesian dispute",

La deuxieme question a trait an rekait des
troupes. Je tiens a att~re,r l'attention du, Con~ei1
d'e securite sur le conslderant de cette resolution
qui ded<i.re que "le maintien des forces annees
des Pays-Bas en occupation sur le territoire de la
Republique indonesienne est ~l1compatible avec,le
reta'Jtisseme:lt de bonnes relatiOns enlre les partles
et avec un reglement final, equitable et durable dudi'fferend d ']ndol1t~sie".
C'est le: prindpe. La seule,derogation a. ce principe' se trouve' ?i l'aJinea 4 f), qui prevOlt que la
commission "indiquera, Je; cas echeunt, pal' voie
d~ ::,ecomm!t1dation, et, apres a.voir consulte' les
parties)' queUes forces' neerlan'daises dev:ront' ette

That is, the principle, The only exception to
that- p-rinciple is st<l.ted in' paragraph 4 CO- which
says- that the commission "shall, after' consultation, with the parties recommend' wliich if any
Nethelilaads forces shall be' retained', temporarily:

40
in any area in order to assist in the maintenance
of law aud order". That sentence remains in the
resolutLal1.

temporairement maintenues dans une region dotlnee en vue de contribuer au maintien de l'ordre
public". Cette disposition subsiste dans le text('
de la resolution.

May I add that in regard to the second part
of the question which applies particularly to the
Jogjakana area, document 5/1230 specifically
puts in parentheses "outside of the Jogjakarta
area".

Qu'il me soit permis cl'ajouter, en reporise ala seconde partie de la question qui a trait tout
particulierement la region de Djokjakarta, que,
dans le document 5/1230, les mots "hormis .la
region de Djokjakarta" se trouvent entre paren·
theses.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We can
take it that no reply has been received to the
second question.

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques soeia1istes
sovit~tiques) (traduit d It russe): Cansiderons

a

qu'il n'a pas the dOl1ue reponse a la demderne
question.

MahmOllu FAWZI Bey (Egypt): The point
raised a few moments ago by the representative
of Indonesia is an important one. It is possible
that the representative of the Netherlands has
t1p-to-the~mimlte information about this matter
and he may wish to enlighten us. rn this coonexion, while hoping that he will give us, if at
all possible, reassuring information, I think it
would be desirable if he gave us at the same time,
or as early as possible, some explanation or information on the matter dealt with in document
5/1231 circulated this afternoon.

Mahmaud FAwzr Bey (Egypte) (tradnit de
l'allglais): La question SQulevee il y a quelques
instants par le representant de t'Indonesie a son
importance. Peut etre le representant des PaysBas est-ij en possession de renseignements de
fraiche date au sujet de cette question qu'il vou~
drait nous communiqueI'. A cet egard, tout en
esperant qu'il nous donnera, si possihle, des ren~
selgnements rassurants, je pense qu'il serait SOllhaitable qll'il nous fotlrnisse en meme temps au, du moins le plus tot qu'il pourra - quelques
explications et quelques renseignements sur la
question dont traite le docmr.ent Sj1231, qui nous
a ete distribue eet apres~midi.

Mr. VAN ROIJAN (Netherlands): On the ques~
tion referred to by the representative of the
Republic of Indonesia ami also touched on this
morning by the representative of Australia and
this afternoon by the representative of Egyptthe question of a possible journey to Lake Success
by one or more representatives of the RepUblic
who are now in Indonesia-I am Sorry to say
that r have not yet received any further information from my Government.

M. VAN ROIJEN (Pays-Bas) (traduit de l'anglwis): En ce qui concerne la question sou levee
par le representant de l'Indonesie et qu'ont abordee, ce matin, le representant de l'Australie, et,
cet apres-midi, le representant de l'Egypte - a
savoir la possibilite qu'un ou plusieurs representants de la Republique se trouyant actuellement
en Indonesie viennent
Lake Success - j 'aL le
regret de devoir dire que je n'ai pas encore n~c;u
d'aulres renseigne:nents de man Gouvernement.

The PRRSroENT: The Security Council h<ls before it the joint draft resolution on the Indonesian question submitted by the representatives
of China, Cuba, Norway and the United States
[S/1219]. As the situation now stands, the
amendments set out in documents 5/1230 and
5/1232 have been incorporated in the main draft
resolution. Do any members of the Council or
any of the other representatives at the table wish
to speak further on that resolution as amended
at this time?

Le PRESIDENT (troouit de l' anglais) : Les membres du Conseil de securite ont sous les yeux le
projet de resolution commun relatif i la question
indonesienne soumis par les representants de la
Chine, de Cuba, de la Norvege et des Etats-Unis
[S/1219]. A t'heure actuelle, les amendernents
qui figurent dans les document 5/1230 et 5/1232
ont ete incorpores clans le projet de resolution
principal. Les membres du Conse!1 Oll d'alltres
representants id presents desirent-ils prendre la
parole sur la resolution telle qu'elle est modifiee?

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt); r wish to re~
serve the right of my delegation to speak at the
next meeting on the draft resolution as amended.
Whatever I have to say wm, r think be very
brief ;md will not take IIp much time. There may
not be much harm, therefore, in deferring it notil
tomorrow.

Mahmoud FA WZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je voudrais reserver le droit de ma
delegation d'intervenir a la prochaine seance a
propos du projet de resolution modifie. Mes
observations seront, ie pense, tres breves et ne
prendront pas beaucoup de temps. It n'y aura
done pas grand inconvenient a ce que je 1es
remette- a demain.

The PRESIDENT; The COllncil hils heard the
request of the representative of the Netherlands
for an adjournment of the vote on this joint
resolution for twenty-four hours. The Council
has heard the comments made on this request
oy the representative of the United States and
by myself, and also by the representative of
Indonesia. So far, I have no request from a
member of the Coundl, under rule 38 of our

Le PRESIDENT (tracbrt# de l'angla,is) : Les memhres du Conseil ont entendu la demande du representant des Pays-Bas tendant a ce que le vote
sur la resolution commune soit ajol:rne pOUr
yingt-quatre heurcs. Le Conseil a entendu les
observations formulees a propos de cette demande,
par le representant des Etats-Unis et par moimeme, llinsi que par le representant de l'Indonesie. Jusqu'apresent, aucun des membres du

a

41
provisional rules of proceciure, to put a motion
for adjournment to the vote. In the drct:m·
slances, therefore, J would suggest that, because
of the lateness of the hour, the Cuu/l~il may wish
to accept the suggestion which was made to us
by the representative of the United States:
namely, that we should adjot1rn now and meet
tomorrow at 11 a.m,

Conseil n'a demande, (onformemel1t a l'article 38
du reglement interieur provisoire, que 1'0n meUe
aux voix nne motion d'ajournernent. DallS (CS
conditions, et ctant donne l'heure tardive, je propose que le Conseil accepte la suggestion faite par
le representant des Etats·Unis, de lever la seance
et de la reprendre demain matin it 11 heures.

Mr. TSIANG (China): While I think that we
should not delay the conclusion of our considera.
tion of this matter any more than is absolutely
necessary. I would appreciate it if the President
could call our Dext meeting for 3 p.m., because
I have made personal arrangeme:Jts for the
morning.

M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglQi.~):
Je ne desire nullement retarder plus qu'il ne fact
la conclusion de t'examen de cette qt1estion. Je
~er:li~ nr-J!nmoins heuTeux si le President convoquait notre prochaine seance demain a 15 heurcs,
en raison des engagements que j'a! deja pris pour
la matinee.

The PRESIDENT: In view of the remarks of
the fl'presentative of China, I propose that the
Council should adjourn and meet again on the
Indonesian question at 3 p.m. tomorrow.

Le PRESIDENT (tradl~it de l' ar.glai.» : Eu egard
aux observations du representant de la Chine,
je me propose de lever la seance et de fixer la
prochaine re'Jnion consacree a la question indonesienne
demain apres-midi l it 15 heure.s.

The meeting rose at 5.18 p.m.

La seanct est levee d 17 h. 18.

a
