United Nations

A/RES/58/226

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 101

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/491)]

58/226. Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the
strengthening of the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974, 32/162 of
19 December 1977, 34/115 of 14 December 1979, 56/205 and 56/206 of
21 December 2001 and 57/275 of 20 December 2002,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions 2002/38 of 26 July
2002 and 2003/62 of 25 July 2003,
Recalling the Habitat Agenda 1 and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human
Settlements in the New Millennium, 2
Recalling also the goal contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 3 of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at least
100 million slum-dwellers by 2020, as proposed in the Cities Without Slums
Initiative, and recalling further the goal contained in the Plan of Implementation of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation”) 4 to halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of people who are
unable to reach or afford safe drinking water and the proportion of people who do
not have access to basic sanitation,
Taking into account the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable
Development 5 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, as well as the

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Resolution S-25/2, annex.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 1, annex.

03 50808

A/RES/58/226

Monterrey Consensus
Development, 6

of

the

International

Conference

on

Financing

for

Recognizing that the overall thrust of the new strategic vision of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and its emphasis on the two
global campaigns on secure tenure and urban governance are strategic points of
entry for the effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda, especially for guiding
international cooperation in respect of adequate shelter for all and sustainable
human settlements development,
Conscious of the need to achieve greater coherence and effectiveness in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, the Declaration on Cities and Other Human
Settlements in the New Millennium and the relevant internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration,
Recognizing the need for increased and predictable financial contributions to
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation in the new
millennium to ensure timely, effective and concrete results in the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda, the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the
New Millennium and the relevant internationally agreed development goals,
including those contained in the Millennium Declaration and the Johannesburg
Declaration and Plan of Implementation, particularly in developing countries,
Welcoming the establishment by the Executive Director of UN-Habitat of a
Water and Sanitation Trust Fund as a financing mechanism to support the creation of
enabling environments for pro-poor investment in water and sanitation in
developing-country cities,
Commending those countries that have contributed to the United Nations
Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council, 7
Reiterating the call to the Executive Director of UN-Habitat to increase her
efforts to strengthen the Foundation in order to achieve its primary operative
objective, as set out in resolution 3327 (XXIX), of supporting the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda, including supporting shelter, related infrastructure-development
programmes and housing-finance institutions and mechanisms, particularly in
developing countries,
Recalling the decision of the Commission on Sustainable Development at its
eleventh session to address the themes of water, sanitation and human settlements in
its next review and policy sessions, 8
Noting the efforts by UN-Habitat to forge partnerships with Habitat Agenda
partners, other United Nations funds and programmes and international financial
institutions, such as the World Bank,
Recognizing that shelter and human settlements planning and administration
are important sectors in humanitarian efforts,

_______________
6

Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18-22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
E/2003/76.
8
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A.

2

A/RES/58/226

Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Spain and the city of
Barcelona for their willingness to host the second session of the World Urban Forum
in 2004 and to the Government of Canada and the city of Vancouver for their
willingness to host the third session of the World Urban Forum in 2006,
Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
1.
Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) on the work of its nineteenth session 9
and the report of the Secretary-General on the special session of the General
Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the outcome
of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the
strengthening of UN-Habitat; 10
2.
Recognizes that Governments have the primary responsibility for the
sound and effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda1 and the Declaration on
Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium,2 and stresses that the
international community should fully implement its commitments to support the
Governments of developing countries and countries with economies in transition in
their efforts, through the provision of the requisite resources, capacity-building, the
transfer of technology and the creation of an international enabling environment;
Encourages Governments to include issues pertaining to shelter and
3.
sustainable human settlements and urban poverty in their national development
strategies, including poverty reduction strategy papers, where they exist;
Urges Governments to promote pro-poor investments in services and
4.
infrastructure, in particular water and sanitation, in order to improve living
environments, in particular in slums and informal settlements;
Encourages Governments to establish local, national and regional urban
5.
observatories and to provide financial and substantive support to UN-Habitat for the
further development of methodologies for data collection, analysis and
dissemination;
Also encourages Governments to support and enable the participation of
6.
youth in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda through social, cultural and
economic activities at the city level and other national- and local-level activities;
Encourages Governments and UN-Habitat to continue to promote
7.
partnerships with local authorities, non-governmental organizations, the private
sector and other Habitat Agenda partners, including women’s groups and academic
and professional groups, in order to empower them, within the legal framework and
conditions of each country, to play a more effective role in the provision of adequate
shelter for all and sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing
world;
Encourages UN-Habitat to continue to work closely with other relevant
8.
agencies within the United Nations system, in particular members and observers of
the United Nations Development Group and the members of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee; 11
9.
Requests UN-Habitat to strengthen further its efforts to make the Cities
Alliance initiative an effective means for the implementation of the twin goals of the
_______________
9

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/58/8).
A/58/178.
11
Established pursuant to resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991.
10

3

A/RES/58/226

Habitat Agenda, namely, adequate shelter for all and sustainable human settlements
development in an urbanizing world;
10. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts by the Cities Alliance
partnership between the World Bank and UN-Habitat, and other donor countries, to
continue to provide an important forum for policy coordination and development, as
well as to provide support for the preparation of pro-poor city development
strategies and slum-upgrading programmes within the legal framework and
conditions of each country;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to incorporate the assessment of the
progress towards the target of achieving a significant improvement in the lives of at
least 100 million slum-dwellers by 2020 in his report on the review in 2005 of the
implementation of the United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
12. Welcomes the fund-raising efforts of the Executive Director of UNHabitat, which realized an increase in the general-purpose contributions of the
United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation for the year 2003;
13. Calls for continued financial support to UN-Habitat through increased
voluntary contributions to the Foundation, and invites Governments to provide
multi-year funding to support programme implementation;
14. Requests UN-Habitat to collaborate with the Division for Sustainable
Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat in
the preparations for the twelfth session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development to promote a fruitful discussion on the thematic cluster of issues on
water, sanitation and human settlements;
15. Requests the Executive Director of UN-Habitat to inform the Governing
Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme of the results of the
discussions on the topics of water, sanitation and human settlements at the twelfth
session of the Commission on Sustainable Development;
16. Notes that the upcoming sessions of the World Urban Forum, a nonlegislative technical forum, which will be held in Barcelona in 2004 and in
Vancouver in 2006, will offer an opportunity to experts to exchange experiences,
best practices and lessons learned in the field of human settlements;
17. Invites donor countries to support the participation of representatives of
the developing countries in the second and future sessions of the World Urban
Forum;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the resource needs of UN-Habitat
and the United Nations Office at Nairobi under review so as to permit the delivery,
in an effective manner, of necessary services to UN-Habitat and the other United
Nations organs and organizations in Nairobi;
19. Requests UN-Habitat, as the focal point for human settlements
development and for coordination of human settlements activities within the United
Nations system, to work towards coordination of human settlements issues as inputs
to the overall coordination of humanitarian efforts, including through its
participation in the consideration by the Economic and Social Council, in the near
future, of the issue of the transition from relief to development;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution;

4

A/RES/58/226

21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session an
item entitled “Special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the strengthening of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)”.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

5
