S/PV.6979

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6979th meeting

Friday, 14 June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Kpayedo
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2013/254)

13-36395 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1336395*

S/PV.6979

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2013/254)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and I request the Chief of Protocol to escort him
to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President: I also recognize the presence in the
Chamber of His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim Thaçi to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/254, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: On 19 April, following difficult
political negotiations personally facilitated by the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU), Ms. Catherine Ashton,
a historic first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations was initialled between
Belgrade and Prístina.

2

The agreement, consisting of 15 points, provides
for the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities that would encompass a range of
competences related to the people’s day-to-day life.
It also envisages holding local elections in 2013 in
northern Kosovo municipalities with the facilitation
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. Each party also undertook not to block the
other side’s progress in their respective European
Union integration paths. An implementation committee
made up of representatives from both sides is to be
established under the facilitation of the European Union.
Importantly, both sides also affirmed the importance of
continuing to engage in a political dialogue.
The Secretary-General welcomed the agreement
and encouraged the parties to conclude this historic
process and to take concrete measures aimed at
faithfully implementing the agreement. I wish to
congratulate the leaders of both sides, who are present
today in this Chamber, for the wisdom, prudence and
political foresight they have shown in jointly taking
this fundamental step forward. That determination
and persistence will also be needed to sustain this
spirit of compromise and mutual respect as they carry
their agreement forward. On 22 May, as a sign of their
commitment, the parties agreed on an implementation
plan for the provisions contained in the 19 April
agreement. It provides timelines for implementation
that will require both sides to move ahead expeditiously.
It is clear that a high degree of commitment, flexibility
and creativity will also be required to meet those
ambitious timelines.
I believe that the international community’s
support and resourcefulness will also be needed to
help ensure that positive momentum is sustained in the
face of inevitable challenges. While the international
community has regularly committed a strong level
of political engagement and resources to promoting
progress, that may be even more crucial in the coming
period for all international presences in Kosovo. A
generous investment internationaln resources and
efforts will preserve the peace dividends in the
region, and support for an integrated and coordinated
implementation process will be crucial. Among others,
a key factor in the successful implementation of the
19 April agreement will be support for it from the
Serbs of northern Kosovo. I appreciate the Belgrade
leadership’s courageous and continuing efforts to
reach out and raise understanding and support for the

13-36395

S/PV.6979

agreement among the leaders and people of northern
Kosovo. Those efforts have included proactive
exchanges with and visits from senior Government
officials in order to address the concerns of Kosovo
Serbs about the impact of the agreement on their future.

church leaders to gradually assume greater security
duties there. In the same time frame, the implementation
of the Law on the Historic Centre of Prizren moved
forward with the establishment of a Council tasked
with monitoring progress and compliance.

I also wish to stress that such support cannot and
should not be seen as Belgrade’s sole responsibility.
All share responsibility for achieving better
communications with the population of the north
and for taking action that addresses — rather than
exacerbates — the concerns and legitimate interests of
the people there. Public protests in northern Mitrovica,
including a mass rally of several thousand Kosovo Serbs
on 22 April and a subsequent demonstration organized
by university students on 25 April, indicate the level
of continuing apprehensions, as well as the paramount
importance of better communication to all groups and
stakeholders in the north.

Publicly funded repairs and reconstruction of
the Orthodox gravestones damaged or destroyed in
a wave of attacks across Kosovo this past January is
progressing. A majority of the affected gravestones
have been repaired by now, and work is continuing. At
the end of May, the Kosovo authorities, in cooperation
with the Tony Blair Faith Foundation, organized a
broad-based inter-faith conference, which included
leaders of all faiths in Kosovo, including the Serbian
Orthodox Church.

Over the past week, joint working groups have
been focusing on the implementation details and other
issues, such as energy and telecommunications and
the exchange of liaison officers. Those discussions
have been taking place against the backdrop of the
upcoming consideration by the EU Council of Serbia’s
and Kosovo’s progress on their respective EU accession
tracks.
We continue to witness the symptoms of tension
and uncertainty in various parts of Kosovo with respect
to the translation of political agreements into practice
on the ground. As reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/254), the threat of instability remains
present in sensitive areas, both north and south of the
Ibar River. Too often, local leaders still appear to be
reticent to speak out clearly and firmly and to ensure
an effective response to acts of ethnic intolerance
or intimidation directed at members of any of the
communities in Kosovo.
Regardless of those ongoing concerns, there were
also some encouraging efforts on the ground alongside
developments at the political level. In that context, I
should like to make particular mention of President
Atifete Jahjaga, who has been addressing some of the
inter-ethnic issues in Kosovo.
The Kosovo police has established ethnically
mixed special units in four regions for the protection of
Serbian religious and cultural heritage sites. The unit
covering the Peć Patriarchate was constituted on 16 May
and is now working together with the Kosovo Force and

In compliance with resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security, the Kosovo Assembly
recently envisaged legislation recognizing the status
and rights to benefits of survivors of sexual violence
during the conflict. That important addition followed
active advocacy efforts by civil society organizations,
together with the United Nations and other international
actors on the ground.
I wish to take this opportunity simply to highlight
one additional crucial area in which progress could and,
in my view, should accompany that being made through
the ongoing political processes, namely, determining
the fate of persons missing since the time of the
conflict. Although the Joint Working Group on Missing
Persons continues to meet regularly and reflects a spirit
of increasing mutual respect and cooperation, much
information vital to the resolution of missing persons
cases from both sides is still lacking. More serious
efforts to locate and provide such information are
needed from each side, which in turn requires a more
substantial commitment at the political level. Without
such commitments, progress on an issue crucial for
reconciliation will continue to be unacceptably slow.
The 19 April agreement represents a major
achievement and a decisive step forward for both
Belgrade and Pristina, which should contribute to
the peaceful solution of issues that have long divided
the parties. Energetic and cogent facilitation by the
High Representative of the European Union has
been fundamental to obtaining that result. No less
fundamental have been the political will and leadership
demonstrated by the parties, who, in their aspirations

13-363953

S/PV.6979

to join Europe, have assumed historic responsibility for
difficult but necessary compromises.
The agreement sets a course that will be neither
sure nor swift. In that respect, my sincere hope is that
the membership of the Security Council, indeed the
international community as a whole, will continue to
provide its resolute support to progress. The situation
on the ground, including the domestic political situation
on both sides, remains fragile, and it cannot be taken
for granted that the progress being achieved now is
irreversible or that it is simply assured.
The implementation of the agreements reached
in the EU-facilitated process will require continued
hard work by the parties and the active support of the
international community. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is making
efforts to ensure that its activities, including its own
supporting role on the ground, contribute to the creation,
in close coordination with international partners, of an
enabling environment for the implementation of the
Agreement.
I wish to express deep appreciation to the members
of the Council for their continuing political engagement
with the parties, as well as my hope that such an
engagement will remain steadfast throughout the
coming delicate and challenging period.
I conclude by thanking you, Mr. President, and all
members of the Council for your support to UNMIK
and for promoting the shared objectives of political
progress, peace and reconciliation on the ground.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the efforts he has made and the
commitment he has shown in addressing the problems
on the ground.
Upon careful study of the report (S/2013/254) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
period 16 January to 22 April this year, I very much

4

regret having to say that the report highlights some
important security challenges. The security situation in
the north of Kosovo is still very fragile, and frequent
incidents are of particular concern. According to the
data available to us, 60 ethnically motivated attacks
were registered in the first four months of 2013,
20 more than in the same period last year. I also must
bring to the Council’s attention the ethnically motivated
low-grade crimes, such as threats, intimidation and
theft. Even if such crimes often go unreported, they are
no less effective as a means of applying pressure than
are physical attacks. Moreover, their numbers are on
the rise.
In the reporting period, Serbia repeatedly showed
its willingness to make an active contribution to
overcoming the problems that have accumulated. Our
principal goal is to achieve a sustainable solution that
will help everybody in Kosovo and Metohija, on the
one hand, and preserve the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia, on the other.
Serbia will continue to care about the Serbian people
of Kosovo and Metohija and to make efforts to ensure
the safe return and sustainable livelihood of Serbian
citizens living there. We are convinced that, even
though that is a very difficult path, it is the best way to
overcome the legacies of the past.
Since the formation of the new Government of the
Republic of Serbia, eleven rounds of political dialogue
have been held in Brussels through the mediation efforts
of Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. The next round of negotiations is scheduled
for 20 June. During the dialogue my country invested
considerable efforts and demonstrated great flexibility,
which was recognized by many international officials,
including Baroness Ashton herself. In furthering
the process, Serbia will continue to be guided by the
firm belief that the negotiations may lead to a solution
acceptable to all that will be a solid basis for building
lasting peace and achieving full security for all people
living in Serbia’s southern province.
The six-month political dialogue resulted in the
“First agreement on principles governing normalization
of relations”. The Republic of Serbia is determined to
implement the agreement. At the same time, allow me
to point out that this is the first agreement reached
between Belgrade and Pristina, as negotiations on a
whole range of important topics — such as the status
of the Serbian Orthodox Church, the protection of

13-36395

S/PV.6979

cultural and religious sites, the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and property rights, as
well as the modalities for the implementation of the
agreement — are yet to be broached by the two sides.
The Republic of Serbia has great expectations of
future meetings of the teams for the elaboration of
agreement implementation plans. My country deems
that it is very important that the agreed provisions for
the implementation of the agreement should be put
into practice, reflecting the will and intentions of the
negotiators who initialled the Brussels agreement, and
that by the same token the status of the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija should be defined in very clear terms.
Let me also recall that the first agreement provides
for the establishment of the “Association/Community”
of Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija.
The Community will be invested with many important
responsibilities in the fields of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning. The
ethnic structure of the police and the judiciary will
be respected in the territory of the Community, while
the future Pristina armed forces will not be allowed to
enter the North without the permission of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR).
The survival of the Serbian population in the
province, both north and south of the Ibar River, is
linked directly to its physical security. Since June 1999
and the arrival of the international civil and military
presence in Kosovo and Metohija, almost 7,000
physical attacks have been registered in which 1,262
persons, 1,037 of them Serbs and non-Albanians, have
been killed and 1,818 injured. Out of the 427 towns and
villages in which Serbs lived prior to 1999, 311 have
been completely ethnically cleansed. Serbs do not live
there any more, but we want to believe that, over time,
conditions will be created for their return. In particular,
it is necessary that they be encouraged to return,
which can be achieved only by creating conditions for
the physical and economic sustainability of returnee
communities throughout Kosovo and Metohija. A
sustainable IDP return would provide an opportunity to
create a multi-ethnic Kosovo and Metohija.
It is with regret that I have to say that the process of
IDP returns to Kosovo and Metohija has been very slow
and difficult to sustain. The returnees are supported in
word rather than in deed; they are eventually left to their
own devices and face attacks by local communities.
They ask the Republic of Serbia for support or to return

to the place of displacement. Admittedly, it may be too
much to expect that the returnees will be welcome in the
communities to which they return, yet there is no doubt
that the relevant Kosovo and Metohija institutions are
obliged to provide at least basic living conditions, such
as physical security.
According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 22,982
persons have returned to Kosovo and Metohija since
1999, only 42.6 per cent of them from the Serbian
community. According to our data, there have been
only about 4,000 so-called sustainable returnees in the
past 14 years. Particularly worrisome is the fact that 47
returnees from minority communities were registered
in the first quarter of 2013, nearly half as many as in the
same period in 2012, when 87 returnees to Kosovo and
Metohija were registered.
Of particular interest are the assessments contained
in the report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission to Kosovo and
Metohija from October 2012, in which it is contended
that the
“absence of a sustainable solution for approximately
235,000 displaced persons (DPs) from Kosovo
continues to pose a major challenge for all
concerned”.
UNHCR in Geneva intends to end the financing
of programmes for IDPs in Serbia. Even though the
amount of $2.8 million earmarked for IDPs is to be
approved in September, regrettably no donor has yet to
pledge any money for the UNHCR fund for IDPs from
Kosovo and Metohija. I take this opportunity to call on
all to continue to help the displaced persons, as many as
96,000 of whom live below the poverty line.
The process of return has been made more difficult
by the fact that the system of the rule of law in Kosovo
and Metohija suffers serious shortcomings and has been
unable to provide proper protection against repeated
human rights violations, in particular the violations of
the rights of minorities. That is confirmed also in the
report of the European Court of Auditors from October
2012, in which it is said that, even though Kosovo is the
largest per capita recipient of financial aid in the world,
this assistance has not been sufficiently effective to
establish a proper system of the rule of law. The report
states that the European Union has helped Kosovo to
build certain capacities in the field of the rule of law,

13-363955

S/PV.6979

but that the reach of the assistance to police and the
judiciary has been limited.
The position of the European Court of Auditors is
corroborated by the fact that the practice of arresting
members of the Serbian community continues unabated
and without explanation as to who is responsible and
the legal basis on which the contentious warrants are
being issued. This in no way helps to build confidence
or a sense of security within the Serbian population.
The presence of the international community in the
field is of decisive importance to the implementation
of all agreements. We therefore consider that the
United Nations should continue to coordinate the
work of the international organizations acting in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija under its auspices
and that the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should continue to carry
out its mandate and ensure that missions in Kosovo
and Metohija act exclusively within a status-neutral
framework as provided for by resolution 1244 (1999).
We have learned from experience that the role of
UNMIK in stabilizing the situation in the region is
irreplaceable. Although we understand the reasons
for the planned budget restrictions, we believe that its
present mandate must remain unchanged, its activity
enhanced, and its cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) made more efficient.
Of all institutions in Kosovo and Metohija, the
minority communities trust UNMIK the most, since its
political team addresses sensitive issues of exceptional
importance to the Serbian community, including the
protection of cultural heritage, raising the level of legal
and security protection, and the implementation of the
right to free return and reconciliation. We therefore
believe that, rather than be reduced, the UNMIK
political team should be strengthened as we enter an
even more sensitive period in which we shall be called
upon to implement agreements on these important
issues.
Of particular concern is the situation relating
to the suspension of the financing of the UNMIK
Administration in Mitrovica by the provisional
institutions of self-government and the establishment
of the so-called Mitrovica North Administration Office
without consultations or agreement with the Serbian side
or UNMIK, which is tantamount to an attempt to take
over the existing competencies of the Administration in
Mitrovica. I recall that the Administration in Mitrovica

6

was established in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) and that its responsibilities and concrete powers
are defined in UNMIK Administrative Direction
No. 2007/12, by which the legitimacy of governance
is extended to the Municipality of Mitrovica by
establishing, on a temporary basis, UNMIK’s direct
administrative responsibility for the northern part of
the municipality.
Nonetheless, the UNMIK Administration in
Mitrovica continues to perform functions in mediation,
reconciliation and conflict prevention, as pointed out in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/254), in which
it is also said that the Mitrovica North Administration
Office cannot exercise effective jurisdiction in the north
of the province. Therefore, we expect that the question
of the Administration financing will be resolved soon.
Well aware of the magnitude and importance
of the task ahead of us. We have invested enormous
efforts and harnessed all our potentials with the aim of
achieving an agreement in order to make the life of all
in the province easier and to bring us closer to lasting
reconciliation. I must therefore bring to the attention
of the Security Council that, even though they comply
with all procedures, the officials and renowned public
figures of the Republic of Serbia continue to have access
to and stay in Kosovo and Metohija, belying the fact
that the so-called institutions of independent Kosovo
continue not only to violate their right to freedom of
movement but call into question their readiness to reach
an agreement.
Even though we understand that, unlike in Belgrade,
considerable political forces exist in Pristina that are
opposed to any agreement whatsoever, we cannot
understand the absence of response in cases of violation
not only of laws, but of basic civilizational norms. We
understand, for instance, that the devastated Serbian
cemetery in southern Mitrovica can never be restored
to its previous state, but we do not understand why
nothing is being done to bring the perpetrators of the
vandalism to justice or to prevent future devastations
or restore the cemetery. Surely, we would insist on
such measures being taken in northern Mitrovica
had the local Muslim cemetery ever been desecrated,
which has not been the case. The attacks against the
Serbian Orthodox Church, its facilities and clergy and
the plundering of churches and monasteries continue
unabated. Although all of the cases have been reported
in a timely manner to the Kosovo police and KFOR, no
report on the investigation results has been received in

13-36395

S/PV.6979

any particular case and no perpetrator has ever been
apprehended. Such attacks are tolerated even in the
case of an attempt to protect the Serbian heritage, such
as the Supreme Court of Kosovo’s decision confirming
the ownership of the Dečani Monastery by the Serbian
Orthodox Church. The demonstrations at Dečani were
organized after that decision by the Self-Determination
Movement and officials of the Dečani municipality and
ended only after KFOR intervention. That protest is
just another example of the instigation to ethnic hatred
and religious intolerance by Albanian extremists and
another reason why KFOR should stay in Kosovo and
Metohija. I thank the United States for its decision not
to reduce its contingent.
I would like to highlight the question of the Serbian
cultural heritage and religious sites in Kosovo and
Metohija, which will be one of the topics of future
negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
context, the establishment of a specialized, multi-ethnic
unit for the protection of cultural heritage and religious
sites within the Kosovo police is a positive, but
insufficient step in the right direction of providing
additional guarantees for the security of the cultural
heritage and religious sites in Kosovo and Metohija,
especially because the Serbian population and Orthodox
clergy do not trust the Kosovo police.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia also
has no confidence in the privatization carried out by
the Kosovo Privatization Agency, formally the Kosovo
Trust Agency. We deem the process to contravene
international and European conventions on human
rights, since it disregards the rights of the legal owners.
Let us recall that the Republic of Serbia invested billions
of dollars in public companies in Kosovo and Metohija
over many decades, and, as a guarantor, continues to
pay international creditors the instalment payments
for loans taken out to help companies in Kosovo and
Metohija. The rights of workers in non-majority
communities, especially the IDPs, who are to receive
part of the proceeds from the sale of such companies,
are threatened by the privatization.
The privatization of public and State-owned
companies in Serbian communities is also of particular
concern. The sale of those companies to persons of
Albanian nationality, with capital of suspect origin,
have resulted in the loss of economic resources in
these communities and is instrumental in stepping up
the exodus of the Serbian population from Kosovo and

Metohija for economic reasons and owing to the lack
of security.
In the previous political process, my country,
notwithstanding the unilateral nature of the declaration
of independence of Kosovo, granted a limited
international status and legitimacy to the provisional
institutions of self-government in Pristina. It considers,
however, that negotiations at a high political level
should be conducted without addressing the question of
the international and State legal status of the provisional
institutions in Pristina. The goal is to establish
administrative organs in the province that will be
respected by all of the parties included in the process,
with formal, legal and political guarantees at the level
of the province and the international community for
the political, territorial and other rights of national
communities throughout the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija.
The Republic of Serbia has already demonstrated
its openness to dialogue and will maximize its
efforts to overcome the current difficulties in the
relations between the Serbian and Albanian peoples.
The unreduced presence of UNMIK is of paramount
importance for our efforts in order to ensure the
effective advice of the Security Council and the United
Nations, which play an irreplaceable role in providing
legitimacy to the comprehensive solution.
It is evident that, owing to the long-standing
problems presented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the non-majority population in the province
has concerns. The respect for human and minority
rights, the protection of the interests, life, cultural and
religious heritage of all citizens alike, as well as the
full implementation of the European standards in all
areas are the goals for which we intend to fight with
determination and resolve. We believe, that, by insisting
on those values, the Balkans can overcome its past and
use its multi-ethnicity as a precious asset, which it is,
rather than as a source of conflict. Despite all of those
problems, historic progress has undoubtedly been made
in the period between the two meetings of the Security
Council dealing with Belgrade-Pristina relations. Much
more courage is needed to talk peace, much less to
begin a war.
Serbia is resolved to commit the past to the past,
which we know we cannot change. What we can
do though is to shape our present and our future. At
this historic moment, we expect the international

13-363957

S/PV.6979

community to give an impetus to the implementation
of the agreement and the building of regional stability.
That is the support that I expect from members of the
Security Council and from the Council of the European
Union, which is expected to decide on the opening of
the European Union membership negotiations.
I would also like to use this opportunity to encourage
the authorities in Pristina to find a compromise and a
common language in the interests of our people and
our common future. Many meetings of the Security
Council have been convened to discuss wars, sanctions
and bombings in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
It is now time that we convened meetings to discuss
the consolidation of peace and the better future of our
people.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English text provided
by delegation): It is a special pleasure to address the
Council again today and to describe key developments
in Kosovo over the past three months, which owing to
to their political importance make this period much
more special.
At the outset let me express our sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his continuing
support for peace and progress in Kosovo and the
Balkans.
During the past three months we have had some
specific historic developments. The most important
event was the signing of the peace agreement and the
normalization of relations between the countries of
Kosovo and Serbia with EU facilitation. In parallel, the
institutions of the Republic of Kosovo have maintained
political and economic stability, continued to promote
and protect the rights and interests of all communities,
improved the socioeconomic situation in the country
and significantly advanced our European perspective.
After ten rounds of high-level political dialogue,
on 19 April the historic first inter-State agreement
was reached between the Republic of Kosovo and
Serbia, mediated by European Union (EU) High
Representative Baroness Catherine Ashton. That
preliminary agreement and the political dialogue had
their beginning in discussions in the General Assembly
in autumn 2010, and we are proud that we have managed
to implement it completely.
The Republic of Kosovo has consistently offered
unwavering support and commitment to political

8

dialogue with Serbia and the agreement by taking
all measures to ensure its political acceptance in
Kosovo and its effective implementation. The Kosovo
Parliament voted for it by a two-thirds majority. The
citizens of Kosovo have also welcomed the agreement
and expressed their hope that it will serve peace,
stability and prosperity in Kosovo. Our Kosovo Serb
partners in the ruling coalition have also been part
of the dialogue process and strongly supported the
agreement reached. It has also received broad support
from the international community.
I would also like to commend the efforts of my
counterpart, Prime Minister Ivica Dačić of Serbia,
for his serious efforts and commitment to reaching
this important landmark for our two peoples and the
countries in the region. In that context, the facilitation
of the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia has led to gains for both Serbia and Kosovo; they
have gained and the region has gained.
In that respect, the facilitation of the dialogue by
EU High Representative Ashton and the agreement
reached under her leadership represent a significant
achievement for the EU’s foreign policy, an important
achievement that will serve to stabilize the entire region.
The bilateral agreement between Kosovo and Serbia
is important beyond the Western Balkans, because it
has created an environment for the EU member States
that enables the full recognition of the independence of
Kosovo.
The agreement contains 15 provisions that regulate
key aspects of the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. The agreement is also in line with
the Kosovo Constitution. The agreement opens the
way for establishing stability in the north through a
fundamental transformation of the current security
situation and the political and economic conditions.
The agreement also opens the way for Kosovo to attain
full international recognition and membership in
international bodies.
One of the main aspects of the agreement is to
establish an association that will perform several
functions related to local economic development,
education, health, and urban and rural planning. We
agreed that the powers of that association will be in
accordance with the Constitution of Kosovo, the Law
on Local Self-Government and the European Charter
of Local Self-Government. The association will be an
integral part of Kosovo institutions and as such will

13-36395

S/PV.6979

work closely with the central Government in exercising
its activities.
Since the beginning of the dialogue, the Republic
of Kosovo has been convinced that there can be no
normalization of the situation in the north while Serbia
operates illegal parallel structures, which it refuses to
dismantle. The agreement provides an implementation
plan specifying that by mid-July 2013 Serbia will
close all of its security premises in Kosovo and cease
providing them financial support.
The agreement provides that the Kosovo Police
will be the only legal and legitimate police authority
in northern Kosovo. A regional police commander
will be nominated by the association and selected by
the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Kosovo.
With these provisions, the rule of law will finally
be strengthened in the north of Kosovo, and law
enforcement authorities will cooperate more effectively.
The agreement confirms the unitary legal system
of the Republic of Kosovo as the sole legal authority
with jurisdiction in the country. The timely integration
of Kosovo-Serb judicial authorities within the legal
and judiciary system of Kosovo is essential, and we
believe that the composition of the judicial system will
increase community trust in Kosovo’s courts, improve
inter-ethnic relations, and, above all, establish the rule
of law in the north that has been absent for the past 14
years.
Another important aspect of the agreement is the
organization of municipal elections in the north of
Kosovo in October 2013 in parallel with the Kosovowide municipal elections. Those elections will be held
in cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe and in accordance with the laws
of Kosovo and international standards. The organization
of the municipal elections and the formation of new
governing structures will strengthen the legitimacy of
the institutions of Kosovo at the local level.
Another important provision of the agreement is
the mutual agreement that neither party will block, or
encourage others to block, progress by the other party
on the path to EU integration. That mutual assurance
is a promising provision that supports the hope that
the European integration path for both countries will
be smooth and swift, based on fair conditions and
individual merits.

Prior to the agreement, Kosovo and Serbia had
signed a number of technical agreements on the
freedom of movement of people and goods, on applying
integrated border management along the inter-State
border, on customs services, and on exchanging liaison
offices between capitals as the first step towards
establishing diplomatic relations. Those agreements
have undoubtedly improved the political, economic and
social conditions in Kosovo, Serbia and the broader
region.
The implementation of integrated border management
between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia has
continued in the recent months. At the same time,
the agreement on exchanging liaison offices between
Kosovo and Serbia has led to steady progress in finding
a joint solution to the issues of representation, mandate,
composition, immunities and protection of personnel
and communication.
In that context, for the first time, the Republic
of Kosovo will be represented in Belgrade at the
ambassadorial level by a member of the Kosovo
Diplomatic Service. That step marks a historic turning
point in official communication between two countries,
given the fact that the liaison offices will have a unique
role in creating mutual trust beyond the institutional
context.
Without detracting from the historic importance
of the signing of the agreement, the implementation of
that agreement is essential for Serbia, Kosovo and the
Serbs in Kosovo. The coming months will be crucial in
that regard.
The Kosovo Government, public institutions and
political actors of all kinds in the country are committed
to implementing the agreement, which will open the
way for the integration and normalization of northern
Kosovo and for the improvement of relations with Serbia
by opening a new chapter of cooperation, dialogue and
mutual understanding. We affirm our determination to
take, as a matter of priority, all technical and political
steps needed to ensure the timely and constructive
implementation of all aspects of the agreement.
We also expect Serbia to maintain a steady course
of progress in fulfilling its obligations and working
closely with local Serbs in the north to persuade them to
accept and implement the agreement. We count on the
support of the member States of the European Union and
the wider international community in implementing the
agreement in order to attain Kosovo’s full international

13-363959

S/PV.6979

recognition and membership in the United Nations and
other international and regional bodies.
Over the past three months, the Republic of
Kosovo has maintained political and economic stability
and a safe environment for all its citizens; improved
institutional performance; strengthened the rule of
law; accelerated efforts and investments to protect
communities and their religious freedoms; and has
worked to enhance the socioeconomic conditions and
social inclusion of various social groups in Kosovo.
In recent months, the stream of international
recognition of Kosovo’s independence and statehood
has continued. In the last few days and weeks, Kosovo
has been recognized by Tanzania, Yemen and Guyana.
We have also intensified regional participation and
membership in various European bodies, such as the
European Investment Bank.
The timely and effective implementation of the
agreement is essential to establishing security, the rule
of law and order in the north of Kosovo, as well as to
reducing the criminal activity and economic informality
that have been rife in that part of Kosovo under the
control of parallel structures for the past 14 years.
The Government of Kosovo has upheld its
commitment to protect and promote the rights of
communities by providing institutional, political,
economic and social support. Kosovo security
institutions have increased their efforts to provide
additional security to Serbian Orthodox Churches and
other heritage sites. In March 2013, the Kosovo Police
created a special task force comprising 207 police
officers, coming from all communities, who provide
24-hour security for Serb religious and cultural sites.
So far, there have been no reports of incidents against
the Serbian Orthodox heritage in Kosovo.
Moreover, during this period Kosovo has
also maintained economic stability, continued the
privatization of publicly owned enterprises and
expanded the scope of foreign direct investments.
Likewise, the Kosovo Assembly has continued its
legislative work and adopted 10 new laws regulating a
range of economic, judicial and public administration
issues.
Kosovo’s path towards European Union integration
has shown steady progress. EU integration is a national
priority, representing our agenda of modernization
and political transformation. As a result of Kosovo’s

10

constructive engagement in ongoing dialogue and in
fulfilment of European requirements, Kosovo is on
track to sign this year a Stabilization and Association
Agreement and benefit from visa liberalization.
On 22 April, the European Commission
recommended the opening of negotiations for signing
a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Kosovo, which opens the prospects for establishing
contractual relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and the European Union. In less than two weeks, the
European Council will take a decision on approving the
negotiations for signing such an Agreement between
the EU and Kosovo.
The EU report represents the first and most
important political assessment of Kosovo’s progress
in its path towards EU integration. The report
acknowledges that Kosovo has met all four short-term
priorities in the area of public administration, the rule of
law, minority protection and trade, and recommends to
the EU Parliament and Council that negotiations for the
signing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with Kosovo be opened.
Last but not least, following the important
developments in recent months and the overall
political, economic, social and inter-ethnic progress
in Kosovo, it is our firm conviction that it is time for
the Council to consider closing the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in the near future, which will contribute to the process
under way in Kosovo, create space for local ownership,
preserve the credibility of the United Nations and
its role in the past in Kosovo, and ultimately reduce
unnecessary financial costs, which could be used by
United Nations agencies in Kosovo for more important
socioeconomic development projects or in other crisis
situations.
The agreement between Kosovo and Serbia
represents a significant milestone and opportunity for
the Council to consider adopting a new resolution to
end the UNMIK mandate in Kosovo; show support for
the first agreement, mutually agreed upon by Kosovo
and Serbia; provide support for the EU to monitor the
implementation of the agreement, and show support
for the full functioning of both parties as independent
neighbours and responsible members of the international
community.
Let me conclude by reiterating the unwavering
dedication and perseverance of the Kosovo Government

13-36395

S/PV.6979

and its people in continuing to make Kosovo successful
and prosperous, rejecting the legacy of the past and
joining the community of free and peaceful nations at
the regional and international levels. The agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia represents a crucial and
historic moment for improving the relations between
Kosovo and Serbia as two independent States with
a historic opportunity to pave the way for goodneighbourly relations in the EU integration process.
Both sides have had to make some compromises,
which are ultimately in the best interests of the citizens
of Kosovo and their future within the unitary and
functioning State of Kosovo. However, the timely
and effective implementation of the agreement will
determine the success and normalization of inter-State
relations. Good intentions should be translated into
visible actions. Members of the Council and the wider
international community should support the effective
implementation of the agreement.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his insightful briefing. I
would also like to welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dačić
and Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi back to the Council
today.
Since the last Council meeting on this issue in
March (see S/PV.6939), there have been constructive
developments in the political dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. The Republic of Korea congratulates both
sides on reaching the historic agreement of 19 April
within the framework of a dialogue facilitated by
the European Union (EU). The agreement is a major
breakthrough in the normalization of relations and
also represents a big step forward for regional peace
and security. In that regard, we commend both Prime
Ministers for demonstrating their political courage and
taking a flexible approach to finding compromise. We
also applaud the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, for her tireless efforts and personal dedication
in facilitating this ground-breaking agreement.
What is required now is the full and effective
implementation of the agreement on the ground. In that
vein, it is encouraging that a new round of technical talks
on the implementation has already begun in Brussels.
However, the path to full implementation could be
easily littered with serious obstacles. The biggest
challenge at this juncture is the strong resistance and
scepticism of ethnic Serbs living in northern Kosovo.

Taking into consideration that the 19 April agreement
primarily concerns the status of the four municipalities
in northern Kosovo, implementation simply cannot
work without their cooperation. Therefore, we would
like to emphasize that it should be carried out in an
inclusive and participatory manner that allows the full
participation of Kosovo Serbs. It is also imperative that
all police and judicial authorities in northern Kosovo
be integrated into Kosovo’s institutional framework, as
both sides have agreed.
However, genuine sustainable reconciliation cannot
be achieved overnight. The old tensions are still far
from fading. Lingering mistrust presents huge obstacles
to a constructive dialogue. This is all the more reason
why the political dialogue must be complemented by
confidence-building measures. In our meeting in March,
we suggested educational initiatives and an awarenessraising campaign as effective confidence-building
measures, and today I am please to note that the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) describes
some meaningful progress in the educational sector.
We believe that instilling the values of tolerance and
inter-ethnic understanding in future generations is the
first step towards restoring trust among communities.
We therefore call on both sides to further strengthen
their efforts to promote intercultural education and to
facilitate interchange among students. Furthermore,
Kosovo must uphold its commitment to ensuring the
full safety of all ethnic minorities. Without it, people
will find it difficult to have a sense of safety, trust and
confidence in their system.
In that context, a series of incidents targeting the
staff of the Mitrovica North Administrative Office
and attacks on returnees continue to be of particular
concern. We condemn such attacks. We also call on the
Kosovo authorities to redouble their efforts to better
protect all ethnic minority communities.
Finally, the Republic of Korea would like to
commend Special Representative Zarif and the entire
team of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We hope that UNMIK
will further strengthen its close cooperation with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Kosovo Force and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, thereby making a substantial
contribution to lasting peace and genuine reconciliation
in Kosovo.

13-3639511

S/PV.6979

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, at today’s meeting. I have also listened
carefully to the statement made by Mr. Thaçi.
China has always held that resolution 1244 (1999)
is an important legal basis for resolving the question of
Kosovo. Efforts to resolve that issue should be carried
out within the framework of that resolution. It is up to
the parties to find a mutually acceptable settlement
through dialogue and negotiation. The sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia should be fully respected.
China welcomes the recent rounds of the highlevel political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
at which positive results have been achieved. We
encourage both parties to continue to move the
pragmatic and constructive dialogue forward in an
effort to find a long-term solution to the question of
Kosovo so as to maintain the peace and stability of the
Balkans and Europe at large.
The security situation in Kosovo remains calm,
but the northern part of Kosovo remains tense. In
that connection, we express our concern. The parties
concerned must take action to effectively protect the
legitimate rights of the different ethnic groups of
Kosovo, to adopt a prudent approach and to adhere to
dialogue to resolve their differences. It is important to
avoid any actions that might complicate and escalate
the current situation.
China commends the work carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We support
UNMIK’s continued efforts to implement the Council’s
mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will strengthen their cooperation and coordination and
work in synergy so as to play an active and constructive
role in facilitating a solution to the Kosovo question.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on

12

the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
Developments that can be described as historic have
taken place since the last debate of the Security Council
devoted to UNMIK (see S/PV.6939). On 19 April, after
the tenth round of talks, a first tentative agreement
governing the normalization of relations was reached in
the high-level political commitment under the auspices
of the European Union. This agreement is a milestone
for reconciliation between the two countries, which
share a painful past marked by the atrocities of war.
Like leaders of other countries in the region before
them, the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo were able to
act based primarily on the firm commitment of their
people to rejoining the European family.
Luxembourg can only welcome the political
vision and leadership shown by the Prime Ministers
of Serbia and Kosovo. As a member of the European
Union, Luxembourg also welcomes the role played
by the Union, in particular the personal commitment
and considerable efforts of its High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, who has been able to facilitate and lead
sensitive and difficult negotiations.
By adopting at the end of May the plan to implement
the provisions of the historic agreement of 19 April,
the Serbian and Kosovo Governments confirmed
their desire to normalize their relations in order to
realize their European perspective. Negotiations are
now under way in Brussels on the practical details of
the implementation. Luxembourg encourages both
parties to continue to uphold the spirit of compromise
in order to achieve tangible and visible results in the
implementation of the April 19 agreement, even before
the European Council meets on 27 and 28 June in
Brussels.
My country is ready to continue to support the
efforts of the two countries and their leaders to achieve
their common goal. Luxembourg remains strongly
committed to the stability, the development of the rule
of law and socio-economic development of Kosovo,
through its participation in KFOR and EULEX and
through a substantial bilateral cooperation programme.
In his report, the Secretary-General reported on
a situation that has remained generally calm, but with
transient tensions in multi-ethnic areas as well as in
northern Mitrovica. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force

13-36395

S/PV.6979

have responded, in close collaboration with the Kosovo
police, by increasing the visibility of their regular
patrols and strengthening other preventive measures in
the sector.
We also commend the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to establish, in cooperation with EULEX,
a multi-ethnic police unit that is responsible for the
protection of religious and historical sites. The unit will
play a key role in preventing a repeat of the vandalism,
in January, of Serbian Orthodox sites role.
To conclude, let me reiterate the profound
conviction of Luxembourg to see the future of Kosovo,
and that of Serbia, form part of a decidedly European
perspective. A long road toward peace and stability has
been achieved since UNMIK was established in 1999.
It must therefore continue.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minster of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, for
their statements.
The Security Council is meeting for the first time
since the historic agreement of 19 April was achieved
between Serbia and Kosovo under the auspices of the
European Union. The agreement lays the bases for
normalized relations that will contribute to regional
stability and enable the people to turn towards their
future, the development of their countries and their
European prospects. We commend the Serb and Kosovo
authorities, particularly the two Prime Ministers,
who have been personally committed to that difficult
exercise, for their determination and courage. Their
statements before the Council today represent a new
demonstration of their spirit of cooperation. We call
upon them to ensure the swift implementation of the
agreement, pursuant to the road map of 22 May.
Serbia must steadily dismantle the parallel
sovereign structures that it maintains in the north,
pursuant to its commitment. For its part, Kosovo must
provide the future community of majority-Serb areas
with substantive autonomy, as provided for in the
19 April agreement, in order to reassure the northern
Serbian population and allow it to find its lasting place
in Kosovo.
Generally speaking, it is clearly important to ensure
that the rights of the various communities throughout
the territory, especially concerning their cultural and

religious heritage, are protected. The two parties must
work to successfully achieve the municipal elections
scheduled in the autumn, in cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The previously concluded agreements must
also be fully implemented.
If the conclusions reached by the European Council
at its December 2012 meeting are met, by the end of
June new milestones on the two countries’ paths to
Europe — including the launching of negotiations
with Serbia on accession to the European Union
and a stabilization and association agreement with
Kosovo — could be reached.
The international community must acknowledge
those positive developments and cast off the paradigms
of a bygone era. Kosovo has now been recognized by
the majority of the States Members of the Organization,
reflecting the reality of a State that aspires to good
relations with its neighbours and peaceful integration
within its region and to find its proper place in the
international community.
As the European Union, NATO and the OSCE
adjust their presence on the ground, we encourage
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to do the same with a view to
promoting peaceful conduct, in cooperation with the
Kosovo authorities, while avoiding the undue influence
of those who champion the status quo. In that context,
I wish to thank the Special Representative and the
UNMIK actors for their efforts.
It is also essential that the Kosovo authorities
actively cooperate with the Special Representative of
the European Union, Mr. Žbogar, and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), as
they carry out crucial work to implement the dialogue
agreements between Belgrade and Pristina and combat
corruption, organized crime and impunity for the most
heinous crimes, including alleged trafficking in organs.
All parties must respect the freedom of movement of
troops and personnel deployed under the Kosovo Force
and EULEX.
France remains committed to the reality of a
sovereign, peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo living in peace with its neighbours. It believes
that Serbia must become one of the pillars of stability
in the Balkans. Today, we have inched a bit closer to
those two goals.

13-3639513

S/PV.6979

Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, and thank him and Mr. Thaçi for their
statements.
The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and the
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for a comprehensive settlement to the political
process and negotiations.
Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made at
the meeting of the parties on 19 April in Brussels,
facilitated by the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine
Ashton, where they reached a landmark agreement on
the principles governing the normalization of relations.
We encourage both sides to remain further committed
to reaching agreement on the contentious issues through
mutually acceptable solutions. That is indispensable to
the security, stability and well-being of the region.
UNMIK’s activities are of great importance.
The Mission’s ongoing collaboraton with all other
stakeholders to enhance the prospects of success
in the political dialogue is noteworthy. UNMIK
should continue to play its key role in ensuring the
coordination of all international efforts on its statusneutral framework, as envisaged in resolution 1244
(1999).
The general calm that was observed in the overall
security situation during the reporting period is a
welcome development. However, repeated incidents of
violence in northern Mitrovica constituted exceptions
to the general security environment. It is necessary that
these incidents be duly investigated.
The voluntary return of internally displaced persons
to Kosovo again showed few signs of improvement
during the reporting period. We commend the
efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in monitoring the process and implementing
the necessary policies towards facilitation of their
return. We agree with the Secretary-General that

14

the promotion of reconciliation and increased trust
among the communities in Kosovo is as important as
the achievement of success in the political process.
Therefore, it should be underlined once again that the
preservation of the region’s rich cultural diversity and
spiritual heritage on the basis of ethnic and religious
tolerance is indispensable.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Mr. Zarif, for its efforts and
important role in maintaining peace and stability in
Kosovo and the entire region.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia and Mr. Hashim
Thaçi of Kosovo. We welcome their presence here
today and their statements.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/254) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) highlights the challenges to its longterm presence and security in Kosovo, but the report
also highlights the agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina. Rwanda welcomes this historic agreement
governing the normalization of relations, reached in the
framework facilitated by the European Union. Serbia
and Kosovo have proved that they can both focus on the
future rather than stay entangled in the past.
Indeed, Rwanda believes that it is in the common
interest of both countries to close that dark chapter of
their history and continue with serious negotiations.
I deeply appreciate the role of the European Union,
especially its continued efforts to maintain the
momentum of peaceful dialogue between the two
countries. It is evident to us in the active, skilful and
sustainable involvement of the High Representative of
the European Union, who has stewarded that sensitive
and delicate negotiation towards a landmark agreement.
Rwanda strongly believes that it is through dialogue
that the long-term normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina can meaningfully flourish.
The step taken by the parties is a cornerstone in their
history, and there should be no turning back. We
therefore call on both sides to maintain open channels
of communication and involve all stakeholders as the
process moves towards full realization.
This important step on the part of both leaders
indicates that they are looking forward to a better

13-36395

S/PV.6979

future for their countries. We call on the international
community to give full support to the parties on their
journey to implement this agreement. The Council
responding with one voice in support of this agreement
would be a key contribution to the realization and
implementation of the agreement, but of course both
parties should continue to demonstrate their political
while and sincere desire in the continuation of the
dialogue that will bring lasting peace.
On the security situation, my delegation is
concerned about the tensions in Kosovo. We call
upon leaders, in collaboration with the international
presence, to engage opinion leaders in the concerned
communities in finding a peaceful solution to the cause
of this tension. We welcome the ongoing cooperation
on cultural heritage projects. Despite recent violence
caused by the acts of a few extremists, Rwanda remains
optimistic that Kosovo and Serbia can eventually
resolve their differences.
I commend the collaboration between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) in the area of the rule of law and its
technical cooperation with the Ministries of Justice and
Internal Affairs. In particular, we commend the efforts
undertaken by EULEX in monitoring and advising the
rule of law sector.
Regarding human rights, Rwanda stresses that it is
crucial to protect the human rights of minorities. The
protection of their religious values as cultural heritage
is crucial for the stability of Kosovo and the region.
Rwanda welcomes the establishment of a specialized
unit for the protection of cultural heritage and religious
sites.
My delegation welcomes the drafting of the Kosovo
Strategy and Action Plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security.
I welcome the cooperation between UNMIK and
other international organizations in implementing the
United Nations mandate. We urge the international
community to maintain its commitment to increasing
its assistance to the parties in order to achieve lasting
peace. However, we remain convinced that the task of
building a stable and prosperous Kosovo and Serbia is
the primary responsibility of both countries themselves.
We therefore call upon the two countries to strengthen
their cooperation with UNMIK.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that the achievement of peace in Kosovo lies in the
hands of both parties, Kosovo and Serbia, themselves.
My delegation therefore urges both sides to continue
in the same spirit of determination and compromise
in the implementation and realization of the historical
agreement.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States warmly welcomes both Prime Minister Dačić
and Prime Minister Thaçi back to the Council and
congratulates them on reaching the landmark 19 April
agreement on principles for the normalization of
relations. We commend the European Union, especially
High Representative Ashton, for their continued
engagement and leadership on this important issue.
The historic 19 April agreement strengthens Kosovo
and Serbia’s futures as multi-ethnic democracies based
on the rule of law and respect for human rights and as
neighbours on the path towards European integration.
The United States applauds both Governments for their
political courage and commitment to making the hard
decisions to achieve this significant milestone, which
holds the potential to significantly enhance stability in
the region. We welcome the Prime Minister’s agreement
on an associated implementation plan and time line,
and look forward to the agreement’s timely and full
implementation.
It will be important for both Governments to
cooperate with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and other partners
to advance implementation and ensure safety and
security during the transition phase. We encourage the
legislatures of Serbia and Kosovo to take all necessary
steps in support of this agreement.
The agreement provides a durable solution for
northern Kosovo within Kosovo’s legal and institutional
framework, and reaffirms far-reaching municipal selfgovernance for ethnic Serbs and other communities
living in the north. Free, fair and orderly municipal
elections this fall will be an essential step on this path,
and we commend the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for its work with the Government
of Kosovo to facilitate this electoral process.
At the same time, however, we are concerned about
the threats of violence and irresponsible rhetoric from
hardliners who are personally vested in maintaining
the status quo. We encourage both Governments to
explain the agreement and its benefits to their citizens.

13-3639515

S/PV.6979

We hope that the residents of northern Kosovo will take
note of Prime Minister Dačić’s appeal to accept and
support the agreement, and we welcome the assurances
of President Jahjaga and Prime Minister Thaçi that
all citizens’ rights will be protected. We applaud the
remarkable progress Kosovo has achieved, including in
reforming its justice sector and economy.
The new criminal code, the new code of criminal
procedure and the restructuring of the courts are major
steps forward. Kosovo’s standby arrangement with the
International Monetary Fund is meeting performance
benchmarks, and the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development just approved its country strategy for
Kosovo.
We are also pleased to note that over half of all
States Members of the United Nations now recognize
Kosovo.
The United States stands with Kosovo as a
partner and friend and looks forward to deepening
our partnership in the years to come. Serbia is also a
long-time partner of the United States, and we welcome
Prime Minister Dačić’s productive trade mission to the
United States in May.
By resolving political differences through dialogue
and compromise, Kosovo and Serbia have collectively
set a noteworthy and constructive example for the
region. We look forward to continued progress by both
countries and their societies on reforms and boosting
economic growth.
Lastly, let me take this opportunity to reiterate our
strong support for the commendable efforts of Kosovo
and Serbia to further their cooperation which remains
the optimal path to peace and prosperity.
Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to express
Australia’s appreciation to Special Representative
Zarif for his presentation this morning and for his
continuing efforts and those of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to promote security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and in the region. I also welcome
Prime Minister Thaçi and Prime Minister Dačić and
thank them for their statements.
We welcome the first agreement between Serbia
and Kosovo of principles governing the normalization
of relations, initialled on 19 April and subsequently
approved in full by the Government of Serbia and the
Parliament of Kosovo on 22 April. We join others in

16

congratulating both parties for the strong political
leadership and far-sighted vision they have displayed
in reaching that historic milestone, which, among other
important components, also allows both countries to
make progress towards their European integration. I
would also like to acknowledge the constructive and
dynamic role played by High Representative Ashton
over a period of four critical months to steer difficult
negotiations to their successful outcome. It is necessary
that both parties now implement the 15 points of the
Agreement fully and in line with the agreed timelines.
A viable solution to the situation in Kosovo cannot
be achieved without addressing the anxieties expressed
by Serbs residing in northern Kosovo. Continuing
political dialogue between Belgrade, Pristina and Serbs
in northern Kosovo can ensure that the implementation
process meets their concerns and interests. Local
elections in municipalities in northern Kosovo later this
year facilitated by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe will be an important test of the
degree to which Serbs residing in northern Kosovo feel a
real sense of political inclusion. Ensuring that northern
Kosovo’s security structures become part of a coherent
framework within Kosovo will also be a crucial step
towards a long-term resolution of the situation.
Security, the rule of law and a strong human rights
framework are essential components of any longterm sustainable solution to the situation in Kosovo.
Australia is encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation on the ground remained relatively
calm throughout the period covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/254), but we regret the incidents
which occurred in ethnically mixed areas in northern
Kosovo. The attacks on offices of political parties
and civil society groups are of particular concern and
represent a threat to dialogue and mediation efforts. We
commend the close cooperation between the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission and
the Kosovo Force in responding to those challenges.
We welcome the steps taken by the Assembly
of Kosovo to strengthen the rule of law and stem
corruption. The work of the Kosovo police to fight
organized crime and international narcotics flows is
vital. That contributes to strengthening law and order
not only in Kosovo but in the broader region.
Australia condemns acts of vandalism and the
desecration of sites of cultural or religious significance.
In that regard, we commend the establishment of

13-36395

S/PV.6979

a specialized unit within the Kosovo police for the
protection of cultural heritage and religious sites. We
acknowledge the continuing efforts made to strengthen
protection frameworks in Kosovo for religious, social
and ethnic minorities. Australia continues to encourage
the safe and viable return of internally displaced
persons.

and move towards a common European future. We laud
the undertaking that neither side will block each others’
path towards integration with the European Union. The
implementation of the agreement is as important as its
signing. We urge both sides to conclude arrangements
for implementing the agreement. They should not be
deterred by those who seek to obstruct the path of peace.

Much progress has been achieved over the past
four months, and we welcome the efforts of the
parties in working towards a stable and prosperous
Kosovo. The international community needs to
remain closely engaged to encourage and monitor the
faithful implementation of the agreements reached at
the political level and continue to support the ongoing
political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and
with local communities towards a better future for all
people in Serbia and Kosovo.

It is important for the leaders to build support
for the agreement among their communities and
constituencies. The holding of elections in northern
Kosovo in October 2013 and the integration of Serbs
into the national mainstream are important benchmarks.
Ethnic divisions and barriers must blur over time.

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Special
Representative Farid Zarif for his important briefing.
We thank Prime Minister Ivica Dačić and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi for their compelling statements.
We welcome the peace and normalization
agreement signed by Serbia and Kosovo on 19 April
this year. The agreement is indeed a landmark. The
two Prime Ministers have underlined that this is a
historic moment for the two countries to improve
relations and forge good-neighbourly ties. Leaders on
both sides have shown courage and foresight to reach
out, explore common ground and make the necessary
compromises. They have succeeded against heavy
odds. We congratulate them and the people of the two
countries for their achievement. It should signal a new
dawn in the region.
We appreciate High Representative Catherine
Ashton for her skilful mediation which made the
Agreement possible. We salute the European Union for
its steadfast commitment to peace in the Balkans.
The signing of the agreement increases the
prospects of reconciliation between Belgrade and
Pristina and promotes peace in the region. It has a builtin potential to save future generations of Serbs and
Kosovars from the scourge of strife. It is an opportunity
for the region to transcend the narrative and the reality
of ethnic cleansings.
The ratifications of the agreement by the Parliaments
of Serbia and Kosovo demonstrate the collective desire
of the people on both sides to resolve outstanding issues

We are glad to learn that the situation in Kosovo is
generally calm. That opportunity should be used to let
peace and stability grow, but we should also heed the
warnings by Special Representative Zarif and Prime
Minister Dačić that stability in Kosovo is fragile.
In the implementation phase, therefore, close
coordination between NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will be extremely important. UNMIK,
under the effective leadership of Special Representative
Zarif, has an especially key role to play. We hope that
the leadership of both countries will continue to find
solutions to all outstanding problems and move their
people away from the legacy of conflict to cooperation.
Rapprochement should lead to new bonds between
the two neighbours. The Agreement also gives fresh
ground to the Council to bridge differences on Kosovo.
Pakistan recognized Kosovo’s statehood last year.
We sincerely hope that the people of Kosovo will grow
and prosper in a stable environment as they rebuild their
nation into a unitary and functional State. Pakistan
wishes both States well. This is a historic moment. It
must be captured by all, but primarily by Serbia and
Kosovo.
Mr. Churkin (Russia) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank Mr. Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genral, for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/254) on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Dačić.
We share his assessment. We have listened carefully to
Mr. Thaçi.

13-3639517

S/PV.6979

We expect that the results achieved during the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina conducted
under European Union mediation will lead to a genuine
improvement in the situation of the Serb population of
Kosovo. We back Serbia’s efforts in this very complex
process. The demands for guarantees of a normal life in
the province are fully justified. The dialogue addresses
only a few aspects of the normalization of relations
between Serbia and the province and has no bearing on
the issue of the status of Kosovo, which remains open.
The only legal basis for a settlement of this issue
continues to be resolution 1244 (1999). The Council
remains the only body with the authority to take the
relevant decisions. The international community
and, first and foremost, the United Nations should
not diminish the attention paid to events in Kosovo.
Belgrade and Pristina’s agreement has not removed the
main problems in the province. Furthermore, the most
difficult phase remains — the practical implementation
of the agreement. We believe that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo must
actively involve itself in the process. What must not be
lost from sight are all the other aspects of the mandate
granted to UNMIK under resolution 1244 (1999),
which must be fully implemented. The United Nations
presence has a significant potential for resolving issues
that exist in such fields as the rule of law, the protection
of minorities, the forging of intercommunal dialogue
and, of course, the protection of Orthodox sites. For
this reason, we are against a reduction in UNMIK’s
mandate; faced with so many problems, there is a need
to expand the political component of the Mission.
The situation in the province, especially in the north,
remains tense. That is demonstrated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, with a growing number of cases of
grenade explosions in areas of mixed populations
in the north and the increase in ethnically motivated
incidents in the west of Kosovo. Also of note is the
letter circulated in the Security Council by the Head
of Serb Department on Kosovo and Metohija regarding
the low level of return of internally displaced persons
in Kosovo. Regrettably, the numerous cases of Kosovo
Serbs’ property being put up for sale and their forced
displacement outside the province continue to receive
little attention. All of this bears witness to serious
problems in the field of inter-ethnic tolerance. The size
of major Serb enclaves is gradually decreasing. Smaller
ones are essentially dying out.

18

The tensions relating to Orthodox churches and
cemeteries can be seen in the fact that at the beginning
of the year there was a wave of vandalism. There
was also an unacceptable situation around the World
Heritage site of the Visoki Dečani Serbian Orthodox
Monastery. The disdain shown by the local authorities
for laws passed to uphold the rights of national
minorities and the preservation of Serbian cultural
heritage is clear. Messages addressed to Pristina
regarding the unacceptability of all this have shown
themselves to be inadequate to restore genuine order
in the province. Lengthy and persistent efforts will be
needed by the international community. Of concern
here are the European Union and NATO plans to reduce
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
and Kosovo Force missions active in the province on
the basis of United Nations Security Council decisions.
We are concerned by the complete lack of
information regarding the course of investigations by
EULEX into the allegations by the Council of Europe’s
Special Rapporteur, Mr. Marty, regarding the illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. Prosecutor
Williamson’s Special Investigative Task Force was set
up in January 2011. Since the beginning of last year, it
has been fully staffed and should work to produce real
results.
The stabilization of Kosovo lies far ahead. Problems
in the province, both current and long-term, can only be
resolved by strictly political means. We expect that all
international presences will unswervingly follow the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254)
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I should also like to thank the
representatives of Serbia and Kosovo for their important
statements.
The agreement signed on 19 April between Kosovo
and Serbia constitutes a decisive historic step on the
path to the normalization of their relations. Fourteen
years after the end of the conflict and five years after
independence proclaimed by Kosovo, the parties, after
months of tough negotiations, have finally initialled
this agreement in order to put an end to the conflict in
Kosovo and open up new prospects for both States. The
agreement signed grants a large measure of autonomy

13-36395

S/PV.6979

to the Serbian municipalities in North Kosovo and
gives the Kosovo Government powers over all its
territory, which constitutes a considerable step forward
towards a consensus-based definition of the final status
of Kosovo.
My country commends the political courage shown
by the two parties in overcoming the resentment and
the hostility of some of their people, who feared that
the agreement might sacrifice their interests in the
interest of a reasonable compromise. We urge parties
to rapidly the implement committee called for by
the “First agreement on principles governing the
normalization of relations” so as to bring about its
effective implementation. We believe that the first task
of the Committee must be to propose judicial reforms
in order to align legislation with the 15 points of the
agreement.
Togo also urges both parties to pursue dialogue on
the questions remaining in abeyance, particularly the
issues regarding those persons who have disappeared
or who are displaced, property ownership and the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs into central institutions.
Moreover, we welcome the progress achieved in other
areas of dialogue, particularly the exchange of liaison
officers, which should, as emphasized in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, foster communication between the
two parties and the provisional agreement on customs
and taxation questions.
There is a risk that the normalization under way in
relations between Serbia and Kosovo might not achieve
its purpose if the peoples who are principally concerned,
particularly the Serbians in North Kosovo, are not
involved in the new dynamic. The many demonstrations
that the community organized before and after the
signing of the agreement to voice its hostility to any
connection with Kosovo and the demands put forward
by the representatives demanding the convening in
Serbia of a referendum on the Brussels agreement are a
major source of concern. That is why Togo urges Serbia
and Kosovo to take the necessary steps to explain the
basis of the agreement and the comparative advantages
that it affords to the various communities.
We encourage the Serbs in northern Kosovo who
believe that their concerns have not been sufficiently
taken into account to fully join in the process of
normalization and to play a part in the local elections to
be held in neighbouring municipalities. By doing that,
they will be able to form the association of municipalities,

which will be in charge of the administration of their
municipal constituencies, pursuant to the 19 April
agreement.
My country wishes to welcome the fact that the
security situation has remained stable in Kosovo
during the period under consideration, despite tension
observed in the mixed zones in the north of Kosovo. We
also are concerned by the incidents involving the use
of firearms and explosives affecting both civilians and
personnel of the Kosovo security forces. We urge the
Kosovo police to continue their efforts to investigate
the most recent events affecting minority communities,
the defacing of property, acts of vandalism against
religious sites, the desecration of graves and other acts
of intolerance.
I would like to conclude by again expressing my
country’s congratulations to the European Union, in
particular the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, whose decisive role made it possible
for the 19 April agreement to be signed. We also wish
to thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and all partner
organizations standing with the Kosovo authorities in
the stabilization of the territory and the construction of
democratic institutions.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I convey
my gratitude to Mr. Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for having presented the quarterly
report that takes stock of developments in the situation
of Kosovo. During the period under consideration, the
Serb and Kosovo sides have shown political will in the
spirit of compromise, as is clearly demonstrated by
the new cycle of dialogue since the beginning of the
year under the auspices of Baroness Ashton, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. Serbian Prime Minister
Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim Thaçi have confirmed
their commitment and resolve this morning before the
Security Council, and we commend them.
The dialogue has promoted significant progress
in the association/community project in Serb
municipalities in Kosovo, ultimately leading to the
approval by the parties on 19 April of the “first
agreement on principles governing the normalization
of relations”. The agreement is historic in many ways.
It marks a turning point in relations between Serbia

13-3639519

S/PV.6979

and Kosovo, and has finally opened a real prospect for
their integration into the European Union. It is in the
interest of both parties and the entire region that these
agreements be fully implemented.
The parties have also made progress on issues as
crucial as the levying of customs duties, taxes and value
added tax in northern Kosovo, the issue of land records
and the integrated management of border crossings.
It is hoped that this process can lead to definitive
agreements and extend to the crucial issue of the
movement of people in order to help allay the fears and
apprehensions of the people concerned. In this process,
the parties have shown courage and resolve not to
dwell on the past but to look to the future together. The
European Union, for its part, has also demonstrated its
ability to contribute through perseverance, persuasion
and motivation to a breakthrough in relations between
Kosovo and Serbia.
In terms of security, the situation has remained
generally calm. However, the tension persists in the
northern part of Kosovo because of incidents affecting
minorities, such as theft of and damage to property,
and the illegal occupation and burning of houses. The
issue of the protection of heritage and religious sites
continues to arise, and requires tangible action. The
decision to set up a specialized Kosovo police unit for
the protection of cultural heritage and religious sites is
a measure which we welcome.
With regard to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Bernd Borchardt to lead it. That structure must
continue its monitoring, mentoring and advising
activities in the field of rule of law and the promotion
of cooperation with the parties to fight crime at the
regional level.
We commend the parties for the progress made.
We encourage them to consolidate the momentum by
continuing to work with an open mind and conciliation
to address the outstanding issues by intensifying their
efforts and preparing a common future for present and
future generations. We also congratulate the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, which continue to play a key role
in advancing the dialogue and negotiation between the
parties to find a political solution that is comprehensive
and inclusive, in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999).

20

Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), and to welcome the Prime Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
I underscore the role of the United Nations in
Kosovo via UNMIK in promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights, as well as its cooperation
with the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), maintaining a
status-neutral position regarding the statute and under
the auspices of the United Nations. We welcome the
signing of the “First agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations” in the context of the
high-level dialogue under European Union auspices.
We trust that the agreement will give a high profile
to the situation and that progress will be made on a
political solution to the outstanding issues through
compromise, trust and dialogue. Those in Serbia who
favour the normalization of relations deserve special
recognition. We urge the parties to pursue this agenda,
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), and to implement
the agreement strictly, overcoming past obstacles and
acting in good faith and peacefully.
We must continue to focus on the security
situation in northern Mitrovica. This will require
coordinated action to ensure that the problems can
be resolved in good faith and future tension avoided.
UNMIK’s important work makes it imperative to find
practical solutions, prevent tension and ensure that the
Administration continues to play its role in conflict
prevention, mediation and facilitation.
We are concerned over the ongoing incidents and
tensions, particularly the destruction of religious and
cultural heritage, the prevention of which is an UNMIK
priority. We draw special attention to the desecration
of Orthodox Serbian cemeteries in Kosovo. Argentina
condemns such acts and calls for the conclusion
of investigations under way in order to punish the
perpetrators of these acts of vandalism and religious
intolerance, and to promote reconciliation between the
communities.
We must continue to work to ensure the return
and final integration of internally displaced persons
and in particular facilitate their access to housing,
basic services and jobs. We must also expedite the

13-36395

S/PV.6979

documentation of their civil status and prevent incidents
of insecurity. UNMIK technical assistance is essential
in that regard. We support UNMIK as it supports the
rule of law, particularly by cooperating with EULEX
and the competent authorities in Serbia and Pristina.
In conclusion, I underscore the work of the
Special Representative to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/254) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
thanks also go to his Special Representative for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing the report and
for his sustained personal endeavours to promote the
reconciliation of the Kosovo communities. We are also
grateful for the words that we have heard from the high
authorities with us today.
As others have done, we welcome the “First
agreement of principles governing the normalization of
relations” reached on 19 April within the framework of
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. This
represents a historic step forward with the potential
to achieve regional reconciliation, stability and
prosperity. The most challenging part now is to ensure
that the results of the dialogue are implemented and
their positive impact on the ground.
We believe that UNMIK has a key role to play
during this implementation phase. We support the
assertions in the report that UNMIK, in supporting the
positive achievements reached through dialogue, will
henceforth focus its efforts on promoting reconciliation
among the Kosovo communities.
The escalation of tensions and violence in northern
Kosovo remains a cause for concern to my delegation.
We note that the alarming trend of incidents involving
explosive devices continues. Likewise, security incidents
continue to affect returnee areas. We appreciate that the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the
Kosovo Force and local authorities have increased the
visibility of their regular patrols and stepped up other
preventative measures to the north of Mitrovica.
We also deplore the desecration of cemeteries of
the Serbian Orthodox Church that took place during
the reporting period. It is imperative that all of those
incidents be fully investigated. In that regard, reform

of the security and justice sectors must be undertaken,
in particular with regard to the administrative and
procedural problems that lead to delays in the processing
of cases.
The situation facing minority communities in
Kosovo still has not shown sufficient improvement,
with a climate of tension and discrimination prevailing.
We regret that the first quarter of 2013 saw the decrease
in voluntary returns continue from the last quarter of
2012.
Turning to the work of the Special Investigative
Task Force charged with looking into the reports of
inhumane trafficking in persons and human organs,
we note with interest the information included in the
EULEX report annex and will follow developments
in that regard closely. We support the operational
cooperation objectives and therefore continue to support
the reaching of an arrangement that would allow the
United Nations to be involved in the investigation of
these reports, all the more in the light of the report’s
affirmation that this is a complex investigation that
will take time to complete and because it covers several
jurisdictions and acts that would have been committed
some 13 or 14 years ago.
This debate has confirmed that the United Nations
continues to play an irreplaceable role as guarantor of
stability and neutrality in Kosovo and the region and
as a presence conducive to reconciliation among the
different communities that coexist in that geographical
space. A strong United Nations presence with sufficient
resources remains necessary. We reaffirm the relevance
of resolution 1244 (1999) as the applicable legal
framework in Kosovo, as well as the importance of
ensuring full respect for international law.
In conclusion, we draw some hope from the
progress observed recently, which nevertheless does not
yet imply any change in the position of my Government
on the non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today. I am delighted to welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime
Minister of Serbia.

13-3639521

S/PV.6979

The normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia is integral to both countries’ European Union
(EU) accession paths. We welcome the EU-facilitated
dialogue, the success of which must be attributed to the
hard work of Cathy Ashton and the two Prime Ministers
here today.

security and stability, and EULEX will help integrate
institutions in the north under Kosovo’s jurisdiction.
The United Kingdom urges the authorities in Pristina
and Belgrade to cooperate fully with EULEX and
ensure freedom of movement for all of its personnel in
the north.

From the perspective of sitting in the Security
Council, we are all too often able to observe how
issues remain blocked because of the absence of vision
and commitment on the part of political leaders. The
progress that has been made in the EU-facilitated
dialogue is a welcome reminder that the opposite
can also be the case — that vision, commitment and
persistence can yield tangible and effective results, and
that flexibility from one side can generate flexibility
on the other side. I offer my sincere congratulations
to Prime Minister Thaçi and Prime Minister Dačić for
the leadership and courage they have demonstrated
in coming to an historic agreement that will aid the
irrevocable progress of both countries towards the
European Union.

I welcome Kosovo’s commitment to holding free,
fair and democratic elections. All citizens of Kosovo
must have the opportunity to take part in the elections,
and women must have an equitable role in competing
for political office. The United Kingdom is keen to see
the necessary reforms adopted without further delays.

The momentum of the past two months must be
sustained. Implementation is crucial to unlocking
progress for both Kosovo and Serbia. Belgrade must
communicate the benefits of this agreement effectively
to the local communities in northern Kosovo, and
Pristina must demonstrate its support of the rights and
culture of all its citizens and integrate Kosovo Serbs in
the north.
The continued assistance of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the implementation
of dialogue agreements will be indispensable. The
OSCE will play a crucial role in facilitating municipal
elections in the north. KFOR will help with maintaining

22

The European Commission report of 22 April
states that Kosovo has met the short-term conditionality
set out at the December General Affairs Council for
opening negotiations on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union. The United
Kingdom fully supports a stabilization and association
agreement with Kosovo.
Finally, I welcome the further progress made by
Kosovo in securing wider international recognition. In
recent weeks, the Governments of Guyana, Tanzania
and Yemen have all decided to recognize Kosovo’s
independence. After only five years of independence,
Kosovo is now recognized by over half of the States
Members of the United Nations. Kosovo’s independence
is a reality, it is irreversible, and we welcome the
steadily growing international recognition of that fact.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

13-36395
