63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should consider the question of the exploitation
of labour through i11icit and clandestine trafficking at
its next session, as provided in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 (LIil), as a matter of priority;
4. Invites the International Labour Organisation to
continue the studies it has begun on illicit trafficking
in foreign labour, which is a form of exploitation, and
to strengthen international machinery for the protection
of migrant workers;
5. Urges the Governments which have not yet done
so to give high priority to the ratification of the Convention of the International Labour Organisation concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949),
in the context of their efforts to eliminate illicit trafficking in foreign labour.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2921 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the third year
of its activities,~ submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimimtion of A11 Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention, if possible by 10 December 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
3. We/comes the adoption of the new procedure
for the consideration of reports submitted by States
parties under article 9 of the Convention, which includes an invitation to States parties to be present at,
and take part in. the Committee's discussions when
their reports are under consideration, as suggested in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution
2783 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971.
2085 th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2922 (XXVII). Draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2786 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Recognizing the urgent need to take further effective
measures with a view to the suppression and punishment of apartheid,
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8718).
6 Resolution 2106 A (XX).

Reaffirming again that the conclusion of an international convention on the suppression and punishment
of the crime of apartheid would be an important contribution to the struggle against apartheid, racism, economic exploitation, colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made in order
to elaborate an international document on the suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Special Committee on Apartheid and to States the
revised draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid7 and the amendments thereto 8 for their comments and views;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyninth session to consider as a priority item the revised
draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid and the amendments thereto,
and to submit the results of its consideration thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.

2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2955 (XXVII).
Importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial eountries ancl
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Importance of
the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective
guarantee and observance of human rights",
Recalling resolution 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, in which the General Assembly urged the
Security Council as well as States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies to
take effective steps to ensure the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples under
colonial and alien domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and with
Assembly resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Disturbed at the continued reluctance of the colonial
and racist Powers, such as Portugal and South Africa,
to recognize and to apply the right to self-determination and independence for the peoples of the Territories
under their control,
Deeply concerned at the negative attitude of certain
Member States to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Annexes, agenda item 50, document A/8880, para. 42.
8 fbid., para. 43.

(;cneral Asscmbly-Twcnty-,cvcnth Session

64

Assembly on decolonization, racism and self-determination,
Strongly deploring the intensification of armed repre,sion and wanton slaughter of peoples under colonial and alien domination and acts of aggression
committed by colonialists and alien forces against a
number of sovereign States and peoples struggling for
their self-determination, which obstruct the full enjoyment of human rights,
Noting the urgent need, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, for providing maximum material, humanitarian and moral
assistance to the peoples of the liberated areas, colonial
territories and territories under alien subjugation,
I. Reaffirms the right of all peoples, notably of
those mentioned i11 General Assembly resolution 2787
(XXVI), to self-determination, freedom and independence, as well as the legitimacy of their struggle for
liberation from colonial and alien domination and
foreign subjugation by all available means consistent
with the Charter and the resolutions of the United
Nations;
2. Strongly condemns all those Governments, particularly the Governments of Portugal and South Africa,
which persistently refuse to implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and other pertinent resolutions;
3. Strongly condemns the policies of those States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
and other Powers which assist Portugal and other
racist regimes in Africa and elsewhere in their suppression of peoples' aspirations for, and enjoyment of,
human rights;
4. Decides to examine concrete wavs and means of
extending maximum humanitarian and material assistance to the peoples of the liberated areas, colonial
territories and territories under alien subjugation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session, indicating the present scope and nature of
assistance being provided to colonial countries and
peoples, as well as those in the liberated areas, from
relevant existing voluntary funds and other forms of
assistance by relevant organs of the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, regional intergovernmental organizations and relevant non-governmental organizations after
consultation with the Council Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, in order to assist in the
examination of areas and of ways and means of further
promoting humanitarian and material assistance, account being taken of the need for co-ordination;
6. Invites the aforementioned organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in the implementation of paragraph 5 above.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

2956 (XXVII). Report of the United Nations
Iliµ-h Conuuiia;;.ioner for Refuµ-res
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the tTnited Nations

High Commissioner for Refugees concerning his current
activities 9 and having heard his statement, 10
Commending the results obtained by the High Commissioner in the accomplishment of his humanit:1rian
task of providing internation::il protection t(1 refugees
with111 his mandate and promoting permanent solutions
to their problems,
Noting with appreciation the manner in which the
High Commissioner has, at the request of the SecretaryGeneral and in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly, co-ordinated, or participated in, essential
humanitarian actions undertaken by the organiz:1tion,
in the United Nations system,
Recognizing the importance of voluntary repatriation
as a permanent solution to the refugee problem and
the useful role that United Nations bodies and nongovernmental agencies have been playing in racilitating
the rehabilitation of groups of refugees who have voluntarily returned to their countries of origin.
Considering the increasing and fruitful en-operation
between the High Commissioner and other member·,
of the United Nations svstem in the field of rural settkment, education and training of refugees, particularly
in Africa, which results in better co-ordination of action
and greater efficiency,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
assistance programme and the substantial increase in
some of those contributions,
Commending the growing number of accessions to
the Convention relating to the Status of Rcfuµees of
195 l1 1 and the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967, 1 ~
1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their humanitarian task;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
participate, at the invitation of the Secretary-General,
in those humanitarian endeavours of the United Nations for which his Office has particular expertise and
experience;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to pursue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems of
refugees who are his concern through \'O!untary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or res:'ttlcment in other countries;
4. Requests the High Commissioner tll continue to
provide international protection and assistance tn refugees who are his concern, in accordance with the
r;levant resolutions of the General Assemblv and the
directives of the Executive Committee of - the High
Commissioner's Programme;
5. Urges Governments to continue to lend their support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian action
by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection;
!l Ibid.,
Twc1111·-.1·c1·e11tli
Scs.,ion, S11pr•lc111(·111 Xo.
12
(A/8712) and S11ppleme11t No. 12A (A/87J21Add.1).
10 Ibid., Twenty-seventh s~ssion, Third Commitfre, 1954th
meeting.
11 United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. I 89, No. 2545, p. 137.
12 lbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
