General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

56

2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve the
prohibition of all nuclear-weapon-test explosions by all
States for all time is a matter of the greatest urgency and
highest priority;
3. Expresses the conviction that such a treaty constitutes
a vital element for the success of efforts to halt and reverse
the nuclear-arms race and the qll1llitative improvement of
nuclear weapons and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries;
4. Calls upon the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States to resume their negotiations and to exert their best
efforts to bring them to an early successful conclusion and
invites them to prepare a report on the state of negotiations
in good time for submission to the General Assembly at its
second special session devoted to disarmament;
5. Reiterates its conviction that the Committee on Disarmament has an indispensable role in the negotiation of a
treaty prohibiting nuclear testing;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to take the
necessary steps, including the establishment of a working
group, to initiate substantive negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty as a matter of the highest priority at the
beginning of its session in 1982;
7. Also requests the Committee on Disarmament to determine, in the context of its negotiations on such a treaty,
the institutional and administrative arrangements necessary
for establishing, testing and operating an international
seismic monitoring network and an effective verification
system;
8. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament to
exert all efforts in order that the draft of such a treaty may
be submitted to the General Assembly at the earliest possible
date;
9. Urges all members of the Committee on Disarmament, in particular the nuclear-weapon States, to co-operate
with the Committee in fulfilling its mandate;
10. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to report
on progress to the General AssemblY. at its second special
session devoted to disarmament and at its thirty-seventh
session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item relating to the implementation
of the present resolution.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/86. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/76 B of 11 December 1979
and 35/146 A of 12 December 1980,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa14 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first
ordinary session, which was held at Cairo from 17 to 21
July 1964,
Recalling that, in its resolution 33/63 of 14 December
1978, it vigorously condemned any attempt by South Africa
to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into
the continent and demanded that South Africa refrain forth74 Official Records of the General Assembly,

nexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

Twentieth Session, An-

with from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent
of Africa or elsewhere,
Alarmed by the content and growing sophistication of
South Africa's military and nuclear programme,
Alarmed also at the fact that South Africa's nuclear programme has enabled it to acquire nuclear-weapon capability
enhanced by the continued support and collaboration which
certain Western countries and Israel have given to it,
Noting with grave concern that South Africa's capacity
to produce nuclear weapons has been established, inter alia,
by the content of its nuclear programme, as well as by the
report of the Secretary-General on South Africa's plan and
capability in the nuclear field 15 following the reported detonation by that country of a nuclear device on 22 September
1979, and that it might indeed have acquired nuclear
weapons,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective, 16 as well as the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 4 73 ( 1980), 17
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of
9 September 1980, 15 as well as his report of 3 September
1981, 18 submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
35/146 A on the nuclear capability of South Africa,
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comprehensive safeguards
agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency
with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials
from peaceful uses to the manufacture of nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices.
Gravely concerned that South Africa, in flagrant violation
of the principles of international law and the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, has continued
its military attacks against independent States of southern
Africa, in particular Angola, and has increased its acts of
subversion aimed at destabilizing those States,
Equally concerned that the acquisition of military equipment and nuclear-weapon capability by the racist regime of
South Africa, with its abhorrent system of apartheid and
its record of violence and aggression, poses a serious danger
to international peace and security,
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council should
take appropriate effective steps to prevent the frustration of
the decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 19
Expressing its indignation at the fact that some Western
countries, by a ready recourse to the use of the veto, have
continually frustrated every effort at the United Nations to
deal with the question of South Africa,
1. Deplores the massive build-up of South Africa's
military machine, including its frenzied acquisition of a
nuclear-weapon capability for repressive and aggressive
purposes and as an instrument of blackmail;
2. Reaffirms that the racist regime's plans and capability
in the nuclear field constitute a very grave danger to international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardize
the security of African States and increase the danger of the
proliferation of nuclear weapons;

" A/35/402 and Corr. I.
16
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
17
Ibid .. document S/14167.
1
• A/36/430.
19
Resolution S-1012, para. 63 (c),

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Requests the Security Council to intensify its efforts
to prohibit all forms of co-operation and collaboration with
the racist regime of South Africa in the nuclear field and,
in particular, to institute effective enforcement action
against that regime so as to prevent it from endangering
international peace and security through its acquisition of
nuclear weapons;
4. Calls upon all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to terminate forthwith all military and nuclear
collaboration with the racist regime, including the provision
to it of such related materials as computers, electronic equipment and corresponding technology;
5. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
6. Requests·the Secretary-General to continue to follow
closely South Africa's evolution in the nuclear field and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa' ' .
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
B
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,

Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa 14 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at its first
ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November
1961, 32/81 of 12 December 1977, 33/63 of 14 December
1978, 34/76 A of 11 December 1979 and 35/146 B of 12
December 1980, in which it called upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the
continental African States, Madagascar and other islands
surroupding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously
condemned any attempt by South Africa to introduce in any
way "Vhatsoever nuclear weapons into the con~inent and
demanded that South Africa refrain forthwith from conducting any nuclear explosion in the continent of Africa or
elsewhere,
.Reaffirming that the nuclear programme of the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave danger to
international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardizes the security of African States,
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comprehensive safeguards
agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency
wfth a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials
from peaceful uses to the manufacture of nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the
question of South Africa on ways and means of making the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective, 16 in particular its recommendation that all forms of
nuclear collaboration with South Africa should cease, and
the report of the International Conference on Sanctions
against South Africa, held at Paris from 20 to 27 May
1981, 20
Gravely concerned over the possibility that South Africa
has acquired nuclear weapons,
w A/CONF.107/8.

57
-------------

Convinced that the acquisition of such weapons by South
Africa would endanger the implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa as well as the maintenance of international peace and security,
Expressing its indignation that certain Western countrie~
and Israel have continued to collaborate with South Africa
in the nuclear field despite the risk of proliferation of nuclear
weapons which the South African nuclear programme
represents,
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council should
take appropriate effective steps to prevent the frustration of
the decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 19
l . Once again reiterates its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the
continental African States, Madagascar and other islands
surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Reaffirms that the nuclear programme of the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave danger to
international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardizes the security of African States and increases the danger
of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
3. Condemns any form of nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the racist
regime of South Africa since such collaboration frustrates,
inter alia, the objective of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the Organization of African Unity to keep Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
4. Calls upon such States, corporations, institutions and
individuals, therefore, to terminate forthwith such military
and nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South
Africa, including the provision to it of such related materials
as computers, electronic equipment and corresponding
technology;
5. Requests the Security Council, in keeping with the
recommendation of its Committee established by resolution
421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa, to
prohibit all forms of co-operation and collaboration with the
racist regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
6. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the Organization of African Unity towards
the realization of its solemn Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Implementation of
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

'36/87.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
the region of the Middle East

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/71 of 10
December 1976, 32/82 of 12 December 1977, 33/64 of 14
December 1978, 34/77 of 11 December 1979 and 35/147
of 12 December 1980 on the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit General
Assembly resolution 35/147 to the Assembly at its second
