S/PV.7685

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7685th meeting

Tuesday, 3 May 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Health care in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-12476 (E)
*1612476*

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
formal meeting of the Council for the month of May, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Liu Jieyi, Permanent Representative of China, for his
service as President of the Council for the month of
April. I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Liu and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Health care in armed conflict
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Micronesia,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates and Vanuatu to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of
Médecins Sans Frontières.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
2/24

03/05/2016

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/380, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxemborg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, .
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2286 (2016).
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by welcoming
the presence of Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF). The ICRC and MSF are our
good partners, playing unique and vital roles in conflict
and disaster areas. Through their leaders here today, I
want to thank and commend all of their personnel for
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

their professionalism and dedication in serving people
in danger and distress across the world.
Last week, MSF’s head of mission in Aleppo
underscored the urgency and importance of efforts such
as resolution 2286 (2016), which has been adopted today.
“No corner is being spared”, he said. And he added:
“Aleppo is already a shell of what it once was; this most
recent assault appears determined to eliminate even
that”. He was reacting to an air strike, by all accounts
by the Government of Syria, that destroyed a hospital,
killing at least 20 people, including three children and
the area’s one and only pediatrician, Dr. Mohammed
Wassim Maas.
Yet this appalling act was only the latest wartime
assault on health care in Syria. Since the beginning
of the conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented more than 360 attacks on some 250 medical
facilities. More than 730 medical personnel have been
killed. Today, almost half of all medical facilities in
Syria are closed or only partially functioning. Millions
of Syrians lack life-saving health care.
A similarly pattern of systematic destruction of
health facilities is evident in Yemen. More than 600
medical facilities have closed because of damage
sustained in the conflict and shortages of supplies and
medical workers. Last year, the United Nations verified
59 attacks against 34 hospitals. In January this year,
coalition air strikes hit the Shiara hospital, which
serves around 120,000 people in Sa’dah governorate.
Following the attack, pregnant women were reportedly
forced to give birth in caves rather than risk travelling to
the hospital. And last October in Kunduz, Afghanistan,
a bombing by United States military destroyed another
MSF hospital and killed dozens as patients were
burned alive in their beds. These patterns are repeated
in other conflicts, including in Iraq and South Sudan,
where violence against health care is multiplying the
difficulties of already fragile health systems.
Such attacks must end. When so-called surgical
strikes end up hitting surgical wards, something is
deeply wrong. Explanations ring hollow to parents
burying their children and communities pushed closer
to collapse. All too often, there is no respect for the
sick and no sanctity for those who provide care. All too
often, attacks on health facilities and medical workers
are not just isolated or incidental battlefield fallout, but
rather the intended objective of the combatants. This
is shameful and inexcusable. In Syria, Government

S/PV.7685

forces systematically remove medical supplies from
humanitarian convoys. In Syria and elsewhere,
Governments impose cumbersome procedures that
restrict access to health care. This is strangulation by
red tape. It is violence by bureaucratic means rather
than force of arms, but it is just as devastating.
Let us be clear. Intentional and direct attacks on
hospitals are war crimes. Denying people access to
essential health care is a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. All State and non-State parties to
conflict are bound by a strict obligation to respect
and protect medical personnel, facilities and vehicles,
as well as the wounded and sick. Parties to conflict
must allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief, including
medical missions. These obligations are at the very
heart of international humanitarian law. The Council
and all Member States must do more than condemn
such attacks. They must use every ounce of influence
to press parties to respect their obligations. They must
press for perpetrators to be held fully accountable.
The resolution that the Council has just adopted
demonstrates the Council’s determination to strengthen
the protection of health care in armed conflict. For the
sake of humanity, I urge all Member States, parties to
conflict and other relevant actors to heed the Council’s
demands, facilitate humanitarian access, develop
domestic legal frameworks that protect health facilities
and medical workers, train armed forces so that they
understand their obligations, and prosecute those
responsible for such attacks and other violations.
The growing insecurity of medical services is part
of a broader trend of blatant disregard for international
law in armed conflict. Across the world, parties to
conflict are disregarding the most basic rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Every day, civilians are deliberately or indiscriminately
killed or injured. Densely populated towns and cities
are pummelled by air strikes and heavy shelling.
Millions of people have fled their homes into perilous
and uncertain futures. Impunity compounds the crime.
Last October, President Peter Maurer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and I issued
a joint statement calling on States to take urgent
action to uphold international law and address human
suffering. I repeat that call in the Chamber today. Even
wars have rules; it is time to uphold and enforce them.
No Government should stand by and watch the erosion

16-124763/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

03/05/2016

of safeguards for the protection of civilians in conflict.
The international community must never become numb
to flagrant abuses.

the greater the need for medical treatment, the more
difficult it is to obtain such treatment, because the few
places and persons that can help come under attack.

Affirming our common humanity will be a key
theme at the World Humanitarian Summit to be held
in Istanbul on 23 and 24 May, and it serves to highlight
the importance and timeliness of that first-of-itskind event. I encourage Member States to seize the
opportunity of the Summit to take concrete action to
uphold the norms that safeguard humankind. Our world
confronts disasters of staggering size and complexity.
One hundred and twenty-five million people need
humanitarian assistance, and at least 60 million people
have been forced to flee their homes or countries. The
World Humanitarian Summit is the moment to come
together to renew our commitment to preventing
and ending crisis and to show that we are steadfast
in reducing suffering and vulnerability. We need the
full engagement and commitment of all partners,
Governments and non-governmental organizations. We
can strengthen humanitarian response and fulfil that
duty to the world’s most vulnerable only by working
together. The success of the Summit is in your hands.

I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
to brief the Council on such an important issue. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his kind words
at the beginning of this meeting, as well as for our
good partnership and friendship throughout the year
as we confront challenges such as the one we are
discussing today.

Finally, I appeal to Member States to work with
greater intensity to find political solutions to end
bloodshed and suffering. As the skies over Aleppo and
other parts of Syria continue to be filled with barrel
bombs and artillery fire, we must all work relentlessly
to rescue the cessation of hostilities. That is crucial
for saving lives and for the credibility of the political
process and, indeed, once again, that of the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: A couple of months ago, I stood in
front of a four-story building — it was really more the
shell of a building, completely bombed out, burned out
and ripped apart, with steel cables sticking out from
the load-bearing walls and rubble all around. The
only indication that it had once been a hospital was a
surgical lamp, miraculously still attached to the ceiling
of the second floor. I was in Syria, but I could just as
well have been in Afghanistan, South Sudan, Yemen or
any other place.
It is a painful paradox that in times of greatest
need the availability of health care is at its lowest. In
war people are injured, malnourished and sick. Yet
4/24

The ICRC has found that 2,400 attacks against
patients and health personnel, facilities and transports
occurred in 11 conflict-affected countries over the
course of three years. That is more than two attacks
per day, every day, for three years. And we looked at
only 11 countries in our study. Last year, the World
Health Organization announced that 60 per cent of
health-care facilities in Syria had been damaged or
destroyed, while 25,000 people were being wounded
every month. Stephen O’Brien, Emergency Relief
Coordinator, has stated that, after a year of fighting
in Yemen, one quarter of the country’s health services
have been destroyed or shut down. In 2015, the ICRC
registered a 50 per cent increase in Afghanistan in the
number of incidents against health staff and facilities,
as compared with the previous year. That means one
incident every three days, without considering how
many incidents go unreported.
Not always, but far too often, such incidents,
attacks and destruction constitute outright violations of
international humanitarian law. It is no coincidence that
the very first Geneva Convention, in 1864, pertained to
the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and
sick — to be precise, the wounded and sick in armed
forces in the field. As wars and armed conflicts have
evolved from taking place in open battlefields to urban
areas, and from the use of pistols to mass shelling and
bombardment by air forces, the wounded and the sick
are no longer just those in uniform. The wounded and
the sick now include Ramish, who was 9 years old when
he stepped on a mine in Afghanistan. They include
Mathilde, who was raped by fighters while she was
harvesting her fields with her husband in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They include the wife of Khaled
in Syria, whom I met and who died during childbirth
because there was no midwife or doctor to atttend to
her. And they include all the nameless patients in the
hospital I mentioned at the beginning of my briefing.
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Those are just a few examples of the human beings,
and their stories, that the staff and volunteers of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement are confronted with
in the field, every day, around the world. They show
the impact of war on people but, more important, they
show that medical treatment and health care at large
are crucial in time of war. International humanitarian
law therefore specifically protects medical personnel,
facilities and transports precisely because they are
indispensable in time of war. Not doing so risks
multiplying the impact on health systems, which in turn
risk unravelling, with an impact far beyond the region
concerned and imposing a burden on future generations.
Attacking a hospital, threatening a doctor, coercing
a nurse to give preferential treatment to armed fighters,
hijacking ambulances, using patients as human
shields — such acts are not collateral damage, they are
not sad realities that we have to get used to. They are
abominations to fight and trends to roll back.
The direct effects on health-care facilities,
personnel and transports are grave, yet the indirect
effects go even deeper. When a hospital run by Médecins
Sans Frontières (MSF) in Yemen’s Sa’ada province was
destroyed in October 2015, it meant that 200,000 people
instantly lost access to vital medical care. Five years
into the war in Syria, the entire city of Rastan has one
dentist left, for 120,000 people. Today the reality in too
many war-torn countries is that if you do not die from
shelling or fighting, you die because there is no dialysis
equipment, no diabetes medicine, no antibiotics and no
heart disease treatment. Death rates by communicable
and non-communicable diseases often surpass death
rates by weapons. That, for us as humanitarians,
is an indicator that we are not confronted with mere
temporary disruptions but with system disintegration.
It is not just a hospital or a doctor affected; entire health
systems unravel under the attacks on health facilities
and personnel. The medical sector, alongside water,
power and education infrastructure, is often the first in
line to collapse under the cumulative impact of warfare,
particularly in urban areas, when heavy explosive
weapons are used. Where a lot of people live closely
together and depend on infrastructure and public
services that are all intertwined, the effects of attacks
and destruction are greatest.
The ICRC, in a recent study, has summarized its
experience with the successive disintegration of urban
services for people in today’s conflicts. What we see
from the study is that humanitarian assistance is always

S/PV.7685

insufficient to cope with the progressive dismantling
of social services over time. What is needed is a
fundamental change of behaviour in warfare. The
humanitarian consequences of the cumulative impact
that results when essential infrastructure like hospitals
is annihilated must be taken into account when
balancing military necessity against the protection of
civilians, in line with the provisions of international
humanitarian law.
It is not true that the guiding principles of the
conduct of hostilities in warfare are wrong or outdated.
Rather, they need to be interpreted differently in
today’s environment. Much more weight has to be
given to the impact on civilians and their protection
in order to counter the decade-long trend in which
civilians have borne the brunt of armed conflict or
even become the very objective of attacks. Beyond the
immediate, when attacks and the destruction of health
infrastructure occur, efforts to reduce child mortality,
improve maternal health and fight against diseases,
such as polio, are wiped out in a matter of seconds.
Rebuilding what has been destroyed will take years,
if not decades. International humanitarian law and
humanitarian action play a critical role as guarantors
for development progress during violence and conflicts.
If they are violated, that function unravels, and healthcare services are particularly vulnerable and exposed.
I want to commend the Council for adopting
resolution 2286 (2016) today. I know from my own
experiences at the Organization that every comma
actually has carefully been considered and negotiated,
and the result is strong. In clear language, the Council
has underlined the importance of international
humanitarian law and called on States and all parties
to armed conflict to comply with their obligations and
develop effective measures to protect people’s lives by
preventing and addressing violence against medical
personnel, facilities, transport and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties. The
resolution marks a momentous step in the international
community’s effort to draw attention to a problem
that we otherwise risk getting used to through the
sheer frequency of its occurrence. We have not yet
been desensitized by such attacks because we are
still outraged after every one. But after outrage must
come action, not complacency. Therefore, while the
resolution is an important step, it must mark not the end
of a political process but the beginning of a practical
effort. I ask the Council to build on the momentum of

16-124765/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the resolution. States and non-State armed groups must
respect their obligations under international law.
Everyone on the Council knows that the ICRC as
an inherently pragmatic institution. We recognize the
dilemmas that exist in times of war, and we recognize
the difficult balance between, once again, military
necessity and humanitarian imperative, between
principles and pragmatism, between short- and longterm concerns, and between our role as advocates for
victims and as interlocutors of parties to conflicts
to mitigate the effects of warfare on civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We are committed to principled
pragmatism. Norms and accountability for such norms
are an important side of the medal. Condemnations are
first and foremost political, not humanitarian acts. As
humanitarians, we engage to change behaviours and
prevent violations of international humanitarian law,
thereby protecting people.
As members of the Council know, we engage with
everyone who can make a difference, and the first in
line are medical practitioners themselves. Therefore,
together with the World Medical Association, the
International Committee of Military Medicine, the
International Council of Nurses, the International
Pharmaceutical Federation, the International Federation
of Medical Students Associations and the World
Confederation for Physical Therapy, we have drawn up
a document entitled “Ethical principles of health care in
times of armed conflict and other emergencies”. Those
organizations today represent 30 million health-care
professionals from the civilian and military realms,
who now have a practical tool to guide them in their
daily work.
Several members of the Council already know firsthand how we work because we have built jointly with
them a constructive relationship of deep operational
engagement, feedback, dialogue and corrective
measures with regard to the conduct of hostilities. I am
here today not to cry outrage, but to offer the ICRC’s
help and constructive engagement to move out of the
deep contemporary crisis of health systems in armed
conflicts. I would like to propose to the Council five
work streams to ensure that the resolution that was
adopted today is not only text but also a spirit that is
respected in the middle of war.
First, we should align domestic legislation
and encourage other States to follow suit, in line
with obligations under international law and with
6/24

03/05/2016

ethical principles of the medical sector. Secondly,
military personnel should be trained to minimize
disruptions to health-care services, while safeguarding
legitimate security concerns. Thirdly, local healthcare organizations should be supported to maintain
minimum service through specific and tailor-made
solutions. Fourthly, the legal protection for patients and
health-care workers should be improved by ensuring
the proper use of protective emblems, enhancing legal
protection for medical ethics and addressing violations.
And fifthly, we must ensure that every weapons transfer
is done with an assurance to respect international
humanitarian and targeted trainings that focus on the
protection of medical personnel and facilities.
As an organization working on the front lines of
conflicts, we take resolution 2286 (2016) as a critically
important political signal and as an encouragement
to bear fruit on the ground. As a neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian actor, we are aware
that ours cannot be the task to use the resolution, or
international humanitarian law in general, as part of a
public argument indicting counterparts for violations
of norms. Front-line negotiations will need skilled
negotiators seeking the consent of parties in order to
create an environment in which the key objectives of
the resolution can be concretized and implemented
through practical agreements amongst belligerents. We
need to be cognizant of the tension between the political
guidance that the Council is offering today on such an
important issue and the practical challenges in contexts
of war that frame the work of humanitarian actors on
the ground. That is an additional reason, should we
need one, that a regular exchange between the Council
and front-line organizations like MSF and the ICRC are
of such critical importance.
I told the Council about the destroyed hospital that
I saw in Syria a few months ago. What I did not say is
that since its destruction, doctors, nurses and volunteers
continue to work in the basement of the hospital. Once
a space to stock materials, it has been transformed into
a micro-version of a hospital. In one former storage
room, premature babies lie in a few generator-powered
incubators that were not demolished by shelling. The
hospital may be all but destroyed, but humanity still
lives on.
Humanity in war is what we demand. As we said
earlier, at the ICRC even wars have limits because
wars without limits are wars without ends. Health-care
personnel and facilities are the outer frontier of those
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

limits. Today, with the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the Council has reaffirmed the relevance of
the laws of war and the basic humanitarian consensus
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions. To demand that
they be respected through practical measures is the
most decisive next step the Council can take to ensure
that humanity in war is a reality and not just an ideal.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Maurer
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Liu.
Ms. Liu: Wednesday’s air strikes obliterated
Al-Quds Hospital in Aleppo. They blew apart at least
55 men, women and children. An air strike killed
one of the last remaining paediatricians in the city: a
murderous air strike.
There were almost 300 air strikes in Aleppo
over the past 10 days. Civilians, often in crowds,
were repeatedly struck. What are individuals in wars
today — expendable commodities, dead or alive?
Patients and doctors have become legitimate targets.
Women, children, the sick, the wounded and their
caregivers are condemned to death. Stop those attacks.
I went to Kunduz, Afghanistan, following the
United States attack on our trauma centre on 3 October
2015. One of the survivors, a Médecins Sans Frontières
(MSF) nurse whose left arm was blown off during the
relentless air strike, told me something that haunts me
daily. He said that, when fighting erupted in Kunduz,
MSF staff were told that its trauma centre was a safe
place. Over and over again, we said that. He told me,
“We believed you, but did you know that we would
be bombed?”
I told him that until 3 October I truly believed that the
hospital was a safe place. I cannot say that anymore
about any medical facilities on the front lines today.
In Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, South
Sudan, the Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen hospitals
are routinely bombed, raided, looted or burned to the
ground. Medical personnel are threatened. Patients
are shot in their beds. Broad attacks on communities
and precise attacks on health facilities are described
as mistakes, are denied outright or are simply met
with silence. In reality, they amount to massive,
indiscriminate and disproportionate civilian targeting
in urban settings and, in the worst cases, they are acts
of terror. The effects of attacks against health facilities

S/PV.7685

go far beyond those immediately killed and injured.
They serve to demolish routine and life-saving health
care for all. They make life impossible, ull stop.
On 26 October 2015, a Saudi-led coalition air strike
hit an MSF hospital in the Haydan district in northern
Yemen, leaving at least 200,000 people without
life-saving care. It was the first of three MSF facilities
partially or completely destroyed in Yemen during a
period of three months.
Attacks on MSF facilities provide only a glimpse
into the brutality of war. Attacks on other hospitals
and clinics, as well as schools, markets and houses of
worship, are routine. Local health workers bear the brunt
of those abuses. We are at a deadly impasse. We can
no longer assume that fully functioning hospitals — in
which patients are fighting for their lives — are out of
bounds. Hospitals and patients have been dragged onto
the battlefield.
In Jasin, a town in southern Syria, citizens have
protested in front of a hospital to prevent its reopening.
They know what happens to functioning hospitals. We
are facing an epidemic of attacks on health facilities,
impeding our ability to do our core work. To date,
our calls for independent investigations have gone
unheeded. Accountability begins with independent
and impartial fact-finding. Perpetrators cannot be
investigators, judges or juries.
Make no mistake: we will relentlessly denounce
attacks on health care. We will speak out loudly and
with force about what we witness in the field. Medicine
must not be a deadly occupation. Patients must not be
attacked or slaughtered in their beds. As physicians,
we take an oath when we join the medical profession
to treat everybody, every individual, regardless of who
they are and regardless of their religion, their race
or on which side they may fight — even if they are
wounded combatants or if they are labelled as criminals
or terrorists.
Hospitals must not be attacked or forcibly entered
by armed personnel, including to search for and capture
patients. To turn our backs on those basic principles
is to turn our backs on the foundation of medical
ethics. Medical ethics cannot be buried by war. The
neutrality of wartime medical care cannot be stamped
out by State sovereignty or domestic law, especially
in an age of counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency
characterized by shifting alliances and murky rules

16-124767/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of engagement. While the nature of warfare may have
changed, the rules of war have not.
The Council is charged with protecting peace and
security. Yet four of the five permanent members of
the Council have, in varying degrees, been associated
with coalitions responsible for attacks on health-care
structures during the past year. Those include the
NATO-led coalition in Afghanistan, the Saudi-led
coalition in Yemen and the Russian-backed, Syrianled coalition. The Council therefore must live up to its
extraordinary responsibilities and set an example for all
States. I repeat: stop those attacks.
The discussion here today cannot amount to
empty rhetoric. Resolution 2286 (2016) cannot end up
like so many others, including those passed on Syria
over the last five years, which have been routinely
violated with impunity.
Health care in Syria is systematically targeted and
besieged areas are cynically denied medical care. I
exhort the Council to uphold its obligations, ensure the
protection of the impartial provision of health care in
conflict, and support health workers in fulfilling their
obligations to treat every sick and wounded person
without discrimination. Dr. Maas, the paediatrician
murdered in Aleppo last week, was killed for saving
lives. Today, we remember his humanity and bravery,
which he shared with so many patients, nurses, doctors,
communities and MSF staff caught up in areas of
conflict. For their sake, the Council must translate this
resolution into action. It must recommit unambiguously
to the norms that govern the conduct of war. This
resolution must lead to all States and non-State actors
stopping the carnage.
Council members must also pressure their allies to
end attacks on health care and populations in conflict
areas. We will not leave patients behind, and we will not
be silent. Seeking or providing health care must not be
a death sentence. The Security Council will be judged
not on its words today, but on its actions. The Council’s
work has only begun. I urge it to make resolution 2286
(2016) save lives.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Liu
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It is very difficult to be
the first speaker after having heard sobering stores
8/24

03/05/2016

and strong appeals from the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the International President of
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), but I will try my best.
My delegation is very proud to have worked with
other authors in the preparation of resolution 2286
(2016), which we adopted this morning: Egypt, New
Zealand, Spain and Uruguay. I also thank the many
Member States that have joined us as sponsors of the
resolution. I am very happy to note that there are 19
sponsors from the Asia-Pacific Group. Finally, I would
like to acknowledge the work of the Group of Friends
of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, led by
Switzerland, as well as the initiative taken by Uruguay
as President of the Security Council in the month of
January to hold an open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV. 7606).
The Geneva Conventions provide that medical
personnel and medical facilities shall be respected and
protected at all times. Therefore, they shall not be the
object of attack. There is no room for argument on this
point. Today’s resolution does not focus on any specific
conflict areas. However, I have to say that the situation
in Syria, in particular in Aleppo, vividly illustrates the
importance of this issue.
Despite this universally accepted legal principle,
medical personnel and medical facilities are exposed
to attacks in armed conflicts, and the situations are
getting worse. In its effort to tackle this question of
compliance with international humanitarian law, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2175 (2014), which
aims to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. However, as the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter
Maurer of the ICRC and Ms. Liu of MSF brought out in
detail, attacks against medical personnel and medical
facilities are considerably increasing. To add but one
example, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and UNICEF documented 125 incidents
affecting access to health care in Afghanistan in 2015,
which included 20 health workers killed, 43 injured and
66 abducted. That is more than double the number of
incidents in 2014, which was 59.
Facing this grave situation, we believed it
urgent and necessary to adopt a resolution focusing
exclusively on the protection of medical personnel and
medical facilities. I was very pleased to witness the
unanimous adoption of the resolution today. Resolution
2286 (2016) sends a strong message from the Council
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

condemning attacks on medical personnel and facilities
and demanding that all parties to armed conflict ensure
respect and protection for these personnel and facilities.
The next step is the implementation of the
resolution by the international community. All States
Members of the United Nations should demonstrate
their commitment to strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law. In this context, I would
like to see further deliberation on the comprehensive
mechanisms to encourage relevant parties to undertake
such compliance. Although this subject was discussed
intensively at the International Conference of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent in Geneva last December,
we failed to reach an agreement. I hope that viable
mechanisms for ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law could be established in the near
future through an inclusive process.
With resolution 2286 (2016), the Security Council
strongly urges States to develop effective measures
to prevent attacks against medical personnel through
the development of domestic legal frameworks. This,
I understand, is ICRC President Maurer’s numberone proposal. I believe that this approach would lead
to ending impunity and ensure accountability. In this
regard, I wish to share with the Council that Japan has
provided assistance to such countries as Myanmar,
Cambodia and Iraq, for the purposes of developing
domestic legal frameworks by sending experts and
conducting training programmes. The role of States with
influence on the ground is of particular importance for
the effective implementation of today’s resolution. The
role of the Secretary-General to alert the Council on
any obstructions or acts of violence is also important.
I wish to conclude by paying tribute to all the
humanitarian personnel who are working under very
serious circumstances of conflict and by stating
that Japan will continue to play an active role in the
area of humanitarian assistance and international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer,
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms Joanne Liu, International
President of Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), for their
briefings. I also want to pay tribute to the workers of the
ICRC and MSF and other humanitarian organizations
for the very difficult work that they do.

S/PV.7685

The adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) comes at a
time when health-care workers and facilities are, quite
literally, under fire in a number of current conflicts,
most of which are on the Security Council’s agenda. In
Afghanistan, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen, hospitals
and other medical facilities have been attacked by
parties to armed conflict. Health-care workers have
been killed and injured, kidnapped, harassed and
intimidated for carrying out their medical duties.
Urgently needed medical supplies have been
routinely blocked or removed from aid convoys by
protagonists who have sought to deny access to
health care in order to achieve military objectives.
This alarming trend shows no sign of abating as the
attacks on medical facilities in and around Aleppo
starkly illustrate. The consequences of such actions are
measured not only in the immediate loss of human life
but also in the longer-term disruption to health-care
systems that are often already severely overstretched.
The destruction of one hospital can affect the delivery
of health-care services to tens of thousands, if not
hundreds of thousands, of people. Such consequences
endure well beyond the end of hostilities.
The Council has spoken today with one voice to
deliver a firm response to this growing global problem.
We are shining a light on behaviour that is becoming
all too prevalent, but should not be happening. The law
is clear and so is our message. The wounded and sick,
medical personnel, facilities, transport and equipment
must be respected and protected. The delivery of medical
assistance must not be obstructed. It is that simple.
Resolution 2286 (2016) unequivocally condemns
attacks on health-care workers and health-care facilities.
It reaffirms the laws of armed conflict that recognize
the protected status of medical missions, the sick and
the wounded. It recalls key international humanitarian
law principles of distinction and precaution and the
prohibition against indiscriminate attacks. It stresses
the need for medical personnel to be able to uphold
their professional codes of ethics, including the duty
to provide impartial care. It demands that parties to
armed conflict facilitate safe and unimpeded passage
for medical personnel, their equipment, transport and
supplies to all in need. Let us be clear: those legal
requirements already exist. Some of them are among
the oldest rules of international humanitarian law. The
problem is one of respect and compliance.

16-124769/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

On the practical side, the resolution emphasises
the importance of education and training in applicable
international humanitarian law and its integration into
the practice of armed forces. It also stresses the need
to end impunity and urges States to take action to
ensure accountability.
As Mr. Maurer has pointed out, modern warfare,
as we are seeing played out in Syria and elsewhere,
makes it all the more important that international
humanitarian law be respected. We fully endorse the
call for principled pragmatism in its application.
Importantly, today’s resolution requests the
Secretary-General to brief the Council annually on the
implementation of the resolution. New Zealand hopes
to see the participation of relevant organizations and
civil society at those briefings.
As Ms. Liu has told us, our work today on this
issue is only just beginning. We expect her and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to hold us
to account.
Today’s resolution is also significant from a working
methods perspective. Five elected members cooperated
in developing the text. Close consultation with all
Council members and openness to negotiation enabled
its unanimous adoption. Key stakeholders, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Médecins Sans Frontiéres, were also closely engaged in
the process. We are grateful for their support.
Lastly, let me pay tribute to my Deputy, Mrs. Carolyn
Schwalger, and her team for their leadership on
this initiative.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for being with us today. I
say this very sincerely because I think that, among the
people in the Chamber, he is one of the ones who has
travelled the most and who has witnessed the abuses
that have been committed against hospitals and doctors
in different parts of the world. I therefore think it is
excellent that he is with us today.
I also thank the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. It was a pleasure to work
with him when he was an Ambassador at the United
Nations. It is also a pleasure to see how effectively he
leads that organization and that he fully appreciates
what it means to negotiate a Security Council resolution.
I also thank Ms. Joanne Liu for her impressive and
heartfelt briefing, which really touched us. In addition, I
10/24

03/05/2016

thank and pay tribute to our experts from the Permanent
Mission of Spain for their hard work leading up to the
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
In January 2015, a warplane dropped 13 cluster
bombs on a Médecins Sans Frontières hospital in
Frandala, which served 150 people at that time. Council
members may ask why I start by mentioning that
example. It is very simple: because my country had just
joined the Security Council and the news of that event
affected us very strongly. We have now completed two
thirds of our term in the Security Council. Throughout
that time there has not been a single day when there was
not an attack against doctors or hospitals in different
places around the world. The first news I read upon
waking up this morning was about an attack against
a hospital in Aleppo. That attack has already been
condemned by the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Such attacks are so frequent that, unfortunately,
we will wind up becoming used to them, and yet we
should have zero tolerance for them. There is no reason,
no circumstance, that can justify an attack against a
hospital. In any conflict situation, clinics and health
centres make their location known to combatants. Just
a few days ago I heard Stephen O’Brien say that, for
civilians in a conflict situation, the most dangerous
thing was to live near a medical centre (see S/PV.7682).
That is a sad truth, because hospitals often maintain
open channels of communication, including with
terrorists when necessary.
Some attacks are caused by technical mistakes or
human error. In those cases, the equipment, the training
and the rules of engagement need to be adapted so that
those kinds of mistakes can be avoided in the future.
However, other attacks are absolutely deliberate. That is
why the resolution calls for investigating incidents and
taking measures against the perpetrators. The Syrian
soldier who steals surgical equipment from a medical
convoy in broad daylight has to know that one day he
will face trial. Doctors in Aleppo today are forced to
work underground because they are aware that their
lives are hanging by a thread. We need to change that
situation, acknowledge the sacrifices they are making
and not be afraid to demand accountability from those
who are responsible.
The resolution envisions other aspects of medical
assistance in conflict that may not receive as much
attention in the media. We lack a lot of information.
There is no detailed picture of all the attacks that are
committed against doctors and hospitals around the
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

world. We all know, for example, that there have been
multiple air strikes against hospitals in various parts
of Yemen since the hostilities began more than year
ago. However, what is less known are the kidnappings
of the personnel of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which unfortunately occur more frequently
than we think, whether it be in Yemen and the rest of
the Middle East, Somalia or the Sahel. We also need to
make sure that we uphold the ban on punishing doctors
for simply fulfilling their mandate. I will explain a bit
more. As we heard earlier, the doctor of your enemy is
not your enemy.
In drafting this resolution we had the privilege of
getting to know better the specialized organizations
that are dedicated to providing medical assistance
in dangerous areas. They are idealistic, but they do
not expect miracles. We were also surprised by the
pragmatism of the two briefers. They only request
was that everyone comply with the rules of the game,
because even war has a minimum set of rules that need to
be respected. Today’s briefers are ready to do whatever
it takes. I noticed one very apposite phrase uttered
by Joanne Liu today that I think everyone probably
remembers, “We will not leave patients behind”.
Thank God for that statement and for everything that
it signifies.

S/PV.7685

case, it really describes very aptly the spirit that has
guided the negotiations on resolution 2286 (2016).
It involved a true team effort, and I am sure that the
actual implementation of this resolution will also be a
team effort.
Allow me at the very end to express personal
gratitude to my team, to Counsellor Alejandra del Río
Novo and Counsellor Mrs. Maria Palacios Pallacios,
who have worked for weeks behind the scenes in the
negotiations on this resolution. I would also like to
thank my Egyptian colleague, because I cannot imagine
a better way to start a presidency.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to express our satisfaction at the
presence of the Secretary-General in the Chamber.
More specifically, we acknowledge the presence of the
president of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the international president
of Médecins Sans Frontières, Ms. Joanne Liu. In their
individual briefings, they not only provided useful
perspectives but also eloquent accounts that spoke
volumes about the situation that we hope resolution
2286 (2016) will bring some influence to bear on.

That is why we welcome the fact that resolution
2286 (2016) enjoyed the sponsorhip of no less than 85
States. We interpret each one of those sponsorships
as silent support for the thousands of doctors, nurses,
ambulance drivers who, while we are meeting here,
are saving lives in the most difficult circumstances in
various corners of the planet. They certainly deserve the
moral and political recognition of the Security Council.
They also deserve that the Security Council review at
least once a year the measures taken to improve their
protection.

We must remember that the adoption of the
resolution by members of the Security Council and the
many delegations that co-sponsored it are also signs
of the commitment of States Members of the United
Nations to abide by their obligations and deliver on them.
However, we must also be mindful that many events, if
not the majority of them, that we are trying to address
through this resolution involve violations that have
been perpetrated by the armed forces of some Member
States of this Organization. We hope, therefore, that
this will not be just another empty exercise where we
make commitments that will then fall by the wayside.

In conclusion, Spain would like to thank the
members of the Council who have supported this
initiative — our travel companions — above all, Egypt,
Japan, New Zealand and Uruguay, which helped draft
the resolution, as well as the five other elected members
of the Council, who were the first to add their names
to the resolution. I would also like to thank the five
permanent members of the Council, which participated
actively in the negotiations and will play an essential
role in implementing the resolution. We often use
the term “constructive engagement”. Sometimes it
appears to have somewhat lost its meaning. In this

We are very concerned that both human rights and
international humanitarian law are being continuously
violated and ignored with total impunity in many
regions of the world. The current asymmetric conflicts,
involving many opposing parties, including non-State
actors, make it all the more necessary today for
humanitarian personnel, who carry out medical tasks
in war zones, to be protected. However, the deliberate
targeting of such personnel and their health facilities
has become a distinctive tragic aspect of the current
conflicts, as those personnel and facilities find
themselves becoming increasingly vulnerable.

16-1247611/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

As previous speakers have said, in the recent past
we have observed with alarm and concern the sinister
and growing trend of attacks against hospitals and
medical personnel, which is a scourge in those areas
ravaged by violence. Such attacks very often occur
within a framework of growing impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law. Thousands of
people are left defenceless, threatening the lives of
humanitarian personnel, who are performing medical
tasks with dedication and selflessness by providing
health services to populations trapped in conflict
areas and providing a glimpse of humanity amidst the
cruelties of war. The attacks and bombings against
medical facilities in South Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Yemen, Syria and other places, which have been
reported in the international news, demonstrate that
those attacks can occur in any part in the world that is
beset by war.
Respect for international law, which frames
international humanitarian law, is a guiding principle
for my country’s foreign policy. For Uruguay, attacks
and violence against medical facilities and medical
personnel in the context of conflict, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law, are
totally reprehensible and unacceptable. Those who are
responsible must be held accountable, sooner or later.
We believe that the Security Council and its members
have an important role to play and a moral and legal
responsibility to do everything in their power to ensure
that situations involving the violations of the most basic
human rights and international humanitarian law are
not repeated.
In that regard, and together with Egypt, Spain,
Japan and New Zealand, we engaged in an intense round
of consultations that culminated in the introduction of
this resolution, based on the conviction that the current
situation facing the international community requires
effective measures to prevent such unacceptable acts.
Many of us welcome the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), and we can only hope that it will be useful for
the protection and security of the organizations that
are providing medical and humanitarian assistance on
the ground.
I must, in conclusion, render homage to the
humanitarian personnel who are carrying out medical
tasks with great courage and total dedication. Many of
them have sacrificed their own lives to carry out their
work and to save the lives of many other human beings
trapped in those armed conflicts.
12/24

03/05/2016

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the Secretary-General, the president of the
International Committee for the Red Cross and the
international president of Médecins Sans Frontières
for their important briefings today. The Chamber
is far removed from the harrowing realities that
their presidents have just described and that their
organizations have sadly experienced at first hand. I pay
tribute to their bravery and to that of their colleagues.
It is vital that we hear from all of them on issues as
important as this.
The United Kingdom welcomes today’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) and the work of
Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Uruguay in
preparing it. Coming three weeks ahead of the World
Humanitarian Summit, it is a clear signal on the part of
the Council of the vital need for respect for international
humanitarian law, for the protection of civilians and for
accountability for those who fail to show that respect
or protection.
Medical facilities and personnel have clear
protection under humanitarian law. However, as
we have heard, it is sadly repeatedly necessary to
demand compliance with those obligations, as we are
doing through today’s resolution. Respect for medical
neutrality is a tradition that has existed for hundreds of
years, but it is slowly unravelling before our very eyes.
The red cross or crescent symbol that adorns a hospital
or ambulance has become a target, whether in Syria,
Yemen, South Sudan or Afghanistan. A hospital must
be a safe place, not a target. An ambulance must be a
sign of hope, not a target. A doctor or nurse must be a
ray of light, not a target. The doctors of Aleppo know
that all too well, as the Secretary-General himself
reminded us and as is shown by the reports today of yet
another attack on a hospital there.
In a joint letter issued last week, seven Syrian
doctors described the bombing of the Al-Quds hospital,
which killed at least 50 people and injured 60 more.
It was the third such attack on the hospital since the
conflict began. “The city is bleeding”, they wrote. They
went on to say that their friends, the White Helmets,
continue to pull bodies out from the rubble, that those
attacking Aleppo have no regard for the sanctity of life
or humanity and that soon there will be no medical
professionals at all.
In a war seemingly without end and without rules
or limits, it is sometimes hard to be shocked. But when
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

a city — no, an entire country — is bleeding, it is
sickening to see doctors and nurses, the people who can
staunch that bleeding, being killed and maimed. In that
attack, a leading Syrian paediatrician, Dr. Muhammed
Wassim Maas, was killed. To those who knew him, he
was the bravest and kindest of souls. His devotion to
treating the war’s youngest victims was unparalleled.
By day he worked in the children’s hospital; at night
he responded to emergencies at the Al-Quds hospital.
As his friend Dr. Hatem put it so poignantly on
Facebook this week, he was killed for saving lives. Dr.
Maas should have been supported and protected, even
celebrated. Instead, he was killed while trying to save
others. And his story is just one of hundreds to be found
in Syria.
Over the past five years, the civil-society group
Physicians for Human Rights has recorded 730 killings
and 359 attacks on medical facilities. That are three
medical workers killed every week and a medical
facility attacked every five days. At the same time,
we have seen medical equipment and surgical supplies
diverted away from opposition areas. In February, the
Syrian regime denied entry to besieged areas to 80,000
medical items, and to 19,000 in March. The regime is
also stopping urgent medical evacuations from those
areas. The consequences are horrifying: two children
injured in a landmine explosion in Bukkin died after
being denied the evacuation they desperately needed.
Taken together, that amounts to nothing less than a
systematic campaign against medical workers and the
entire health-care system in Syria. We all know who
is responsible. The Al-Assad regime has killed Syrian
civilians time and again. Time and again, it has killed
medical workers trying to save those civilians. Time and
again, it has flouted its obligations under international
humanitarian law. If Russia genuinely believes in the
commitment that we have all just made to protecting
medical workers, it must bring its full influence to bear
to restrain the Al-Assad regime and bring its merciless
attacks to an end.
Today’s resolution sends the important message
that the Council will not tolerate attacks on any
medical workers or their facilities. We now have to
live up to the standards that we have just committed
to. Let us start today. The Council has a responsibility
to respond to horrific attacks such as the one on the
Al-Quds hospital that took the life of Dr. Maas and so
many others. Aleppo is burning, and its civilians are
being killed. We therefore request that the Secretary-

S/PV.7685

General give an urgent, open briefing in this Chamber
on the situation there. We look to you, Mr. President,
and to the Secretariat, to convene such a briefing as a
top priority.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Since this is the first
public meeting to be held under your presidency, Sir, I
would first like to congratulate you and the delegation
of Egypt on your assumption of the presidency and your
convening of today’s very timely briefing on the critical
issue of the protection of civilians, with particular
emphasis on medical and humanitarian personnel,
hospitals and other medical facilities. I would also
like to welcome and thank the Secretary-General, who
was here earlier, as well as Ambassador Peter Maurer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Ms. Joanne Liu of Médecins Sans Frontières — the
organization that is present in so many of the theatres
that we have heard about this morning and that is doing
what we would like to see many more doing, not just
the 35,000 who are its members, as Ms. Liu pointed out
this morning.
Angola is honoured to be a sponsor, along with
other States, of resolution 2286 (2016), which we just
adopted today.
Attacks on medical and humanitarian personnel
engaged in medical duties and on their means of
transport and equipment, as well as on hospitals and
other medical facilities, are flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law as enshrined in the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols
of 1977 and 2005, as well as the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
and its Optional Protocol. Today’s resolution also
represents a meaningful contribution to making the
parties to conflicts aware of the gravity of such attacks
and making their perpetrators accountable for their
criminal deeds, which are in absolute contravention of
international law. At the same time, the resolution also
strengthens the United Nations agenda on the protection
of civilians.
Since the Security Council’s adoption of its first
resolution on the protection of civilians (resolution
1265 (1999)), it has emphasized the importance of
protecting humanitarian and health-care personnel
in various country-specific and thematic resolutions.
However, despite the robust normative framework
established by the Council, the General Assembly
and other international bodies, and the strengthening

16-1247613/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of human rights mandates in peacekeeping missions,
a great deficit remains in the protection of civilians
in situations of rampant conflict. Today’s adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) helps to fill that gap. Now is time
to proceed with the implementation of the resolution.
We are deeply concerned by reports highlighting
attacks on health-care workers and medical facilities
in conflict zones. Shootings, kidnappings, physical
violence and aerial bombardments are a part of daily life
in countries such as Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Pakistan,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Somalia
and Yemen, among others. This year the number of
attacks on medical facilities, as well as the number of
deceased, increase daily in a rampage of irrationality.
Ms. Joanne Liu and Mr. Peter Maurer have shared
with the Council sobering stories of the prevailing
reality in a number of conflict zones. The appeal they
have launched and presented to the Council should be,
without a doubt, enough for us to heed and respond
positively. The recent death in Aleppo of Dr. Wassim
Maas, a humanitarian hero and the last paediatrician
in the city who, with his bare hands, struggled to give
some hope to the children of the martyrized city, bears
witness to that.
In conclusion, we condemn all attacks on healthcare and humanitarian workers and facilities for their
disadvantageous impact on people in need, who have
their access to health care and humanitarian assistance
totally obliterated. We call on all parties to armed
conflicts to fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
to ensure the respect and protection of all medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as hospitals and other
medical facilities. We urge parties to the conflict to
facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded passage for medical
and humanitarian workers and their access to all people
in need of protection and assistance. That would be an
adequate response to the appeal we heard this morning
in the Council.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to
congratulate Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
for the month of May.
It was our honour to co-sponsor resolution 2286
(2016), which was just adopted. We are grateful to the
delegations of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay for their timely initiative, as well as for taking
on board Ukraine’s proposals.
14/24

03/05/2016

We thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
contribution to our debate. However, our main thanks
should go to today’s briefers. We highly appreciate the
work their staff has been doing for years.
Although the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has become an increasingly complex challenge,
this complexity must not in any way dissuade us from
our collective efforts to address the issue. Armed
conflicts inflict all kinds of hardship and suffering
on civilians. It is our deeply held conviction that all
sides in conflicts have both a legal and a fundamental
moral obligation to provide all possible medical care
for the sick and injured, as well as to protect medical
personnel, who often put themselves in harm’s way to
save lives.
Yet, in today’s conflicts hospitals are increasingly
becoming common targets. When medical facilities
come under shelling or bombs, it is an unspeakable
tragedy. When they are attacked on purpose, it is an
example of abhorrent barbarism that has to be combatted
in our presumably civilized times. What is really
horrific is that the number of such instances continues
to grow. We are seeing it happen in Afghanistan, Yemen
and elsewhere. Especially worrying is the situation in
Syria, where there have been dozens, if not hundreds,
of attacks against medical facilities. In the past six
months that trend has only gotten worse.
Last week’s attacks on the Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo reminded us of the enormous difficulties
and dangers that health workers face every day. Two
doctors, including the only paediatrician in the city,
three medical support staff and dozens of patients,
among them children, lost their lives in this horrific
incident. It cannot be left without reflection. Therefore,
we fully support the request just made by the delegation
of the United Kingdom for a briefing on Aleppo. It
speaks volumes about the horrendous humanitarian
situation in Syria and the complete disregard for all
relevant norms of international humanitarian law.
Attacks on medical facilities are a blatant violation
of international law. Strict and long-established norms
of international law provide for an absolute inviolability
of medical facilities and workers in conflict zones.
Physicians for Human Rights, a non-governmental
organization that documents and advocates against
mass atrocities and severe human rights violations
around the world, reported 16 attacks on Syrian
hospitals in October 2015 alone. According to that
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

organization’s data, since 2011 at least 610 medical
personnel have been killed in Syria. Furthermore, 183
medical facilities in that country have been the targets
of military attacks on 233 occasions.
The World Health Organization reports that more
than 99 health facilities, including hospitals and clinics,
have been damaged or destroyed in Yemen. Attacks
on health facilities and personnel in Afghanistan
have risen 50 per cent in the past year, as per data of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
reports that in 2015, health workers and institutions in
this country were subjected to arbitrary searches by
Government forces, threats from armed groups, looting
and abductions.
It is of utmost importance that those responsible for
such war crimes be held accountable. Ukraine calls on
all States to cooperate fully with existing international
criminal justice institutions, including the International
Criminal Court, to combat impunity and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law.
The terrible statistics I have just mentioned make
the resolution adopted today all the more topical. The
Security Council is uniquely positioned to send a
strong message concerning this problem. That is why
we hope that resolution 2286 (2016) will serve as a clear
political signal to all parties concerned that the Security
Council will remain extremely vigilant on the issue of
the protection of humanitarian, medical and health-care
workers and medical facilities in situations of armed
conflict. As Ms. Liu so emotionally put it only moments
ago, we should make this resolution save lives.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Since this is the first official meeting of the
Security Council in May, we would like to start by
thanking the delegation of China for its skilful and
effective leadership as President during the month of
April. We would also like to congratulate our Egyptian
colleagues on the start of their presidency, and wish
them every success this month.
We welcome the initiative to convene this meeting
and wish to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Mr. Peter Maurer, and the International President of
Médecins Sans Frontières, Ms. Joanne Liu, for their
participation in this meeting and their contribution to
this discussion.

S/PV.7685

Protecting humanitarian personnel, including
medical personnel, is one of the most important aspects
of the whole issue of protecting civilians. The provision
of medical assistance to those affected by armed
conflict has become not only one of the most sorely
needed activities, but also one of the most dangerous.
The Security Council has more than once called on
parties to armed conflict to comply strictly with the
provisions of international humanitarian law and to
take all necessary steps to ensure the security of those
who provide humanitarian and medical assistance
to affected populations. This idea is also invoked in
resolution 2286 (2016), which we have just adopted.
There is no doubt that we need to consider this issue
in the broader context of conflict resolution and of the
tasks facing the Security Council in this area.
In examining the issue of the security of medical
facilities and personnel, all United Nations bodies,
including, of course, the Security Council, must be
guided by fully verified, reliable information. In this
context, it is particularly important that the reports of
the Secretary-General to be submitted in accordance
with the resolution we have just adopted include only
verified and reliable information. It is unacceptable
that unverified reports of attacks against hospitals
taken from unreliable sources are fed to the media
and then used for political pressure for short-term
objectives. In particular, we are not able to corroborate
the accusations levelled against the Russian air force of
violations of international humanitarian law in Syria.
The key responsibility for protecting humanitarian
personnel and other individuals entitled to special
protection under the Geneva Convention of 1949 lies
with the parties to armed conflict, which have the
primary responsibility for ensuring the protection of the
civilian population. However, we occasionally witness
brutal disregard for the norms of international law,
which stipulate that hospitals that provide assistance to
those who are suffering can under no circumstances be
the targets of attacks. To this can be added the dispiriting
numbers of murders, attacks and abductions against
medical workers carried out by terrorist organizations,
especially the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
What is particularly unacceptable is when medical
personnel suffer at the hands of those who are supposed
to protect them. Late last year, for example, owing to the
indiscriminate use of force, Médecins Sans Frontières
hospitals were damaged in different cities of Yemen. In
October 2015, there was an air strike against a Médecins

16-1247615/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Sans Frontières hospital in Kunduz, in Afghanistan,
and similar attacks have occurred in other countries.
So far we have not been able to significantly
improve the security of humanitarian and medical
personnel, including doctors, who are working in
dangerous conditions. Against this backdrop, additional
efforts must be made by States Members of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations to strengthen
mechanisms aimed at ensuring the protection of
such personnel.
We must also remember the high degree of
responsibility that medical personnel bear vis-à-vis
society. Often people’s lives depend on their
work. An important precondition for the effective
protection of humanitarian organizations and medical
staff is compliance with the guiding principles of
international humanitarian cooperation, as enshrined
in the resolutions of the General Assembly. These
include respect for sovereignty, neutrality, humanity,
impartiality and independence. There is no doubt that
medical workers who find themselves in conflict areas
must respect the laws and customs of the host country
and strictly adhere to the ethics and standards of the
medical profession. Abiding by these rules will help
ensure that medical workers are able to carry out their
tasks in a well-defined, effective and safe manner.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and Ms. Liu
for their briefings.
Let me first of all express my deep appreciation
and respect for the critical, life-saving work that the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) do around the world.
We also thank the penholders of unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016) for focusing the Council’s
attention on the importance of protecting medical
personnel and access to medical care in armed conflict.
At the outset, it is important to be clear: all those
who are engaged exclusively in medical work must
be respected and protected as civilians, regardless of
their affiliation. The United States strongly supports
efforts to safeguard access to medical care in situations
of armed conflict. We also support efforts to increase
awareness of the international laws that provide legal
protection for medical personnel as well as medical
facilities and transportation in conflict situations.
16/24

03/05/2016

I would like to focus my comments today on
practical ways of protecting medical care in conflict
and on the human consequences of the attacks in
Syria, where we see the most egregious examples of
attacks on medical facilities and personnel. But first
let me take a moment to state up front that United
States deeply regrets the tragic and mistaken attack
on the Médecins Sans Frontières hospital in Kunduz,
Afghanistan, last October. I would like to echo the
words of President Obama and once again express our
profound condolences in connection with the Afghan
medical professionals and other civilians killed or
injured in the tragic attack. United States forces are
prohibited from targeting protected medical facilities,
and United States forces are committed to complying
with the international humanitarian law principles that
protect hospitals and medical staff caring for patients,
including wounded combatants in conflict zones.
As the Council is aware, the Pentagon, following
a six-month investigation of the incident in Kunduz,
has disciplined 16 service members for mistakes that
led to the tragedy, including the suspension of an
officer from command. The disciplinary action taken
highlights the seriousness with which we take this
incident. This tragedy was the direct result of human
error, compounded by systems and procedural failures,
and United States forces will learn from this incident,
study what went wrong and take the necessary steps to
prevent any such tragic incidents in future.
As some in this Chamber may recall, one of the
worst recorded cases of assault on the wounded and the
sick occurred in November 1991, in the Croatian town
of Vukovar. The same day the ICRC secured agreement
on the neutral status of the hospital, 300 patients and
their relatives were forced onto buses. The bodies of
200 of them were later found in a mass grave, and 51
are still missing today. Despite the outcry that this
event generated more than 20 years ago, we have seen
similar instances of targeted violence against patients
and medical workers in countless conflicts since then.
Unfortunately, many instances occurred only last
month.
Nowhere has the increasing trend of attacks on
medical personnel, facilities and transportation been
more apparent than in Syria, where such attacks
are overwhelmingly carried out by the regime.
The Commission of Inquiry recently reported that
targeting hospitals and medical personnel as well as
the denial of access to medical care remain ingrained
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

features of the Syrian conflict. Last week, UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien told the Council
that the presence of a hospital or health facility is now
perceived by neighbours to be a threat to their safety.
For instance, of the 33 hospitals open in Aleppo City
in 2010, fewer than 10 are reportedly still functioning.
Just last week, we all heard the report of the horrific
attack by the Syrian regime on Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo, a hospital supported by both MSF and the
ICRC. Reports suggest that at least 27 people died in
the attack, including one of the last paediatricians in
Aleppo City, as the Secretary-General and others have
noted, along with a dentist and a nurse. The Al-Quds
attack came the day after a Syrian civil defence station
in the town of Al-Atareb, Aleppo province, was struck
five times, tragically killing five members of the civil
defence, a humanitarian and first-responder group
most commonly known as the White Helmets. Both of
these attacks came a week after targeted attacks on a
cardiologist in Hama, Dr. Hassan Al-Araj, and another
physician in Zabadani, Dr. Mohammed Al-Khous.
It is clear that the regime has been targeting medical
facilities and personnel. We are also concerned by the
report of today’s attack on the Al-Dabit hospital, on
which we are still gathering information, and we are
saddened by the deaths resulting from that attack.
I regret to say that all of these attacks on medical
workers and facilities took place in April alone. Today
in Syria, according to several organizations, over 725
physicians in the country have been killed and over
350 attacks on medical facilities have taken place, the
vast majority of them at the hands of the regime. In
fact, from January through March, including during an
agreed cessation of hostilities, Physicians for Human
Rights documented 13 attacks on medical facilities and
the deaths of 25 medical personnel. Syrian Government
forces were responsible for 12 of the attacks and 24 of
the deaths. Allies of the Al-Assad regime, including
Russia, have an urgent responsibility to press the
regime to fulfil its commitments under resolution 2254
(2015) to stop attacking civilians, medical facilities and
first responders and to abide fully by the cessation of
hostilities. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
too, has directed multiple bombings of medical centres,
including the triple bombing of a clinic in Tel Tamer,
in Al-Hasakah governorate, that killed more than 50
civilians on 10 December 2015.
We are also deeply concerned by the devastating
toll of the crisis in Yemen. Throughout the Yemen

S/PV.7685

conflict, we have urged all sides to take all feasible
steps to avoid doing harm to civilians and to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including with regard to the protection of medical
personnel and facilities. We continually remind the
parties in Yemen of their obligations under international
humanitarian law not to direct attacks against protected
hospitals or places where the sick and wounded are
present. Impartial humanitarian organizations must be
allowed to continue their critical work of saving lives,
free from threats from armed groups.
Let me conclude by saying that we commend the
tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the International Committee
of the Red Cross to promote practical ways that parties
to armed conflicts can better protect medical personnel
and facilities through the establishment of deconfliction
systems. Establishing humanitarian deconfliction
systems allows humanitarian organizations to submit
geolocation data to parties to the conflict. Parties to
any conflict share the responsibility for ensuring that
such data is effectively incorporated into no-strike lists.
For the United States, one result of the Kunduz
investigation was to set out a number of operational
improvements that have been made as a result of that
accident, including the preloading of key information
regarding targets onto aircraft systems. However, we
must all do more to improve the protection of medical
personnel and hospitals in armed conflict. With respect
to Syria specifically, we call again on Russia and other
allies of the Syrian regime to use all their influence
to stop the regime’s deliberate targeting of medical
professionals and facilities. With the deeply concerning
increase in violence in Aleppo, we support the United
Kingdom recommendation for an open meeting on the
situation there.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on preventive measures. We hope
that this can be an ocassion, on the lead-up to the World
Humanitarian Summit, for us to recommit collectively
to the core principles of international humanitarian
law, including those that protect medical personnel
and hospitals.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Peter Maurer,
and the International President of Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF), Ms. Joanne Liu, for their briefings,

16-1247617/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

which were as moving as they were powerful and
inspiring to us to act on our shared moral and political
responsibility to implement resolution 2286 (2016),
which we have just adopted unanimously. Allow me to
commend the dedication and courage of the personnel
of MSF and the ICRC, and of all health workers in the
field who help the wounded and sick in increasingly
difficult conditions and often at the risk of their lives.
Attacks on medical personnel and health
infrastructure have increased in recent years in many
countries at war — Syria, South Sudan, Yemen,
Afghanistan and Iraq, among others. In 2015 alone,
75 medical facilities supported by MSF were targeted.
According to the World Health Organization, 654
medical personnel have been killed in Syria since the
beginning of the war. This sad record is still growing. As
has been noted today, last week the Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo was deliberately bombed by the Syrian regime.
At least 20 civilians were killed, including one of the
last pediatricians in the city, who sacrificed himself to
save children. I offer a special tribute to local health
workers who are the first victims of these violations
of international humanitarian law. Who can accept that
these men and women not only are killed as they save
lives, but are deliberately targeted because they seek to
save lives?
Faced with this unacceptable situation, the Council
could not remain silent. Attacks on health personnel
and medical facilities are contrary to international
humanitarian law, as the President of the ICRC, whose
mandate is based on the Geneva Conventions, reiterates
relentlessly. We must thank him for that. Even war
has its rules, as codified, inter alia, in 1949 by the
Geneva Conventions, which apply to all parties and
must be respected in all circumstances. France takes
this opportunity to call on countries that have not
yet ratified the additional protocols to do so. It is our
collective responsibility to strengthen the protection
of all medical personnel and health infrastructure in
conflict zones. That is the meaning of the resolution
we have just adopted, with the active contribution of
France. I wish to warmly thank the sponsors for their
collective initiative and ongoing efforts. I congratulate
Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Uruguay.
In addition to the attacks on medical personnel and
hospitals, the deprivation of care, including against
civilians, is increasingly used by parties to conflict as
a weapon of war. In Syria, medical kits are removed
from humanitarian convoys. The regime’s obstructions
18/24

03/05/2016

of the delivery of medical assistance have increased,
despite the commitments made in the framework of
the intra-Syrian negotiations. As emphasized in the
resolution we have just adopted, access to care is a
right guaranteed by the Geneva Conventions; it is not
negotiable. Military hospitals are also used by the
Damascus regime as detention centres where torture
is practiced systematically as part of a deliberate State
policy, as evidenced by the thousands of horrific photos
from the Caesar file and the damning reports of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic. We cannot resign ourselves
to the unacceptable.
Medical personnel cannot be effectively protected
without the fight against impunity. States must
prosecute and punish those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. This requires the conduct of impartial
and independent investigations, and bringing those
responsable to justice. France recalls in this regard that
attacks on hospitals, medical facilities or health workers
can constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Ultimately, we must
follow up our own decisions so that resolution 2286
(2016) is followed by tangible results on the ground
and these unacceptable violations of international
humanitarian law come to an end. In that regard, all the
tools at our disposal must be mobilized.
To that end, the Council must be informed regularly
and in detail about attacks on medical personnel and
medical facilities. That is why France considers it
necessary for the Council to be seized as soon as possible
of the situation in Aleppo. That is true for all conflict
situations where violations of the protection of medical
personnel and infrastructure are committed. The
resolution we have just adopted requests the SecretaryGeneral to report regularly to the Security Council on
its implementation. That important step will allow the
Council to monitor this issue in a thorough, regular and
ongoing manner. It will allow us above all to highlight
and publicly disclose violations so that we can counter
them with all the might of the law. This fight belongs to
the Council and to France, and members can count on
our total mobilization.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At this first
public meeting of the Security Council for the month of
May, Senegal would like to congratulate the brotherly
country of Egypt on its assumption of the Council
presidency for this month. I also commend China for its
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

outstanding conduct of our work in the month of April.
This meeting is also an opportunity for me to welcome
the leadership of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain
and Uruguay for having presented the text of resolution
2286 (2016), which is fully in line with the priorities of
the delegation of Senegal. My country gives particular
attention to the issue of health at this troubling moment.
I also thank the Secretary-General and our briefers,
namely, the Presidents of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and of Médecins Sans Frontières,
whose descriptions of the situation on the ground leave
us all the more concerned, even though we continue to
trust in the capacity of the international community to
address the issue.
The resolution we have just adopted condemns attacks
against civilian and medical personnel, equipment and
their means of transport and medical infrastructure.
It also demands that the parties to conflicts respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
Moreover, the resolution expresses the determination of
the Council to include, wherever appropriate, the issue
of protecting the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
the mandates of peacekeeping missions. It also calls on
the Secretary-General to provide recommendations on
how to prevent such acts. In line with the importance it
attaches to the issue of providing health care, Senegal
welcomes the Council’s decision to include that issue in
peacekeeping mandates.
Senegal’s determination to address the issue
of health care is reflected in our participation in the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises,
which includes Senegalese armed forces operating
various field hospitals in a number of peacekeeping
operations, which provide services for both uniformed
personnel and civilians.
The Council’s consideration of the issue of
health care in armed conflict must also touch on the
very serious issue of women and children in need of
medical assistance. In that connection, on behalf of my
delegation, I strongly condemn indiscriminate shelling,
the use of car bombs, acts of terrorism, the dropping
of barrel bombs and the use of famine as a weapon of
war. Long involved in efforts aimed at ending obstetric
fistulas, which is the goal of a draft resolution that
my delegation traditionally introduces at the General
Assembly, we condemn the placing of obstacles in the
way of women accessing emergency obstetric services
in countries in conflict, which is at the heart of the

S/PV.7685

increased levels of maternal and newborn morbidity
and mortality.
Given the delays that the Ebola epidemic produced
for the peacebuilding processes in the affected
countries, above and beyond the areas covered by
today’s resolution, the Council should take up the issue
of health care in conflict situations in the most thorough
way possible. Aware of the importance of the matter,
Senegal’s 2015 chairmanship of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative — the Oslo Group, which, in
addition to Southern African countries, includes Brazil,
France, Indonesia, Norway and Thailand — focused
on improving ways to address international health
emergencies that could jeopardize international peace
and security. That is the aim of Senegal’s full support
for today’s resolution, which we hope will make a
significant contribution to improving the humanitarian
situation in armed conflicts.
The holding of this meeting just a few days prior to
the convening of the World Humanitarian Summit, to
be held in Istanbul on 23 and 24 May, is a source of hope
and satisfaction. That will be the first meeting of its
kind and will provide an opportunity for world leaders
to reiterate their commitment to putting an end to the
worst global humanitarian crisis, including addressing
the issue of health care in the context of armed conflict.
I am pleased to reiterate Senegal’s tireless commitment
to resolving such conflicts.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time
we take the floor in a public meeting this month, I would
like to reiterate our congratulations to the delegation
of Egypt on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We once again express
to you, Sir, our support in ensuring that your leadership
of this organ achieves full success. We would also
like to thank the Chinese delegation for its work last
month. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his excellent, forthright views. And we thank Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, as well as Ms. Joanne Liu, President of
Médecins Sans Frontières, for their briefings today.
We think it was very useful to hear their perspectives
as part of this Council meeting. I should not like to
pass up this opportunity to thank the thousands of
humanitarian workers, doctors and other health staff,
many of them working unrecognized and in a selfless
manner, who daily willingly risk their lives in the noble

16-1247619/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

task of saving lives and alleviating human suffering in
such cruel conflict situations as the ones we are seeing
today. What they do sets an outstanding example of
humanity and hope for peoples being pummelled by
violence and horror.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection
of wounded and sick people and health personnel,
facilities and means of transport in the context of
armed conflicts. We are proud to have been among
its sponsors. We would like to highlight the particular
degree of transparency with which the negotiations
were held, which is an excellent example of the way in
which we should work. We are grateful for the initiative
of Uruguay, Spain, New Zealand, Japan and Egypt in
moving forward the resolution.
We think this resolution is an appropriate political
response to the grave, systematic violations of
international humanitarian law, especially of the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols of
1977 and 2005, as well as the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, that take place daily in today’s
bloody armed conflicts in important regions of the
world, in particular the Middle East and Africa. We
find it unacceptable that health workers and medical
personnel have become targets in war zones. It cannot
be tolerated that hospitals are bombed, that doctors
and the wounded and sick are murdered in hospitals
themselves, or even burned alive, as the SecretaryGeneral mentioned. It seems that for many, life no
longer has any value.
We are witnessing conflicts that dragging
humankind back to times of fascism and lethal wars
that are not regulated in any way. Venezuela has never
participated in a war or armed conflict since our War
of Independence freed us 200 years ago. We have never
participated or nor will we participate in a confrontation
as part of any coalition of war or destruction, and we
will never invade another country. For that reason,
we clearly understand the indignation and frustration
of the representatives of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans Frontières. The
resolution that we have just adopted cannot be allowed
to be simply diplomatic rhetoric.
To begin, I wish to state that members of the
Security Council that participate in coalitions,
wars or invasions are the very ones who must begin
by recognizing their actions in contravention of
20/24

03/05/2016

international humanitarian. They must prevent their
allies or armies from participating in those types of
crimes. We believe that the first concrete step that must
be taken by the Security Council is to ensure that its
members who participate in such conflicts, coalitions
or wars denounce and punish their allies or armies that
flagrantly flout the laws that we are discussing today.
We are witnessing a descent into barbarism in absolute
violation of international law, and we must ensure that
it is stopped and avoided once and for all, starting here,
the Security Council.
We should be worried that, instead of leading to
concrete action on the ground, the resolution become
just another political rhetorical step serving countries’
specific interests, thus making the resolution merely
an instrument of propaganda favouring one side or
another. We believe that humanitarian and medical
personnel do not deserve that this discussion becomes
an issue of propaganda and confrontation among the
very countries that are confronting one another in
the field of battle. We believe that such violations of
international humanitarian law must be dealt with
transparently and on an equal footing. There are no
deaths or victims of one category or another. They are
all victims of barbarism, wherever it takes place and for
whatever reason or motive.
It is difficult for us to understand how it is possible,
at a time when we are using weapons with such
technological precision capable of killing remotely or
via satellite link-up at whatever distance, that there
could be errors and hospitals could be bombed, despite
the fact that they are public facilities whose locations
are well known. Their location is public knowledge to
all parties to the conflict, and indeed there may even
be warning protocols in place in situations to avoid
the bombing of such facilities. We do not understand
how that can take place, neither do we understand how
they can be cited as errors. We believe that attacking
humanitarian targets and hospital facilities has
become a deliberate act as a way of discouraging the
civilian population — as we saw in the previous Israeli
campaign against the Palestinian people — in full
knowledge of what they were bombing. Yet they still
bombed those facilities. As far as we are concerned,
such violations of international humanitarian law are
war crimes. Ignoring the law is not a excuse for anyone.
We believe that the situations that have occurred must
be investigated impartially, and the perpetrators cannot
serve as judge and jury in that type of situation.
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We believe that such violations not only jeopardize
the well-being, security and lives of millions of
civilians and deepen the crisis, but also represent an
extraordinary challenge for medical and humanitarian
personnel. As the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans
Frontières said earlier, it is difficult for them to carry
out their humanitarian work. We believe that we must
all assist so as to ensure that that situation is resolved
and that the Security Council takes action.
Finally, I recall that all States Members of the
United Nations are duty-bound to protect their civilians
and abide by the resolutions linked to international
humanitarian law. We also believe that the proposal to
have the Secretary-General report on the implementation
of this resolution on a country-specific basis and brief
the Security Council once a year on its implementation
is very important.
Our country, Venezuela, with the contributions
that it may be able to make from the political, ethical
and moral perspectives, will do everything possible to
ensure and help efforts to stop the horrors of war that we
are seeing. It is most important that we achieve peace
and enable the medical personnel to continue to carry
out their extraordinary humanitarian work in favour of
life and humankind.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I am sure that you will ably lead the Security
Council through a productive and fruitful month in May.
Once again, I wish to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of China to the members of the Council
for all the support that they have given us during the
month of April. I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. China has listened carefully
to the briefings made by Mr. Peter Maurer, President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
representative of Médecins Sans Frontières.
In recent years, the safety of medical personnel
and humanitarian organizations exclusively engaged
in medical duties and of the medical facilities and
equipment during armed conflict have been increasingly
under threat, which has received broad international
attention. China pays tribute to the medical personnel
and humanitarian-assistance organizations for putting
themselves at risk to save lives and care for the
wounded and sick. We are concerned about the safety

S/PV.7685

of that personnel and relevant medical facilities and
equipment. We therefore support the enhancing their
protection by the international community.
I wish to emphasize the following four points.
First, protecting medical personnel and facilities
during armed conflict is the inescapable responsibility
of the States and parties to the conflict. States have the
primary responsibility for protecting the population
throughout their entire territory, and they should step
up the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
Parties to the conflict should respect international law,
including international humanitarian law, international
conventions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in fulfilment of their obligation to protect
medical personnel and facilities, so as to ensure safe
and timely humanitarian access. Acts of violence,
attacks and threats against medical personnel and
facilities during armed conflict should be investigated
and punished by States in accordance with the law. The
international community should provide the necessary
assistance and support on the basis of full consultations
with States.
Secondly, medical personnel and humanitarian
organizations engaged in medical duties should, in
carrying out their humanitarian assistance activities
during armed conflict, fully comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
respect the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in providing
humanitarian assistance, and fully respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, avoiding
any involvement in the conflict or supporting any of the
parties to the conflict. That is the basis of humanitarian
assistance — to win the understanding and trust of
all parties, which serves as an important guarantee to
ensure the safety of medical personnel and facilities in
conflict areas.
Thirdly, the Security Council should actively carry
out preventive diplomacy and political good offices
with the aim of striving towards the settlement of
differences among parties through peaceful means,
including through dialogue and negotiation, so as
to find a political solution to the questions and to
prevent or contain conflicts from escalating in order to
fundamentally prevent medical staff and facilities from
being threatened.
Fourthly, the United Nations should carry out
its actions together with humanitarian assistance

16-1247621/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

organizations. The United Nations should conduct
in-depth analysis and assessments of the risks and
challenges faced by humanitarian assistance activities
in conflict areas, and, on the basis of respecting
the views of States, maintain communications and
coordination with all parties to conflict in order to step
up the protection of medical personnel and facilities.
The relevant medical staff and humanitarian assistance
organizations should maximize preparedness for their
own safety and protection, while establishing effective
communications mechanisms with States, the parties to
the conflict and the relevant United Nations agencies
and institutions.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Security Council members in congratulating you and
your team, Mr. President, on Egypt’s assumption of
the Council presidency for this month. I reaffirm my
delegation’s full cooperation, and we wish you and your
team every success. I also wish to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Liu Jieyi and his team for
China’s effective leadership of the Council in April.
I wish to express my appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, to Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and to
Ms. Joanne Liu, President of Médecins Sans Frontières
(MSF), for sharing their perspectives and insights on
the topic at hand. Their briefings add significant value
to our discussion today.
Malaysia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), which we co-sponsored alongside a significant
number of Member States. We commend the leadership
taken by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay on this important initiative, which comes at
a very critical juncture. The resolution is an important
milestone and stands out as a timely response by the
Council in discharging its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, specifically by
addressing the increasingly frequent and inhumane
attacks against health-care institutions by parties to
armed conflict.
Schools and medical facilities in Gaza were
targeted and bombed in 2014 during military offensives
by Israeli forces, killing and maiming thousands of
civilians, including children. The attacks occurred
despite the sharing of coordinates of the civilian
facilities with the Israeli authorities. In Kunduz,
Afghanistan, in October 2015, a medical facility
operated by MSF was repeatedly bombarded, killing
22/24

03/05/2016

dozens of civilians, including patients and medical
personnel. Most recently, the attack against Al-Quds
Hospital in Syria, which killed 57 civilians, was a new
low with regard to the protection of civilians, medical
personnel and medical facilities. As noted by many
previous speakers, a prominent victim killed in the
attack was the only remaining pediatrician in Aleppo,
Muhammad Waseem Maas. Despite the intolerable
stress of living in a city under siege, Dr. Maas chose to
stay in Aleppo to treat the wounded and, as his friends
put it, “to help those babies crying”, instead of joining
his family in Turkey. We also heard Ms. Liu’s harrowing
description of attacks on MSF facilities in Yemen, and
we share similar outrage and distress.
Such attacks, whether premeditated or otherwise,
are simply unacceptable. They violate basic, established
principles of international humanitarian law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
in the provision of humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance. Attacks against medical personnel
and health facilities also constitute two-fold atrocities
against children. They not only kill and maim children,
they also leave them without access to much-needed
treatments, including lifesaving care.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) demonstrates the Council’s collective resolve
in responding to a worsening deterioration of civilian
protection in time of conflict. As we seek to maintain
international peace and security, the protection of
civilians must continue to be at the core of the Council’s
work. We must reject the notion of “collateral damage”
as a convenient excuse to commit and perpetrate
attacks against civilians and civilian objects. Similarly,
countering terrorism has unfortunately become a
convenient narrative to justify attacks on civilians
and on humanitarian and medical personnel as well
as medical facilities. If by fighting terrorism means
we would be carrying out indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and the facilities, then, from the victims’
point of view, we are no different from the terrorists.
As clearly stipulated under international law, attacks
intentionally directed against civilians and civilian
objects, including medical and humanitarian personnel
and medical facilities, constitute war crimes.
Malaysia strongly supports calls to ensure
accountability as a crucial step in the fight against
impunity with regard to the protection of civilians and
civilian objects during armed conflicts. We therefore
16-12476

03/05/2016

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

call for independent and impartial investigations into all
alleged serious violations of international humanitarian
law, particularly in connection with the protection
of civilians and civilian objects in armed conflicts.
We agree with Ms. Liu that perpetrators cannot be
investigators, judges or juries. Member States have an
obligation to cooperate with the relevant international
courts and tribunals in ensuring accountability for war
crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, in accordance with their
international commitments.
In conclusion, we are deeply humbled and touched
by the commitment and sacrifice of medical and
humanitarian personnel worldwide who devote their
lives to saving others under dangerous and trying
circumstances. We wish to pay tribute to those who
paid the ultimate price in the pursuit of such honourable
aims. The Security Council must persist in defending
and protecting the safety of medical personnel and
health facilities in situations of armed conflict, an
undertaking to which Malaysia is fully committed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, it gives me pleasure to express
sincere thanks to Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay, which were Egypt’s partners in introducing
the important resolution 2286 (2016), on medical care
in armed conflict. In that context, I would like to draw
attention to the unique manner in which the initiative
was developed. It is perhaps the first time that five
elected Member States of the Council participated in a
collective effort to draft a resolution while leading and
coordinating consultations in an open, transparent and
all-inclusive manner, with all Council members taking
part in order to achieve its unanimous adoption. The
adoption was reflected in the widespread support for
the resolution among the States Members of the United
Nations, as well as in the fact that many Member States
co-sponsored the resolution.
Humanitarian efforts today face a serious
development in the form of the increasing frequency
of attacks against medical facilities and medical staff.
Parties to the various conflicts have put obstacles in
the way to medical services for those in need. This
represents an unprecedented challenge to the basic
pillars of international humanitarian law and to
enforcement of the principle of protecting civilians in
armed conflict.

S/PV.7685

Egypt believes that such attacks foment hatred
and tension among parties to a conflict and the
various components of society, which undermines
the possibility of achieving peaceful settlements to
conflicts. As a case in point with respect to the urgency
of this situation, I would cite the atrocities committed
against health-care providers in many conflicts around
the world, but especially in Syria over the last five
years, due to the conflict that has been raging there.
International humanitarian law, including the
1949 Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols,
provides for the protection of international healthcare personnel, facilities and equipment and their
transport. It also sets forth strict rules to protect access
to health care by the sick and injured in times of armed
conflict. I would therefore stress that the violation of
these conventions has been and continues to be totally
unacceptable. Perpetrators must be held accountable no
matter which side of the conflict they are on. Individual
States and the international community as a whole have
a duty to guarantee that perpetrators are held to account.
These rules are binding on all parties to a conflict,
be they Governments or non-State actors. These rules
also prohibit forcing health-care workers to commit
acts that prevent them from fulfilling their healthcare duties or that violate their professional ethics.
International law also prohibits deliberate attacks
against medical facilities, designating such attacks as
war crimes. Through such a designation, it guarantees
the accountability of the perpetrators and deny
them impunity.
The initiative behind resolution 2286 (2016),
sponsored by five States, seeks to urge the Security
Council to uphold the legal framework that requires
parties to a conflict to protect the sick and the injured
and those working to bring them medical care. The
Council needs to send a strong political message that
attacks on the sick, the injured and health-care workers
are no longer acceptable or admissible, that they can
no longer be perpetrated with impunity or without
accountability to States. Concerted international efforts
must therefore be made to prevent the occurrence of
such gross violations of international humanitarian
law. Accordingly, resolution 2286 (2016) condemns
violations of international humanitarian law, urges
Member States to adopt practical measures to prevent
their occurrence, and calls on States to ensure peaceful
and unimpeded access to medical care.

16-1247623/24

S/PV.7685

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Egypt’s
sponsorship of resolution 2286 (2016) is rooted in its
deep and focused commitment to the noble principles
of international humanitarian law, in particular those
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Indeed, Egypt supports access to medical care during
conflict — without politicization or discrimination — for
the injured, the sick, the vulnerable and those who are
most likely to be subject to attack, including women
and children. We seek to increase awareness in the
Security Council of the violations of international
humanitarian law in this area so that we can provide a
safer environment for the sick and the injured and for
health-care workers.

24/24

03/05/2016

I would be remiss if I failed to express our gratitude
for the sacrifices of and the noble role played by
such international organizations as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans
Frontières and others, which are providing health-care
services to innocent civilians who find themselves
caught in zones of violence or the victims of terrorist
attacks through no fault of their own.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

16-12476
