asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6880

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6880th meeting
Wednesday, 5 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Ms. Guo Xiaomei
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2012/592)
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (S/2012/594)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-62879 (E)

*1262879*

S/PV.6880

Letter dated 14 November 2012 from the President of the International
CriminalTribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2012/836)
Letter dated 16 November 2012 from the President of the International
Tribunalfor the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/847)
Letter dated 16 November 2012 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2012/849)

2

12-62879

S/PV.6880

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2012/592)
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (S/2012/594)
Letter dated 14 November 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/836)
Letter dated 16 November 2012 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/847)
Letter dated 16 November 2012 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2012/849)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite

12-62879

the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
in the Security Council today of Mr. Aleksandar Vučić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence
of the Republic of Serbia .
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
documents S/2012/592 and S/2012/594, which contain,
respectively, the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the report
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
I also wish to draw Council members’ attention to
documents S/2012/836 and S/2012/847, which contain,
respectively, a letter dated 14 November 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and a letter dated 16 November 2012 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, addressed to the President of
the Security Council. In addition, I wish to draw the
attention of Council members to document S/2012/849,
which contains a letter dated 16 November 2012 from
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, addressed to the President of
the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Security Council today both as the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I congratulate Ambassador Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for his country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and wish him
3

S/PV.6880

much success in the management of the Council’s
activities during this very busy period.
As I just noted, I appear before the Council today
in two capacities and I will accordingly give two
reports — one on the progress made in relation to the
completion strategy of the ICTY and the other on the
launch of the Mechanism. Written reports concerning
both institutions were presented to the Council last
month (see S/2012/592 and S/2012/849, annex I).
Accordingly, in my remarks today, I hope to highlight
certain key issues, rather than repeat the contents of
those reports in detail. However, before addressing
specific successes and challenges faced by the Tribunal
and the Mechanism, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my deep appreciation for the efforts and
dedication of the Security Council’s Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, which operates under
the able leadership of Guatemala. I would also like to
recognize the guidance and considerable assistance
provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism by the Office
of Legal Affairs. The sustained support and invaluable
advice provided by both of these bodies has been
instrumental to the continuing progress of the ICTY
and the Mechanism.
I now turn to the completion strategy of the ICTY.
As Council members will have seen in my written
report (see S/2012/592), the Tribunal is making excellent
progress in completing its work. At the trial level, the
judgement in the Haradinaj et al. re-trial was issued
just a few days ago, on 29 November. The Tolimir trial
judgement is scheduled for delivery on 12 December, in
keeping with previous estimates, and we still hope that
the Karadžić trial will conclude by 31 December 2014.
The first estimates for the Hadžić and Mladić cases
forecast those trials finishing by 31 December 2015 and
31 July 2016, respectively.
There have also been some delays in certain trials.
More specifically, we currently estimate that the trials
of Prlić et al., Stanišić and Župljanin, and Stanišić and
Simatović will not be completed until March 2013, and
the Šešelj trial is now expected to conclude no earlier
than July 2013. Still, once the Šešelj trial judgement is
delivered, all trials will have been completed save for
those of the three late-arrested accused: Mr. Karadžić,
Mr. Hadžić and Mr. Mladić.
With respect to appellate work, I note that the
judgement in the Gotovina and Markač case was
delivered on 16 November and that the judgement in

4

the Lukić and Lukić case was delivered yesterday,
4 December. It is anticipated that the judgement in
the Perišić case, which was heard on 30 October,
will be delivered early in 2013. Other appeals
are progressing more or less as anticipated. The
Popović et al. case is anticipated to be completed by
July 2014, several months earlier than previously
forecast, and the Ðorđević appeal is on schedule to
conclude by October 2013. The Šainović et al. appeal has
suffered a delay of five months and is now anticipated
to be completed by 31 December 2013.
In short, there have been significant advances in the
estimated completion dates for several appellate cases,
while almost all others are on track to meet previously
reported forecasts.
At the same time, the Tribunal continues to face
a myriad of challenges in meeting the estimated
completion dates for some of its cases, and my written
report details the reasons for delays in trials and on
appeal that I have just mentioned. As President of the
Tribunal for the second time, I am well aware of the
frustrations that Council members may feel when faced
with shifts in forecasted completion dates, particularly
when updated forecasts fall short of expectations. I
share that frustration. However, I must underscore that
predicting the completion dates for trial and appellate
proceedings is more akin to an art than to a science, and
the forecasts the Tribunal provides must be understood
in that context.
As Council members are all too aware, the Tribunal
is situated far from where the conflicts took place in
the former Yugoslavia. The geographical scope of the
indictments and the number of charges alleged can
surpass the most complex of national proceedings,
and the number of crime sites and crimes alleged are
often of unparalleled scale. The documentary and other
evidence adduced to establish or defend against the
charges at stake runs in most cases to tens of thousands
of pages, and witnesses must be flown from various
parts of the world to give evidence in the proceedings.
In this context, even the most robust management
of cases cannot always guard against delays. Setbacks
can arise from the departure of staff members who
are experienced in the workings of the Tribunal and
deeply familiar with the factual record of the particular
cases, or when the accused or counsel become ill.
Witnesses may refuse to appear to testify, embroiling
the proceedings in ancillary contempt matters. States
may be slow in cooperating with requests for material
12-62879

S/PV.6880

due to insufficient legislative frameworks or claims
of national security interests. The translation of
materials into a language that the accused or counsel
understands may take longer than anticipated. All the
while, the Tribunal’s cases are inevitably subject to the
vagaries — the unexpected twists and turns — common
to all criminal law proceedings.
These are daily challenges in the work of the
Tribunal. I assure Council members, however, that
they are challenges that are met with tenacity by the
judges and staff of the Tribunal, whose commitment
to ensuring the completion of the Tribunal’s work in
as timely a manner as possible is extraordinary and
deserves the Council’s recognition.
Indeed, despite some delays in the completion
of the Tribunal’s trials and appeals, there is no doubt
that the work accomplished by the Tribunal so far, and
the legacy that it will leave, are already of profound
significance. The Tribunal has established a robust
and authoritative body of jurisprudence on customary
international humanitarian and criminal law,
addressing everything from crimes of sexual violence,
to international criminal procedure, to the erosion of
the traditional distinction between the laws applicable
to international and internal armed conflicts. In doing
so, it has transformed the face of international justice
forever, all the while paying full respect to the rights
of the accused and the principle of legality. Indeed, the
Tribunal has been instrumental in bringing about a new
era of accountability and a new commitment to justice
within the international community at large.
These accomplishments are priceless, and should
not be forgotten. While frustrations may arise due to
delays in the completion of trials and appeals, and while
my colleagues and I will continue to seek out new ways
to avoid further delays, I encourage Council members
to view such challenges in their proper context and from
the perspective of the Tribunal’s broader achievements,
the salutary effects of which will be felt for many years
to come.
Before turning to my briefing on the Mechanism,
I wish to raise two final issues with respect to the
Tribunal.
First, I note that with the end of all but three trials
in 2013, the focus of the Tribunal’s work will have
moved firmly to the Appeals Chamber. Indeed, during
the critical period between January 2013 and December
2014, it is anticipated that the Appeals Chambers of

12-62879

the ICTY and the International Criminial Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) will be seized with up to 16 appeals
from judgement, as well as any number of additional
interlocutory appeals and other requests.
This change in focus is hardly unexpected. In
resolution 1877 (2009), the Council recognized that
the workload of the Appeals Chamber was expected
to increase upon completion of trial proceedings and
accordingly amended the Tribunal’s Statute to authorize
the enlargement of the Appeals Chamber through the
redeployment to the Appeals Chamber of up to four
additional ICTR trial judges and up to four additional
ICTY trial judges.
While I am very pleased to note that three ICTR
trial judges have since been redeployed to the Appeals
Chamber and that the fourth is expected by March 2013,
unfortunately only one ICTY trial judge is now expected
to be available for such redeployment, which will occur
no earlier than July 2013 following the conclusion of
the Šešelj trial. That is because all other available ICTY
trial judges have been assigned to either the cases of
two late-arrested accused, namely, Mr. Mladić and
Mr. Hadžić, which are expected to go past 2014, or to
the Karadžić case, which will not be completed until
31 December 2014 — the date by which the Security
Council would like to see the Tribunal complete the
bulk of its work. I also note that Judge Kevin Parker of
Australia demited from the Tribunal in 2011 and was
not replaced because of our expectation that additional
judges would be moved from the Trial Chamber to
the Appeals Chamber. I am now concerned about the
resulting situation, in view of the increasing workload
of the Appeals Chamber. I am currently considering
what actions, if any, to take in order to ensure that that
does not impact the completion strategy.
Finally, I note that in my letter to the SecretaryGeneral of 29 October 2012 I signalled the necessity of
extending the terms of office of the Tribunal’s permanent
judges and certain ad litem judges. As set forth in that
letter, which I trust has been shared with the members
of the Council, the extensions requested vary in length
according to the expected timelines of the cases to
which each judge is assigned. Notably, no extensions
are presently sought beyond 31 December 2014,
although several cases — most notably the Mladić and
Hadžić trials and possible appeals in some cases, as
discussed in my written report to the Council — are
expected to go beyond that date. Those cases obviously
cannot be halted mid-stream. I will seek any relevant

5

S/PV.6880

extensions of the terms of the judges involved in those
cases at a later date, but I wished to bring the matter
to the attention of the Council now in the interests of
transparency.
As the Council may appreciate, judges, in common
with staff members, require certainty in the lengths
of their mandates. That certainty is instrumental to
the stability of the Tribunal and the retention of both
judges and staff members. I would also underscore
that a number of the Tribunal’s judges are on leave
from national jurisdictions. Those periods of leave are
granted based on the terms of office approved by the
Security Council. It is important for both the national
jurisdictions and the judges themselves that they be able
to plan based on realistic expectations of the lengths
of trials and appeals. I would be extremely grateful to
the Council for considering the Tribunal’s extension
request, which will greatly assist in achieving the
Council’s completion strategy. In view of the fact that
the judges’ current terms of service are due to expire at
the end of this month, I would be most grateful to the
Council for considering this matter expeditiously.
I would now like to turn to my report on the work
of the Mechanism, which commenced operations at
the Arusha branch on 1 July, in full conformity with
resolution 1966 (2010).
Notwithstanding the short time between the
appointment of its principals and the launch of its
first branch, the Mechanism is fully functional. It
has begun issuing orders and decisions in areas under
its competence. It has taken over the provision of
witness support and protection for those witnesses
who have testified in completed ICTR cases, and
assumed responsibility for the enforcement of ICTR
sentences. It is engaged in monitoring the ICTR cases
transferred to national jurisdictions for trial. It is also
actively providing assistance to States for domestic
investigations and prosecutions.
The Rules of Procedure and Evidence have been
adopted, practice directions have been promulgated, and
lines of communication and cooperation between the
Mechanism, on the one hand, and the ICTY and ICTR,
on the other, have been established. The Mechanism
currently relies upon its predecessors for a wide range
of administrative services and other support, but I can
assure the Council that it will be ready to assume those
functions and be fully self-sufficient when required to
do so.

6

Preparations are well under way for the launch
of the Mechanism’s branch at The Hague. We have
begun to consider the additional challenges that the
Mechanism may inherit upon the eventual closure
of the ICTY and ICTR, including the vital issue of
ensuring the relocation of persons acquitted before the
ICTR, should a solution not be found in the meantime.
In sum, the Mechanism is already deeply engaged in
fulfilling its mandate.
I am profoundly honoured to have been appointed
President of this new institution. The Mechanism
offers a unique opportunity to be involved in building
an international criminal institution from the ground
up. As I have undertaken this work, I have been guided
by my experiences of over a decade at the ICTY and
by the advice of the Mechanism’s Registrar and a
team of talented and committed staff. But I have also
been guided by an awareness of what are often seen as
failings of international criminal justice, namely, that
international trials can be slow and costly. In overseeing
the creation and operations of the Mechanism, I
therefore feel a particular responsibility to demonstrate
to the international community that fairness and
efficiency are not mutually exclusive concepts. Making
international criminal justice sustainable in the long
run depends in great part upon demonstrating that it
can be an efficient, effective and affordable proposition
for the international community.
The Mechanism’s other principals and I and
the Mechanism’s staff are committed to making the
Mechanism a model institution. That approach is
evident in much of what we have accomplished thus
far. For example, last spring, I asked the judges of
the Mechanism to cooperate in ensuring the efficient
adoption of the Rules of Procedure by means of
electronic communications, thereby avoiding both
delays and the need to convene a costly plenary
meeting. For similar reasons, I appointed my friend
and colleague President Vagn Joensen of the ICTR
as the Mechanism’s duty judge at the Arusha branch.
Because President Joensen wears two hats, as a judge
of both the ICTR and the Mechanism, he brings his
already considerable experience and understanding to
bear on the issues before him. In addition, his work for
the Mechanism is being performed at no cost to that
institution.
Finally, in assigning judges to handle the appeal
of Mr. Munyarugarama from a decision referring his
case to Rwanda, I selected Mechanism judges who are

12-62879

S/PV.6880

already serving judges of the ICTY or the ICTR, in order
to benefit from their experience and avoid incurring
unnecessary costs to the Mechanism. I anticipate
adopting — to the extent possible — a similar approach
in assigning the bench to hear any appeal that may arise
from the ICTR’s Ngirabatware trial judgement, which
is expected shortly. That would be the first appeal from
judgement conducted by the Mechanism.
In relation to appeals, I would note that all notices
of appeal from ICTY judgements filed on or after the
launch of The Hague branch of the Mechanism on 1 July
2013 will fall within the competence of the Mechanism.
We can thus already anticipate that any appeals in the
Šešelj, Karadžić, Hadžić and Mladić cases will come
before the Mechanism. However, the ICTY Appeals
Chamber will continue to operate in the meantime,
hearing appeals in cases in which the notices of appeal
are filed prior to 1 July 2013, potentially including
appeals in the Stanišić and Simatović, Haradinaj et al.,
Tolimir, Stanišić and Župljanin, and Prlić et al. cases.
Any appeals in the cases of Stanišić and Simatović and
Haradinaj et al.are predicted to be completed by the
end of 2014. The appeals of Tolimir and Stanišić and
Župljanin are anticipated to be completed in early 2015
and the Prlić et al.appeal in late 2016. That is a situation
regarding which the Security Council has previously
been apprised.
Although the lion’s share of the Mechanism’s
judicial work will be in appeals, the Mechanism
wil nonetheless be prepared to conduct trials of the
three fugitives indicted by the ICTR whose cases
are still within the competence of the Mechanism:
Messrs. Félicien Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana, and
Protais Mpiranya. The arrest and trial of those three
fugitives is a top priority for the Mechanism. While
the Mechanism has sought and will continue to seek
the cooperation of States, I call upon the members of
the Council, in particular, to lead by example on that
critically important issue.
In closing, I would like to express my appreciation
to the members of the Council for their support of the
Tribunal and the Mechanism, and to urge Council
members to reflect on the achievements of the one and
the potential of the other. The ICTY has already had
a profound impact on the landscape of international
criminal justice, and the Mechanism has the potential
to build upon the achievements of its predecessors
by creating a model institution that is effective and
efficient and represents the international community’s

12-62879

strong commitment to the fight against impunity. I look
forward to working with you to turn that potential into
a reality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joensen: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Representative of
Morocco, who is presiding over the Security Council in
December, as well as the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and
Rwanda for their nations’ election to the Security
Council beginning in January 2013. I wish them all the
best for successful tours of duty. I would also like to
thank the representatives of Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa for their nations’ service
to the Security Council as they near the completion
of their terms and to express the appreciation of the
entire Tribunal to all the Governments of the Security
Council for their continued support as we draw ever
closer to the completion of our work.
I am happy to report that the transition from the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
to the Arusha Branch of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is now well under
way and progressing according to plan since the
Mechanism’s opening on 1 July. With the transfer of
nearly all judicial functions to the Mechanism and the
imminent completion of the Tribunal’s final genocide
trial, the administrative energies of the Tribunal are
increasingly spent on downsizing and providing the
necessary support to the Mechanism in order for it
to continue to progress toward full assumption of the
residual functions of the Tribunal upon our closure. In
the coming months, the major challenges will be the
continued transition of the remaining functions to the
Mechanism and the preparation of archives for handover
amid the continued departure of key staff prior to the
planned abolition of posts.
The Tribunal has continued to focus on reducing
the judicial workload, having referred three additional
cases to Rwanda during the current reporting period of
12 May to 5 November 2012. Those referrals reduced
the Tribunal’s workload to one trial judgement and
have helped us to remain on track with the current
Completion Strategy goals for a timely closure. Only
one referral request, the Munyagishari case, awaits
final conclusion. The Trial Chamber’s decision to refer

7

S/PV.6880

that case to Rwanda is currently under appeal, with a
decision in the matter expected to be rendered in early
2013.
During the reporting period, two trial judgements
were delivered in the Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana
cases. Nizeyimana was one of the fastest trials for its
size, further showing that efforts to improve efficiency
in recent years have had a positive impact, especially
in single accused trials. One appeals judgement was
delivered in the Gatete case in October 2012, marking
the completion as projected of four appeals judgements
concerning four persons in 2012.
Despite the continued premature departures of staff
in Chambers, combined with unanticipated litigation
challenging the ability of judgement drafting and trial
teams to complete their work on time, all projections
for trial and appeals work during the reporting period
were met and the final genocide trial judgement in the
Ngirabatware case will be rendered this month in line
with the projection in our last report. The delivery of the
Ngirabatware judgement, scheduled for 20 December
2012, will mark the end of substantive trials at the ICTR,
and unless the decision to refer the Munyagishari case
to Rwanda is reversed on appeal or arrests are made
in the two contempt of court or false testimony cases,
which would not go to the Mechanism, the ICTR will
have only the pending appeals to finish. The remaining
appeals remain projected to be completed by the end
of 2014, with three appeals concerning seven persons
to be delivered by the end of 2013 and the final four
appeals concerning ten persons expected by the end of
2014.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to the Council for adopting resolution 2054
(2012), which permitted me, as President, as well as the
trial judges on the Ngirabatware case, to serve beyond
the expiry of our terms of office in order to complete
our remaining work. The swift action taken on that
request helped ensure that the Tribunal will continue to
meet its completion strategy targets.
As projected in my last report (see S/2012/349), all
other trial judges demitted office by 30 June, with the
exception of Judge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov, who
was redeployed to the Appeals Chamber to further
strengthen the complement of judges working towards
timely completion of the remaining appeals. Two of the
three judges on the Ngirabatware bench are expected
to demit office once the written trial judgement is

8

filed, and the third, Judge Sekule, is expected to be
redeployed to the Appeals Chamber at that time.
I recently submitted a request for extension of the
terms of office of the ICTR appeals judges until the end
of 2014 or until the completion of the cases to which
they are or will be assigned, if sooner. The President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) has filed a similar request with respect to the
ICTY appeals judges who also sit on ICTR appeals. The
ICTR request is based on the projected completion of
our appeals work, which has remained on track despite
delays in translation and recruitment of the additional
judicial support staff necessary to handle the increased
workload in the Appeals Chamber. The extension of
the terms of these judges, as well as those of the ICTY
appeals judges, is imperative for the timely completion
of our remaining work.
Next, I turn to staffing. Staff recruitment,
retention and separation continue to be a challenge as
we progress through the completion process. Where
recruitment is required, the Tribunal continues to have
difficulty attracting suitably qualified candidates,
given the limited contractual security that we, as a
closing institution, can provide. The ICTR continues to
experience difficulties in retaining experienced staff,
due to the lack of financial incentives to stay with the
Tribunal to complete their work and the few possibilities
for upward mobility. Many staff members, therefore,
have been leaving the Tribunal to accept offers of
employment elsewhere, either within or outside the
United Nations system. It is vital that we work to retain
the necessary staff until the expiry of contracts in line
with the downsizing plans in the remaining time, so
that we may complete all the necessary work within the
current projections.
The downsizing process continues apace, with an
overall reduction of more than one third of the authorized
2010-2011 levels expected by the end of 2013. However,
ensuring the existence of a fair and transparent
decision-making process for the downsizing of posts
has put additional strain on programme managers.
Thus they are required to perform retention exercises
in addition to their regular workload. Moreover, their
workload is already greater, due to restructuring plans
that require all retained staff to perform an increasing
range of functions.
I again express the gratitude of the Tribunal to the
Department of Management, especially the Office of
the Controller and Human Resources Management,
12-62879

S/PV.6880

which continue to provide the Tribunal with support
for exploring and adopting additional measures and
a common strategy to address the challenges of
downsizing and separation of staff. I must also praise the
Human Resources and Planning Section of the Tribunal,
which continues to prepare staff for the transition to
other jobs after the Tribunal amid an already increased
workload in that Section due to retention and separation
activities.
I now turn to the persistent problem of relocating
persons who have been acquitted by the Tribunal. I
am the third ICTR President to call on the Council to
assist with our perilous problem of finding countries
to receive acquitted persons. With the imminent
completion of current trial activities, I continue to see
as a cornerstone of my presidency that I should enhance
my role in those efforts. I will continue to increasingly
apply my energies to persuade Member States to assist
with relocation.
There are five acquitted persons who remain
in the safe houses in Arusha under the Tribunal’s
protection, one of whom has been in Arusha for more
than six years since the confirmation of his acquittal
by the Appeals Chamber. The resettlement of acquitted
persons is considered a fundamental expression of the
rule of law, and the ICTR is deeply concerned about
the consequences of failing to fulfil that obligation
and leaving relocation for the Residual Mechanism. 1
therefore continue to call on all members of the Council
to do their part in helping to ensure that we uphold this
fundamental right of freedom to live one’s life after
being acquitted by an international tribunal.
I will now provide further detail on the transition
to the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism. As
previously stated, the Arusha branch was launched on
1 July 2012 with the immediate transfer of most judicial
and prosecutorial functions from the Tribunal to the
Mechanism. Any appeals filed after 30 June are now
the responsibility of the Mechanism. That includes any
appeals that may be filed after the Ngirabatware trial
judgement is rendered later this month.
The judicial function of monitoring cases referred
to national courts is now also the responsibility of
the Mechanism. However, the ICTR Registrar and I
continue to oversee the administration of the monitoring
of the already pending Uwinkindi case in Rwanda, in
close consultation with the Mechanism. The ICTR and
ICTY currently provide the administrative support for
the Mechanism, and plans are in place to reduce the
12-62879

reliance of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism on the
Tribunals by the beginning of 2014, or earlier where
possible.
In terms of preparing the ICTR archives for
the custody of the Mechanism, much progress was
made during the reporting period. In July 2012, the
Secretary-General’s bulletin on information sensitivity,
access and handling of the records of the Tribunals
(ST/SGB/2012/3) was promulgated, and the ICTR
retention schedule was approved in August. By the
end of 2012, the ICTR will be in a position to transfer
25 per cent of its hard-copy records to the custody
of the Mechanism. The actual handover process for
those records will begin as soon as renovations of
the record repository are completed. The target date
for the completion of the archive handover process is
December 2014, bearing in mind that the records that
are still in active use in support of ICTR functions
cannot be transferred to the custody of the Mechanism
until the ICTR officially hands over responsibility for
the related functions.
As the work of the ICTR concludes, the Tribunal
is striving with renewed vigour to preserve the efforts
of the international community to help bring justice to
Rwanda and build sustainable peace in the region. The
Tribunal’s activities geared towards seeking justice,
national reconciliation and capacity-building remain
strong, so that the ICTR can serve as an example for both
creating and closing an international legal institution.
Member States and Tribunal staff members have been
indispensable in providing the support and hard work
necessary for the ICTR to become a court that has not
only challenged impunity but has also added a new
dimension to international law.
After nearly two decades of work, the ICTR will
shortly deliver judgement in its final genocide trial,
marking the end of our work with respect to the trials
of 93 persons indicted by the Tribunal. The 93 men
and women indicted by the Tribunal stood accused
of planning and executing one of the most brutal and
efficient campaigns of targeted killing of civilians that
the world has ever seen. Although the Tribunal did
not manage to arrest all of those indicted, through the
referral to Rwanda of six fugitive cases and handing over
of responsibility for the tracking of the remaining three
top-level fugitives to the Mechanism, the fight against
impunity will continue unabated. The international
community and Rwanda have made it clear through
their continued intensive tracking efforts that although

9

S/PV.6880

the Tribunal will soon close, the remaining suspects
who stand accused of some of the most heinous crimes
known to man will not escape justice.
The world of international criminal justice has
undergone an immense evolution in the 18 years since
the ICTR began its work. In that short time, we have seen
the creation of hybrid tribunals where nations may take
a more active role in the prosecution of war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed on their territories,
a permanent International Criminal Court promising to
prosecute all perpetrators of the most heinous crimes
of concern to the international community, and vast
advancement in national legislation enabling States to
prosecute crimes they were previously unable to handle
alone.
As the ICTR becomes the first ad hoc tribunal to
complete its trials, we have faith that the Council’s
creation of the Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals will continue the important work that was
started by the ICTR and ICTY and further the evolution
of global criminal justice. It has been and continues to
be an honour and privilege to be a part of this important
stage in history, and it has been a great honour for me to
address the Council today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Judge
Joensen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Council on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.
A major goal was met in the past reporting period
with the commencement in October of the last trial in
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) , the Hadžić case. Goran Hadžić is accused
of some of the first crimes committed in 1991 in the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia. Extensive pre-trial
preparation and timely disclosures to the defence have
contributed to the expeditious conduct of the trial to
date. The Prosecution currently expects to conclude its
case in early summer 2013.
Important progress was also made in our three
other remaining trials. The trial against Ratko Mladić
has progressed steadily since commencement of the
Prosecutor’s evidence in chief in July. The Prosecution
has implemented strategies to present its evidence
efficiently so that, at its current rate, the prosecution
case will also conclude in July 2013.

10

The Karadžić trial transitioned from the prosecution
case to the defence case during the reporting period.
At the conclusion of the prosecution case, the accused
asked the Trial Chamber to find he had no case to
answer. The Trial Chamber dismissed his motion on
all counts, with the exception of the count related to
genocide in municipalities throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 1992. Both parties’ appeals against the
decision have now been fully briefed and are pending
adjudication by the Appeals Chamber.
The Stanišić and Simatović trial will conclude by
the end of the year with the presentation of the parties’
closing arguments.
As all other trials concluded during the reporting
period, the Appeals Division is preparing for an
influx of appellate work. By the end of this year one
trial judgement will be issued, and a further three
judgements involving multiple accused are scheduled
for early 2013. During the reporting period, in addition
to its appellate work, the Appeals Division provided
substantial assistance to the Trial Division, which is
reducing in size as posts are progressively abolished.
Day-to-day cooperation provided by the States of
the former Yugoslavia to the Office of the Prosecutor
is still crucial for the successful completion of our
remaining trials and appeals. Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina continue to respond to our requests
for assistance in a timely manner, and they fully met
our expectations during the reporting period. During
my last trip to Serbia in October, the new Government
assured me that it will maintain the previous positive
level of cooperation.
Since our last report (S/2011/473), Serbia has also
intensified its efforts to investigate support networks
responsible for helping ICTY fugitives, including
Mladić and Hadžić, evade justice for so many years.
Cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will also soon take a positive step forward.
The legal barriers to the protocol on cooperation
between their Prosecutors’ Offices on the exchange
of evidence and information in war crimes cases have
been removed, and Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
will sign the protocol in the near future. If effectively
implemented, it will offer practical solutions for
improving investigative capacity and strengthening
the professional interaction between the Prosecutors’
Offices. We welcome that recent development and

12-62879

S/PV.6880

encourage the parties to sign the protocol without
further delay.
The success of the Tribunal will ultimately be
measured by the success of the transition from our
work to national war crimes prosecutions. Regrettably,
national authorities continue to face difficulties in
prosecuting war crimes cases, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In addition to the investigative materials
transferred by my Office, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a
backlog of hundreds of cases and no prospect of meeting
its 2015 and 2017 war crimes strategy deadlines. One of
the contributing problems is the limited capacity not
only of the State-level courts but also of the entity-level
courts that are increasingly taking over responsibility
for those cases. Comprehensive measures must be taken
to remedy the situation.
To assist in finding solutions, we have turned
greater attention to building capacity in the region to
prosecute war crimes cases. We continue to pursue our
long-standing strategies for channeling expertise to the
national authorities, including through our transition
team and the integration of liaison prosecutors in our
Office. We also continue to support the work of our
international partners, including the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
train prosecutors in the region.
The commencement of the ICTY branch of the
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on 1 July
2013 rapidly draws near. My Office increasingly turns
its attention to promoting a smooth transition to the
Mechanism, and with regard to human resources issues,
we very much support our colleague Prosecutor Jallow.
I do not want to conclude without mentioning
the recent judgements in the cases of Gotovina and
Markač, and Haradinaj, Balaj and Brahimaj, which
resulted in a number of reactions about the Tribunal’s
capacity to promote justice in the former Yugoslavia.
While the underlying reasons for the acquittals in those
two cases are very different, there can be no doubt that
serious crimes were documented in the course of the
proceedings. The victims of those crimes have the right
to justice. Therefore, I encourage the national authorities
in the region to continue the fight against impunity
within their jurisdictions, including through increasing
regional cooperation. I assure those authorities that my
Office will provide support to achieve those goals.

12-62879

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Prosecutor
Brammertz for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I am greatly honoured to brief the
Council once again on the progress of the completion
strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to present to you the first report
on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
The trial phase of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR has now concluded save for the receipt
of judgement in the case of Augustin Ngirabatware,
which is now scheduled to be delivered on 20 December
2012. With that will come the conclusion of the trial
phase of the ICTR. Similarly, all trial-related activities,
including the updating of the files of the fugitives,
evidence preservation proceedings in respect of the
three top-level fugitives, and litigation in respect of the
referrals of cases to national jurisdictions, have also
been concluded except in the case of The Prosecutor
v. Benard Munyagishari, in which there is a pending
appeal against the decision of the ICTR Referral
Chamber to refer his case to Rwanda for trial.
Our focus at the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTR for the past six months has been, and for the
ensuing months will continue to be, on the prosecution
and completion of appeals, the preparation of the
Office’s records for archiving and handover to the
Residual Mechanism, and the completion of legacy,
residual and closure issues, as well as providing support
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of
the Mechanism.
The conclusion of trials has substantially increased
the appellate workload of the Office of the Prosecutor,
and currently we are litigating 31 appeals arising
from nine cases. We nonetheless anticipate the timely
conclusion of this appellate workload by 2014, within
the time frame for the completion strategy of the ICTR
set by the Security Council.
The preparation of the records of the Office of the
Prosecutor for archiving by the Residual Mechanism
has progressed during the past few months and has
received a welcome boost with the promulgation of
the of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on archiving
standards and retention schedules for the records of the
Tribunals (ST/SGB/2012/3). The bulletin clears the way
for the security classifications of the various records
11

S/PV.6880

held by the Office of the Prosecutor and the other
organs of the Tribunal. In July this year, following the
commencement of operations of the Arusha branch, I
was able to hand over to the Registrar of the Mechanism
the Office of the Prosecutor’s records of some 27 cases
for retention by the archives of the Mechanism. The
remaining ICTR records will be handed over to the
Mechanism as and when they are cleaned up, properly
classified and packaged for secure storage, and when
they are no longer required as working records by the
ICTR.
These records and archives constitute an important
legacy of the ICTR and the other Tribunals for future
generations of researchers, historians, lawyers and
judges, as well as for the communities that were directly
affected by the situations under our mandate. So also
are a number of other important legacy projects on
which the ICTR has been working and which we plan
to conclude before the expiry of the Tribunal’s mandate.
In 2006, at their first colloquium held in Arusha,
the Prosecutors of the International Tribunals, having
regard to the fact that the legacy of the Tribunals lies not
only in their jurisprudence, which is readily available,
but also in the practices that the various Offices of the
Prosecutor had developed in their operations, decided to
implement a best practices project that would document
the lessons learned from both successes and challenges
in the investigation and prosecution of mass crimes.
I am pleased to report that with the financial
support of the Government of Canada, the Prosecutors
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the ICTR, the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, on the basis
of their experience of the Tribunals, were able to
finalize a joint compendium of lessons learned on the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes
and to launch the compendium on 1 November, at the
annual conference of the International Association of
Prosecutors. The compendium is available to national
and international prosecutors and will, one hopes,
provide some guidance on some of the many difficult
aspects of the investigation and prosecution of mass
crimes.
Further work on legacy projects of this nature will
continue both jointly among the Prosecutors of the
various Tribunals and by individual Tribunals. The
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR has already made
substantial progress in executing a number of projects
12

from a best practices and lessons learned perspective,
including the tracking and arrest of fugitives and the
recording of the course of the 1994 Rwandan genocide
on the basis of facts established by the ICTR judicial
process, as well as the challenges in the referral of
cases to national jurisdictions for trial.
The latter project is intended to highlight the
difficulties and challenges encountered in finding
able and willing national jurisdictions for referral and
the measures, inter alia, of law reform and capacitybuilding that have had to be undertaken in some
national jurisdictions in collaboration with the ICTR to
enable the States concerned to be legally eligible for
receipt of those cases. We hope the project will provide
useful lessons on the partnership between national and
international jurisdictions and on the implementation
of the principle of complementarity, whose effective
application is so critical to the future of international
criminal justice.
Similarly, we have also prepared two lessons learned
manuals on the investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-based violence, and on the management
of victims and witnesses of sexual violence crimes in
situations of armed conflict. Those two manuals, which
are now being finalized, were subjected some two
weeks ago to peer review at an international workshop
organized by my Office in Kigali in collaboration
with UN-Women, the Open Society Justice Initiative,
the East African Community and the Government of
Rwanda — to all of whom we are very grateful.
The manuals are based on the ICTR experience in
this particular field. Crimes of sexual violence were so
extensive in Rwanda during the genocide of 1994, and
unfortunately they continue to feature significantly in
many of the conflicts around the globe, making it one
of the biggest human rights challenges facing the global
community. We hope that our experience, captured in
those manuals and in the very useful discussions at the
workshop, will assist national and other international
jurisdictions to ensure accountability for such crimes.
We are currently also working on a final report of
the activities of the Office in time for the conclusion of
our mandate. We expect it will indicate what has been
undertaken and achieved, the challenges faced by the
ICTR in the execution of its mandate and the lessons
learned for the future of the struggle against impunity.
The reduction in the workload of our Office will
result in the considerable downsizing of the Office this

12-62879

S/PV.6880

year and early next year. The Prosecution Division in
Arusha and the Investigation Section in Kigali will
both close down by 31 December 2012 and their staff
will be separated from the Tribunal. That will be
accompanied by staff reductions in the Information
and Evidence Support Section, the immediate Office of
the Prosecutor and in the Appeals and Legal Advisory
Division of the Office of the Prosecutor. Those staff
reductions are in addition to staff separations effected
earlier, at the end of June 2012.
Beyond the Office, there will also be significant
reduction in staff resources Tribunal-wide. To all of our
separating staff, we wish to record our appreciation for
their commitment and diligence, which has enabled the
ICTR to make significant progress in the discharge of
its mandate and in bringing justice to the victims of the
tragedy of 1994.
I now turn to the operations of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The branch came into being on 1 July and has been
in operation since then. The recruitment of core staff
of the Office of the Prosecutor is ongoing, with 8 of
the 14 core staff already in place. The staff component
currently includes legal officers and investigators
charged with tracking and related assignments. We
expect the recruitment of core staff to be completed
in the next few months, and we plan to commence the
establishment of the roster of ad hoc staff soon after
the new year in order to be able to proceed with trials
without further delay in the event of any new arrests.
In order also to facilitate the work of the Office of
the Prosecutor of the Mechanism, I have also designated
several members of staff of the Office of the ICTR to
double-hat by attending to the Residual Mechanism
workload in addition to their normal ICTR duties.
I would like to record our appreciation of the
Registrars and staff of the ICTR, the ICTY and the
Residual Mechanism for their assistance, which has
facilitated the commencement and continuity of
operations of the Mechanism, in general, and of the
Office of the Prosecutor, in particular. In consultation
with my colleague at the ICTY, we have also commenced
preparations for the recruitment of staff for the Hague
branch of the Office of the Prosecutor in order to ensure
that it, too, can start work effectively on 1 July 2013, as
directed by the Council.

12-62879

Since 1 July, the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism branch has focused on tracking the top
three fugitives — Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana — the servicing of foreign
requests for assistance, the monitoring of cases referred
to national jurisdictions for trial, and trial preparations
for the possible arrest of the top three fugitives. Since
1 July, the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism has
dealt with 23 requests for assistance from 11 countries,
in addition to hosting three national delegations in
support of the ongoing national investigations or
prosecutions. As more national jurisdictions take on
their share of the responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting persons suspected of having committed
atrocities in Rwanda, that aspect of the workload of the
Mechanism will continue and will probably increase.
The service provided by the Office of the Prosecutor
is crucial to empowering national systems and plays an
effective role in combating impunity for mass crimes.
It should continue to be supported.
In accordance with the ICTR rules, I have already
appointed monitors to observe the proceedings in the
two cases that have been referred to France and in
the Jean Uwinkindi case, which has been referred to
Rwanda for trial. The investigations of the cases in
France are progressing. The trial of Uwinkindi, after
the conclusion of the preliminary proceedings, is
scheduled to commence in the Rwandan High Court on
14 January 2013.
I will also appoint a monitor in the Bernard
Munyagishari case if and when the Appeals Chamber
confirms the referral, as well as in respect of the cases
of the fugitives referred to Rwanda as and when they
are arrested and transferred to that jurisdiction for trial.
However, the biggest challenge that the Mechanism
faces is the tracking, arrest and trial of the three
fugitives reserved to its jurisdiction. The readiness
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism for
the trials has been greatly enhanced by the rule 71 bis
evidence hearings already undertaken and the general
updating of the files carried out by the ICTR. Those
files have now been handed over to the Mechanism
Prosecutor. The trials, however, cannot proceed in
absentia and the arrest of the suspects continues to pose
a major challenge for international justice.
Tracking has been intensified in the past six
months and will continue to be our priority. Our work
in Kenya and Zimbabwe and with other countries
and organizations in the region has been ongoing and
13

S/PV.6880

expanded to other countries and institutions outside
Africa.
I had useful discussions in September with
Government officials in Harare, Zimbabwe, on the case
of the fugitive Protais Mpiranya. The investigations
of the activities of the fugitive in Zimbabwe by
Residual Mechanism investigators and Zimbabwe
law enforcement officials is now ongoing. I have
received assurances from Zimbabwean officials of the
commitment of their Government to collaborate with
the Mechanism in the search for the fugitive.
The cooperation of all States Members of the
United Nations is absolutely essential for the tracking
and arrests not only of those three fugitives but also
of the eight others whose cases have been referred
to Rwanda for trial. At the level of the ICTR and the
Mechanism, we can track but have no powers of arrest.
That is a responsibility reserved for Member States;
hence, their legal duty to cooperate with the Tribunals
in that respect. The Security Council should therefore
continue to call on all Member States to discharge that
legal responsibility of cooperation with the Tribunals.
For our part, we shall continue to make tracking the
top priority of the Mechanism. Some two weeks ago,
the Mechanism and the ICTR took time to review the
current strategies and to explore new methods that may
help the Mechanism to fulfil its mandate, including in
the challenging area of tracking. As a result, we shall be
looking at new ways of doing things and hope that they
will be truly productive.
For the fugitives themselves, the clear message is
that tracking will not cease. There is no time limit for
the prosecution of the offences with which they are
charged. The search for them will therefore continue
until they are found and brought to justice, either before
an international mechanism or an appropriate national
jurisdiction to account for their deeds.

delegation also wishes to pay tribute to the enormous
commitment shown by the staff of both Tribunals to
meet the goals of the completion strategies.
The work of the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda is at a critical
stage as they strive to complete their cases effectively,
while steering the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
We acknowledge the considerable achievements and
progress of the Tribunals to comply fully with their
mandates.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, we welcome the fact that
all cases, except those held up through delayed arrest
warrants, will be completed and most of the Tribunal’s
work will be on appeals. We note the recent decisions of
the Tribunals, all of which we fully respect.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, we are pleased that the trials are on
schedule. We are concerned, however, by the fact that
nine people are still fugitives from justice. The Rwanda
Tribunal can complete its work successfully only if it
receives the effective cooperation of every State. We
call on all States, especially those of the Great Lakes
region, to step up their cooperation with the Tribunal
and to provide it with all necessary assistance in
arresting and handing over the remaining fugitives. In
addition, as we near the closure of the Tribunal, we are
also concerned about the human rights of those who
have been acquitted or have completed their sentences
but have not been relocated. We urge States to cooperate
with the International Tribunal and to provide it with all
necessary assistance for the relocation of those people.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.

On the one hand, we welcome the fact that both
Tribunals continue to take all possible measures
to complete their proceedings expeditiously, while
fully respecting due process. We also welcome their
commitment to carrying out the completion strategies,
despite their great burden of work. We remain
concerned by the reports from both Tribunals about
the difficulty of retaining personnel, which is one of
the main obstacles to achieving the completion strategy
goals.

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals. My

My delegation recognizes the major contribution
of the Tribunals to international justice and
accountability for serious international crimes and to
the re-establishment of the rule of law in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. It is an honour for Guatemala
to chair the Informal Working Group on International

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Jallow
for his briefing.

14

12-62879

S/PV.6880

Tribunals. At this crucial juncture, we continue to lend
our full support to the Tribunals and to the Residual
Mechanism.
This year, 1 July was a landmark date for two
reasons. First, it was the tenth anniversary of the entry
into force of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The Tribunals were a source of
inspiration for the establishment of the Court, the
accounts of mass atrocities having called attention
to the pressing need for a permanent court to put an
end to impunity for what the international community
considers the most serious crimes.
The second reason is that 1 July marked the
commencement of operations of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. That
Mechanism ensures that there will be no gaps in the
fight against impunity, given the great number of
remaining tasks after the closures of the Tribunals,
including witness protection, cooperation with national
authorities, reviewing sentences and overseeing their
execution.
We note the Residual Mechanism’s forward
progress, as related in the progress report from its
President (S/2012/849, annex I). We approve the ongoing
process whereby in 2013 the Mechanism will begin
operations relating to cases in the former Yugoslavia.
We welcome the fact that the Tribunals have worked
together to ensure a gradual and efficient transition to
the Residual Mechanism.
Lastly, after two decades we have a success story
for international criminal justice — an achievement not
only for the Tribunals but for our Organization and its
Member States.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I thank President Meron of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
President Joensen of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports (S/2012/592 and
S/2012/594) and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for
their briefings.
I will start by stressing the importance that France
attaches to the work of the two Tribunals, the fight
against impunity in general and the duty to remember.
Facing vast challenges, including the difficulty of
arresting suspects and the need to provide witness
protection, often over the course of many years, the
staff of the Tribunals have carried out long-term work,
paving the way for the creation of the International
12-62879

Criminal Court, which has permanent worldwide
jurisdiction. We thank them.
With specific reference to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we note that the completion of its
work is on schedule, as promised. That is very positive.
We also welcome the fact that the procedure followed by
the Tribunal to preserve evidence, as called for in rule
71 bis of its Rules of Procedure and Evidence, is nearly
complete. That will facilitate proceedings in the cases
of the three high-ranking fugitives Augustin Bizimana,
Félicien Kabuga and Protais Mpiranya, who will be
tried under the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals once they are apprehended.
We believe that the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions is an important part of the completion
strategy for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. The President and the Prosecutor
came to France to monitor the progress of the cases
brought against Laurent Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka under French jurisdiction. The interim
Registrar is in France this week. French authorities will
fully attend to the Tribunal’s concerns and requests
regarding the proceedings.
The Tribunal continues to face difficulties,
especially on the subject of cooperation. The President
and the Prosecutor spoke to us about the matter
of arresting of fugitives. It is the obligation of all
countries to cooperate with the ICTR, as stipulated in
the Council’s resolutions. The Council should remind
all States of that duty.
A second issue related to the cooperation with the
Tribunal is the relocation of persons it acquits or who
were convicted but have completed their sentences.
France was the first to host several individuals in its
territory at the request of the Tribunal. We support the
Tribunals in urging more States to promptly accept in
their territory the persons concerned.
I confirm that France supports the request made
earlier today for an extension of the terms of judges.
As for the ICTY, it is currently dealing with
very complex cases, which explains the delays in the
calendar. Most complex are the Šešelj, Hadžić, Mladić
and Karadžić cases. Of course, we hope that the
Tribunal will complete its work as soon as possible, but
nothing should detract from its ability to render justice
in cases so serious. In the case of the ICTY, too, we
support the requested extension of the judges’ terms.

15

S/PV.6880

Judgements in international criminal justice are
binding on all. It is not for States to debate them, but to
implement them. That is as true for the ad hoc Tribunals
as for the International Criminal Court. They are not an
exercise in variable geometry.
There is also an obligation to honour victims.
The ICTY rules in its judgements on the criminal
responsibility of particular individuals, but its
judgements also attest to the larger fact that in the
former Yugoslavia heinous crimes were committed by
all parties. The ICTY has categorized the Srebrenica
massacres as genocide; disarmed soldiers were subject
to illegal execution; there were campaigns of ethnic
cleansing, and minorities suffered persecutions.
All cases of crimes against civilians or against
combatants in violation of the Geneva Conventions
must be pursued. The excuse that some of the crimes in
question were committed only in reaction to attack is
not acceptable. Victims deserve for those crimes to be
recognized as such, for the perpetrators to be brought to
justice, and for they themselves to receive appropriate
reparation. The most recent judgements of the ICTY and
the widely divergent reactions to its recent acquittals
show that the Tribunal’s work still elicits strong feeling
in the region. The populations concerned must be made
to trust that justice will be done for all victims.
As the international Tribunals are in the process of
completing their work, the responsibility of the States
of the region to be active in the fight against impunity is
of the utmost importance. We were concerned that the
report gives no sense that the countries of the region are
mobilizing to pursue cases at the local level. Moreover,
regional cooperation remains insufficient.
For France, as a member of the European Union,
full cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and regional cooperation remain
major considerations, as well as essential obligations
in the framework of the Stabilization and Association
Process for candidate countries and potential candidates
for accession.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the Ambassador of
Guatemala, chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, his team, the representatives
of the Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs of the
Secretariat for their efforts to implement the transition
pursuant to resolution 1966 (2010).
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russian has always defended and will
16

continue to defend the interests of international justice,
including fairness, impartiality and honesty.
Recent events concerning the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), together with the
report of the Tribunal (see S/2012/592) containing
requests concerning the format and methods of the
Tribunal’s future work and its Residual Mechanism, are
of deep concern to my delegation.
In its work, the ICTY has been neither fair nor
effective. We perceive only an excessive self-regard.
We were surprised at how blithely, even carelessly, a
three-to-two voting result quashed a unanimous trial
verdict, justified by many years of investigation, in
the case of two Croatian generals who were indicted
on charges of crimes against humanity, including war
crimes, mass killings and the repression and deportation
of the Serbian population. As a result, the question of
the identity of the party guilty of hundreds of killings
and the exile of a quarter of a million Serbs from their
homes remains open. In that case, justice was not done.
As was stated in the dissenting opinion of one of the
judges, a reversal from a conviction to an acquittal is at
odds with any notion of justice.
A similar assessment is merited by the acquittal
in the case of Prosecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj et al..
In that case, witnesses were subject to unabashed acts
of blackmail and intimidation, all in an atmosphere
of full impunity alongside a pandering international
presence in Kosovo. The resulting killings and torture
undoubtedly took place, yet there were no perpetrators.
Both of the referenced verdicts of the ICTY discredit
the idea of international criminal justice. Faith in the
possibility of restoring peace through the dispensation
of justice has been substantially undermined.
Such actions of the ICTY only generate mutual
distrust among peoples across the former Yugoslavia.
In that situation, a legitimate question arises: how
to deal with the ongoing requests of the ICTY for
indefinite extensions of the terms of its judges? Once
again, no justification has been provided for the various
scenarios put forth to convince us that the ICTY
should once again extend its existence, in volition
of resolution 1966 (2010).
An obvious example of the absurdity of such
developments is the appeal in the case of Prosecutor
v. Jadranko Prlić et al.. Very recently here in the
Council, the President of the ICTY assured us that the
trial would be completed in 2016. Its completion has

12-62879

S/PV.6880

now been delayed to 2017. It therefore turns out that the
innovative technologies for litigation do not reduce but
rather extend the existence of the ICTY. In that vein, we
are convinced that if the ICTY so desired, it could draft
a decision by which a legally correct method could
be used to transfer the Prlić appeal to the Residual
Mechanism.
Justification of our criticism is confirmed by data
from the recent report of the United Nations Board
of Auditors on the ICTY (A/67/5/Add.12), which is
now is being analysed by the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly. The Auditors have calculated that
the average time of one trial in the Trial Chamber is
four and a half years. That is unprecedented in criminal
justice. In the light of recent events, there is no way that
the Tribunal could be exonerated on the basis of its high
standards of justice. The ICTY should take a lesson
from its confrère, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), which is now managing to wind up
its work within the prescribed timetable. Its standards
are just fine.
It is our firm intention to seek completion of the
work of the ICTY in accordance with the deadlines
set down in resolution 1966 (2010), focusing on the
following measures. According to the report of the
Board of Auditors, to date the ICTY has not provided a
consolidated plan of action for finalizing its work under
resolution 1966 (2010). That plan should be prepared as
soon as possible and submitted to the Council.
Moreover, the Tribunal needs additional
administrative support in the form of independent
experts. As one possible option in that context, we
note the experience of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone which was assisted by an independent expert,
Judge Antonio Cassese, who provided an alternative
assessment of the situation of the Special Court and a
number of useful recommendations for improving the
quality of its work.
For the next six-month report to the Council, we
call on the President of the ICTY to provide an extended
individual timetable for the prosecution of each case,
with a roster of daily activities. We will be prepared
to consider extending the terms of permanent judges
and ad litem judges only upon consideration of these
timetables. We also intend to strictly link all decisions
on the Tribunals’ future budgets to the deadlines set in
resolution 1966 (2010).

12-62879

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to start by
reiterating Germany’s full support for the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Their contribution to the fight against impunity for
serious international crimes is invaluable. We thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen, as well as ICTY and
ICTR Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their
recent assessments. We commend their efforts to
implement the completion strategies of both Tribunals.
Let me add that we welcome the progress made
in ensuring a smooth transition to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are
fully aware of the challenges faced by both Tribunals
during the transitional period.
Turning to the ICTR, the report of 5 November
(see S/2012/836) clearly outlines successes and
remaining challenges. We congratulate the ICTR on
having concluded virtually all of its remaining work
at trial level, with only one case remaining at the trial
level and all appeals projected to be completed by the
end of 2014.
We once again commend Rwanda for having
strengthened its national legal system so as to allow
the adjudication of cases transferred from the ICTR.
We are also grateful to the Governments of both Benin
and Mali, which have recently enabled the transfer of
convicted persons to their respective territories for the
serving of remaining sentences. And we reiterate our
call on the international community, and in particular
to concerned States of the region, to undertake serious
efforts in order to bring the remaining nine fugitives to
justice. Likewise, we encourage further efforts to solve
the issue of the five acquitted persons who currently
remain in Arusha under the protection of the ICTR.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has played a key role in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting long-term stability and
reconciliation in the Balkans. Moreover, it embodies a
unique success story. With the arrests of the last three
fugitives — Mladić, Hadžić and Karadžić — the ICTY
has implemented its mandate to fight impunity and
not to let the perpetrators of outrageous crimes escape
justice.
The jurisprudence of the ICTY and of the
ICTR is a source of inspiration for all national and
international jurisdictions that will have to address
such crimes. Their records show that international

17

S/PV.6880

criminal justice does exist; it prevails, and sooner or
later those responsible for serious international crimes
will be held accountable. And let me be clear. We
owe the Tribunals full respect both for their status as
independent criminal courts and for their judgements.
Both Tribunals consistently uphold high standards of
justice, as well as all principles relating to the right to a
fair trial, including the right of appeal.
While we recognize that some recent judgements
of the ICTY have been met with strong emotions, we
call upon all to deal with such emotions in a responsible
manner. Furthermore, statements questioning the
impartiality of the ICTY only serve to undermine
the mandate and authority of the Tribunal and are
detrimental to the process of reconciliation in the
region. This cannot be tolerated. Germany is committed
to continuing its full support for the Tribunal and calls
upon all States to cooperate with the Tribunal to the
fullest extent.
As the ICTY nears the completion of its mandate,
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia must intensify their efforts to carry on the ICTY’s
work of prosecuting crimes. This includes cooperation
both with the ICTY and between those three States. We
are aware of the Prosecutor’s continued concerns in
this regard, and we are alarmed by the announcement
made yesterday by Serbia, in a letter dated 4 December
2012 addressed to the Secretary-General, that it would
reduce its cooperation with the ICTY to the technical
level, despite the commitment expressed by the new
Serbian Government in its recent meetings with the
Prosecutor.
As Germany is nearing the end of its term as a
non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to assure both the Council and the principals of both
Tribunals of our ongoing and full support for their work
in the future.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I would like to make the following
points.
First, since June the two Tribunals have overcome
such difficulties as staff retention, worked hard to

18

implement the completion strategy, and made steady
progress in their relevant work. The ICTR continues
to successfully transfer cases to Rwanda. Other trials
will be completed by the end of this year on schedule.
The appeals are expected to be completed by the end of
2014. China appreciates this.
We note that, despite great effort on the part of the
ICTY, many trials have been delayed. The trials and
appeals cannot be completed within the time limit set
by resolution 1966 (2010). We understand that there
may be many different reasons for delays in cases,
but we still expect the ICTY to further improve the
efficiency and timeliness of its work. Moreover, China
also notes the controversy caused by a recent appeal
judgement of the ICTY. The ICTY should adhere to
the principles of impartiality, independence and the
rule of law in its work to ensure justice and make a
positive contribution to maintaining regional stability
and ethnic reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia.
Secondly, a branch of the Residual Mechanism
for the ICTR began functioning officially on 1 July
2012. Right now, the ICTR is transitioning smoothly
to the Residual Mechanism. Some traditional functions
have been handed over. The Residual Mechanism has
also submitted its first report to the Security Council
(S/2012/849, annex I), which we welcome. Tracking
and apprehending the three high-level fugitives from
the ICTR is one of the challenges confronting the
Rwanda branch of the Mechanism. We hope that this
endeavour will achieve early progress. We encourage
Kenya, Zimbabwe and other countries to cooperate
with the Mechanism, and we thank them for their
cooperation thus far. On 1 July 2013, the ICTY branch
of the Residual Mechanism will also begin functioning.
China hopes that the ICTY can, in accordance with
the requirements laid out in Council resolutions, make
appropriate arrangements for its work so as to ensure
a smooth start to the functioning of the Residual
Mechanism.
Thirdly, China appreciates the cooperation of
Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Rwanda
with the two Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism. We
call on those countries, where possible, to demonstrate
political will and to work with the two Tribunals in
enforcing judgements and relocating those acquitted.
We also hope that, where possible, the two Tribunals
can pay a positive role in strengthening national
capacity-building in the region.

12-62879

S/PV.6880

Finally, I take this opportunity to thank Guatemala,
as Chairman of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs for their work.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing the United Kingdom’s continued
support for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Their work is
essential in helping to tackle impunity and in delivering
justice to the countless victims of atrocities in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia. All States should respect
that work and the independent and impartial way in
which it is conducted. I would also like to express
our thanks to President Meron, President Joensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
excellent reports and briefings.
Cooperation from all parties is essential to the
effectiveness of the ICTY. The United Kingdom notes
the new Serbian Government’s assurances to the
Prosecutor’s Office of its continued cooperation, albeit
at a technical level. Progress has been made. Crucial
investigations into support networks that allowed
Mladić and Hadžić to escape capture are advancing.
This progress must continue. Anyone who has provided
assistance to fugitives must be held accountable.
Croatian and Bosnian cooperation has also been
positive. We expect this to continue over the coming
months, and encourage the Croatian authorities to react
with dignity and respect to the acquittals of Gotovina
and Markač. These verdicts were reached through
an impartial and independent judicial process. It is
essential that all sides respect these verdicts.
We share the Prosecutor’s concern about the
ability of national institutions to prosecute war crimes
effectively. Efforts to advance regional reconciliation
and to promote the rule of law rely on the effectiveness
of these institutions. We join the Prosecutor in calling
on Croatia to focus on domestic prosecution of war
crimes and deal with this legacy of the past urgently.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is also experiencing
difficulties with domestic prosecutions, as we heard.
Its adoption of the cooperation protocol will help tackle
the backlog of cases and improve parallel investigations
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. We
encourage Bosnian authorities to redouble their efforts
to adopt the cooperation protocol.

12-62879

We understand that staff retention difficulties
are having an effect on the ICTY’s ability to keep the
Karadžić trial on schedule. Nevertheless, we urge the
ICTY to take all necessary steps to minimize delays
and complete the trial by 31 December 2014. The timely
completion of all trials is essential for transitioning to
the Residual Mechanism. With that in mind, we support
the requested extensions of the judges in both Tribunals.
Predictable continuity is required in the interests of
both justice and effectiveness. Neither justice nor
effectiveness will be served by micromanagement of
the Tribunals by the Council.
We reached an important milestone with the start of
the Hadžić trial. This demonstrates that, no matter how
long it takes, anyone accused of serious international
crimes will be held accountable and brought to justice.
Let me now turn to the ICTR. Nine fugitives remain
at large. Apprehending these individuals is an urgent
and immediate priority. Justice will not be served
while these individuals evade justice. We encourage
all Member States to provide their full, unequivocal
support and cooperation to apprehend these fugitives
and bring them to justice.
Close cooperation between the ICTR and the ICTY
is increasingly important as the date of the ICTY’s
transition approaches. We welcome the fact that ICTR’s
transition to the Residual Mechanism is under way
and that the transfer of judicial functions is almost
complete. We encourage further cooperation.
Resettlement of acquitted individuals is a
fundamental expression of the rule of law. Host States
for the five acquitted individuals in Arusha have not yet
been found, as we have heard. Resolving that matter is
a priority. We encourage every effort to find a solution
as soon as possible.
Regrettably, ICTR staff retention remains an issue
and places strain on existing staff members. There is
no easy solution to the ICTR turnover rate problem. We
thus encourage the Tribunal to prioritize its resources
to the best of its ability and to operate as effectively
as possible. We are pleased that the judgement in the
Ngirabatware case is expected this month. Ensuring that
trials are completed on time is, of course, fundamental
to the ICTR’s completion strategy.
In establishing the Tribunals, the Security Council
sent an important signal of its commitment to the fight
against impunity. We and the victims of the atrocities
owe a debt of gratitude to the Tribunals for what they
19

S/PV.6880

have achieved. We also owe our respect to the Tribunals
as independent and painstaking instruments of justice.
But, as we get closer to the fulfilment of the completion
strategies, it is important to recognize that that is not
the end. The pursuit of justice for all of the victims
requires that every effort be made to advance domestic
prosecutions and, in that way, to ensure that everyone
who should be held accountable is indeed brought to
book.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also wish to
thank Ambassador Rosenthal and his team for the
efficient leadership they have shown at the head of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The Tribunals face today a significant challenge.
They have to complete their trial activity as planned
and contribute to the development of the International
Residual Mechanism, while facing, at the same time,
an increasing problem of staff attrition. Under those
difficult conditions, we must recognize the efforts by
the Judges, Prosecutors and all the staff of the Tribunals
in trying to keep on track the overall implementation of
the completion strategies of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as endorsed by
the Security Council.
We appreciate the information provided by the
President of the ICTY on the projected trial activity
and the reasons for its adjustment. It is indeed very
important that the Council remain fully apprised of
relevant developments so as to allow it to promptly help
overcome the difficulties encountered and ensure a
smooth implementation of the completion strategy. We
also welcome the fact that the ICTR trial work remains
on track, that the last trial will be concluded before
the end of 2012 and that all appeals are projected to
be concluded by the end of 2014. On the other hand,
while the ICTY still has to face significant work ahead,
as clearly set forth in the report (see S/2012/592), it
is important to note that all arrest warrants issued by
the Tribunal have been executed and that the Tribunal
and Prosecutor may now concentrate on the main trial
activities.
As the reports of the Tribunals highlight, some
other challenges remain. Let me underline four of them.
First, on management and resources, both Tribunals
share a grave concern resulting from staff attrition and
its effect on the daily management and overall capacity
20

to fulfil the completion strategies endorsed by the
Security Council. Despite a number of recently adopted
Council resolutions referring to that issue, problems
seem to persist in some cases. While commending the
efforts that they have made in that regard, we encourage
the Presidents of the Tribunals, together with the United
Nations Secretariat, to continue to identify possible
ways of further promoting better use of resources with a
view to improving the management of the time devoted
to the cases, while conforming in full, naturally, with
the principles of justice.
Secondly, on outreach and capacity building
activities, as the Tribunals enter the final stages of their
work, the issue of national and regional ownership of the
fight against impunity for the war crimes committed in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia gains in relevance
and importance. In that context, we welcome the
continuing outreach efforts by the Tribunals as well as
their capacity-building activities aimed at strengthening
local judicial institutions and raising awareness among
civil societies.
Thirdly, on cooperation both among States in
the region and with the Office of the Prosecutor, an
essential element of regional ownership is indeed the
extent to which States in the region cooperate among
themselves in criminal matters, including war crimes
investigations and prosecutions. We should not forget
that a significant number of cases concerning such
crimes remain to be pursued domestically and that
questions of the capacity of national institutions to
conduct effective criminal prosecutions and the level
of cooperation among States in the region are crucial in
that regard. We encourage further necessary efforts to
ensure a better cooperation in that area among relevant
States. The cooperation of the States of the region with
the Office of the Prosecutor is also crucial for the prompt
and full implementation of the ICTY mandate. In that
regard, we are very pleased to note the statement by the
ICTY Prosecutor expressing his satisfaction in general
with the cooperation provided by Serbia, Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Fourthly, let me mention the situation of convicted
and acquitted persons, as some previous speakers have
done. As we approach the end of the Tribunals’ work
and project a number of convictions, we have to be
prepared for an increasing number of Tribunal requests
to be addressed to States to host convicted persons to
serve their sentences and the need to find appropriate
and prompt responses to those requests. In particular,

12-62879

S/PV.6880

we reiterate, in that respect, the need to encourage
definitive solutions to address the situation of those
persons acquitted by the ICTR and those released after
serving their sentences. Still today, they remain under
protective measures in safe houses in Arusha because
they can neither return safely to their communities
nor find host countries willing to accept them. That
is an unsustainable situation to which a solution must
be found, and we call on the Tribunal to continue to
exert all efforts necessary to overcome the current
difficulties.
Finally, Portugal has always stood for fighting
impunity and ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes without exception and wherever they
take place. Accountability for such crimes is of utmost
importance in order that countries that have been
subjected to the scourge of war rebuild their societies
in peace and security. It is an essential element for
promoting national reconciliation, strengthening
regional cooperation and allowing peoples to look
confidently to the future. In the case of the Balkans,
it also constitutes an essential step for the countries in
the region to fully integrate themselves into a common
European destiny and framework. The role played
by both Tribunals, firmly rooted in a comprehensive
normative framework established by the Council, has
been fundamental to the attainment of those goals of
the international community in full respect for the
principles of justice. Moreover, the Tribunals play a
crucial role in building a solid legacy for the benefit
of other international and domestic tribunals, which
Portugal would like to commend.
As it is the last time we participate as a member of
the Council in these regular briefings, we wish to take
this opportunity to thank the Presidents, Prosecutors
and staff of the two Tribunals for their important work.
Above and beyond the trial-related activities, they are
also laying the groundwork for the future, well after the
Tribunals close their doors, both by helping to launch the
Residual Mechanism and, most importantly, by helping
the countries of the respective regions to take over and
continue the vital task of fighting impunity for the most
serious crimes and fulfilling their people’s legitimate
aspirations for justice. For all the aforementioned
reasons, Portugal wishes to express its recognition for
the Tribunals’ work and for their overall contribution to
ensuring and promoting justice and reconciliation.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
wish to thank the President for convening today’s

12-62879

meeting. We are also grateful to the Presidents and
the Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their useful
briefings and comprehensive assessments pursuant to
resolution 1534 (2004). I would also like to take this
opportunity to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals under the
leadership of Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala.
Today’s briefings have noted the developments that
have taken place during the last six months, and we
acknowledge the progress made in the implementation
by both Tribunals of their respective mandates.
We commend the efforts undertaken by the Tribunals
to complete the outstanding proceedings within the
established timeframes, while fully respecting and
safeguarding due process. We welcome the launch of
the Arusha branch of the Residual Mechanism of the
International Criminal Tribunals as an important step
towards completing the work of the Tribunals and
ending impunity.
We note the progress made in the transition of
the Tribunals’ functions to the Residual Mechanism.
The ICTR appears to be on track, with the projected
completion of its work on the trial level by the end of
this year, and it has already completed the trials of
almost all the remaining accused, with one remaining
judgement to be delivered late this month.
The ICTY has also advanced on its path to transition
and has to date transferred one Tribunal function to the
Mechanism and concluded proceedings against 128 out
of 161 indicted individuals. As the report notes, the
ICTY anticipates concluding all trials in 2013, with the
exception of three individuals whose arrest occurred
later.
We also note the referral of cases and the transfer of
accused persons by the Tribunals to national authorities
in the context of the Tribunals’ efforts to ensure a
smooth transition to the Residual Mechanism. Such
measures not only reduce the overall workload of the
Tribunals, but also strengthen the capacities of national
judicial systems and reinforce the rule of law at the
national level.
The cooperation of States remains a critical pillar
of the work of the Tribunals and constitutes an essential
component of appropriate regional ownership. It is
therefore important that States remain committed to
meeting their relevant obligations towards the Tribunals
21

S/PV.6880

and that they continue to cooperate with them and to
contribute to safeguarding and further developing their
legacy.
The activity and jurisprudence of the Tribunals
have helped to develop international law, in particular
the law on war crimes and crimes against humanity, and
have contributed to advancing the rule of law and the
restoration of peace. Having said that, we wish to note
several concerns in regard to recent decisions of the
ICTY Appeals Chamber. Without commenting on the
specifics of those decisions, it is nonetheless essential
to recall the importance above all of the human rights
doctrine, which is based on the need to respect human
dignity and consequently to punish all those who
seriously attack that dignity. Indeed, the establishment
of the true and gross violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law, the provision of
adequate and effective reparations to the victims, and
institutional action to prevent the repetition of criminal
offences are all necessary adjuncts to the true resolution
of conflicts and imperative in regard to the effective
and politically uncompromising system of international
criminal justice.
We are confident that the rule of law will continue
to be the guiding principle of the Tribunals.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals and of the Residual
Mechanism for presenting their reports (see S/2012/592
and S/2012/594).
The first conclusion we can draw from the reports
is that the two Tribunals are complying with the
procedures and timetables for the completion strategy
under resolution 1503 (2003), except in cases where
practical demands prevent them from doing so. Indeed,
the reality of those positive results for the two Tribunals
can be measured, on the one hand, by the extent of their
activity since the reports of May 2012 (see S/2012/354
and S/2012/349) to fulfil their mandates and, on
the other hand, by the significant progress made in
implementing the completion strategy per se.
It should be noted that the two Tribunals have
enjoyed varying degrees of success towards completing
their mandates. The ICTY has no more fugitives, but
some of its appeals proceedings will continue longer than
foreseen. Various measures are being taken, however,
to accelerate those proceedings in order to mitigate the
effects of possible delays. With regard to the ICTR,

22

Togo welcomes the fact that, of the three cases whose
verdicts were announced in the May report, two have
been completed and the verdicts rendered. The only
case still pending is currently awaiting drafting of the
sentence, which will be delivered later this year, after
which the ICTR will be able to close its trial activities.
For the appeals cases, we note that the commitment
to handing down four verdicts in 2012 has been
honoured, thereby confirming that the ICTR is firmly
embarked on the path to completion. My country urges
it to do the same with respect to its projected verdicts in
the appeals of seven individuals in 2013 and 10 in 2014.
We believe that the Council should take into account
the insurmountable practical obstacles that led the
ICTY to push back certain dates, and the impossibility
of completing the appeals in other pending cases within
the timeframe of 31 December 2014 established by
resolution 1966 (2010).
Togo welcomes the progress made by both
Tribunals with respect to transferring cases to national
jurisdiction and notes that the decision to transfer to
Rwandan jurisdiction an accused already under arrest
is currently under appeal. The decision will be made
in January 2013. We further note that the cases of six
accused not yet arrested will be transferred to Rwandan
jurisdiction, thereby guaranteeing that the closing of the
ICTR will not spell impunity for individuals of middle
or lower rank, whether or not they have been arrested.
Togo is also pleased to note that the ICTR has been
able to deploy a monitoring mechanism in the context of
the trial of a transferred accused. However, to the extent
that the ICTR appears to have met with certain obstacles
in concluding its negotiations with organizations that
were supposed to play that role, it would be helpful for
the Council to be better informed with respect to the
effective composition and operation of that mechanism,
as well as with respect to its authority to ensure respect
for the rights of those being transferred for trial.
My country notes that hearings to preserve
evidence under article 71 bis of the Rules of Procedure
and Evidence of the ICTR have been held in two cases
in which the accused are suspected of a high level of
responsibility and that the evidence thus preserved will
be able to be used at the appropriate time, with the right
to rebuttal by the accused.
We further welcome the active role of both
Tribunals with regard to the challenge of witness
protection, which has taken a more dramatic turn with

12-62879

S/PV.6880

the fear that the end of the Tribunals will also spell
the end of their protection. We believe that the two
Tribunals should be encouraged to make all necessary
efforts to ensure that witnesses maintain their trust,
without which other individuals will be reluctant to
testify before the Residual Mechanism, with the risk
that justice for the victims will not be done and that the
rights of the defence will be compromised.
In addition, we hope that the Appeals Chamber
will, without excessive delay, render its decision in the
appeal filed by the individual acquitted by the ICTR,
whose request for financial damages and relocation to
a country of his choice was turned down by the Court
in June .
With respect to the implementation of sui generis
aspects of the completion strategy, Togo welcomes the
rigor with which the three bodies — the Chambers,
the Prosecution and the Registry — are attempting
to resolve the difficult equation concerning the end
of their mandates, which they are doing with success
and within the prescribed timeframes, except for a few
cases of delay.
In spite of everything, the facts show that the
support of the Tribunals for the Residual Mechanism
and the transfer of judicial and administrative functions
of the Tribunals to the Mechanism is continuing without
problems. While we note that the two Tribunals have
assisted the Mechanism in establishing its regulatory
framework for executing sentences, witness protection,
the defence counsel commission and code of conduct
issues, as well as guidelines for written depositions,
Togo encourages them to also put their experience at
the service of the Residual Mechanism to enable its
effective implementation as well as in negotiating
headquarters agreements for the two branches in
Arusha and The Hague. We commend the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR and the Residual
Mechanism to follow up within the functions of the
Mechanism on investigations and searches for accused
persons who have not yet been arrested.
Considering the crucial importance of cooperation,
we welcome the multifaceted and effective nature of
the cooperation that exists between the two Tribunals
and States and international organizations. In fact, the
continued willingness of States to cooperate with the
ICTR and ICTY and the Residual Mechanism is a major
advantage, without which the fight against impunity
could not succeed. It is therefore commendable that
the two Tribunals continue to cooperate with States by
12-62879

providing them with technical advice and information
as they fight impunity.
In addition, Togo welcomes the fact that such
cooperation helps to raise people’s awareness of
the importance of reaffirming the legacy of the two
Tribunals as it promotes the transfer of know-how to
other jurisdictions, as was recently the case when the
ICTR sent experts to strengthen staffing capacity of
the Court of the Economic Community of West African
States in Abuja in connection with various aspects.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for the way in which their offices have
carried out their duties with the aim of ensuring a good
start for the functioning of the Residual Mechanism.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Rosenthal and
the delegation of Guatemala, whose work in leading the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
considerably facilitated the progress made in this area,
as well as the interaction between the Mechanism
principals and Council members.
My delegation is convinced that the two Tribunals
and the Residual Mechanism will continue to provide
an invaluable service to the cause of international
justice and the maintenance of international peace
and security. We believe that in the past six months in
particular both the presidencies and the Prosecutors’
Offices have worked extremely hard in order to comply
with the Council’s decisions on the finalizing of the
responsibilities of the Tribunals’s bodies and their rapid
transfer to the Mechanism.
We commend the special diligence that the judges
and the secretariat of the Mechanism have shown in
adopting the regulatory frameworks for their activities,
including the Rules of Procedure and Evidence and
the various practice guidelines, which will provide an
invaluable service to litigants. We also welcome the
fact that the Arusha branch of the Mechanism began
fully functioning on 1 July and that The Hague branch
will do the same on 1 July next year. The reports we
have received show that the former has already taken
the opportunity to act in several areas of its mandate,
including adopting judicial decisions, among which,
in the first decision of its Appeals Chamber, were
measures on protecting witnesses and victims and
monitoring the carrying out of ICTR sentences.

23

S/PV.6880

My delegation believes that, given the developments
experienced in Rwanda, the Mechanism has a
particularly important role to play with regard to the
monitoring of cases remanded to national jurisdictions,
as was the case with the two cases referred to French
courts in November 2007 and to one case referred to
Rwanda, in which we expect the respective criminal
proceedings to start in the next few months.
In resolution 2054 (2012), the Council highlighted
the importance of ensuring proper follow-up on
transferred cases and, above all, that of unfailingly
respecting the rights of the accused being transferred.
We believe that to be very important, particularly if we
take into account the fact that one transfer is still in
process and that in six of the cases where the accused
are still at large it has already been decided to refer
them to Rwandan tribunals. We trust that the States
concerned will continue to provide the Arusha branch
with all the necessary cooperation, since, as President
Meron indicated, the effectiveness of the Mechanism,
as was also the case with the two Tribunals, depends
entirely on States’ cooperation. It is also true that
effective cooperation with Member States continues to
be a key factor in enabling the Tribunals to complete
their mandates.
In that regard, it is regrettable that we still have
a situation where several of those accused by the
Rwanda Tribunal have not yet been captured, although
there is relatively precise information regarding their
whereabouts. A particularly worrying situation is that
of the three accused persons still under the jurisdiction
of the Mechanism, who are apparently in the Great
Lakes region and southern Africa. In our view, when it
adopts its next resolution, the Council should reiterate
and reinforce its appeal to all States to cooperate
effectively with the Tribunal, and that in particular
those whose duty it is to take steps to ensure the arrest
and delivery of fugitives to the Tribunal should comply
with their obligations based on the relevant decisions of
the Council. In that context, we echo the appeals made
by the Prosecutor of the Mechanism to various States
in the region to show greater diligence and to cooperate
with his Office in order to resolve this sensitive issue.
The Mechanism for International Criminal
Tribunals is the principal tool through which the
Security Council can continue to channel the will of
the international community to put an end to impunity
for heinous international crimes. We welcome the fact
that the various bodies of the United Nations and the

24

Mechanism are taking the steps necessary to ensuring
its smooth functioning. We should spare no effort to
continue that work, and to that end we believe it is vital
to respond to the request made by the Presidents of both
Tribunals to extend the judges’ terms in order to allow
them to carry out each Tribunal’s completion strategy.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I join others in
thanking Judge Meron of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Joensen of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor
Jallow for their comprehensive statements. Our thanks
also go to Ambassador Rosenthal and his delegation for
ably guiding the Informal Working Group.
Pakistan commends and supports the important
work of the two Tribunals in delivering justice and
ending impunity. During their proceedings, the
Tribunals have developed a comprehensive corpus
of precedents in international criminal law, and we
welcome their contribution.
Two requests have been made to the Council. Judge
Joensen has requested the extension of the terms of
office of five permanent judges in order to meet the
goals of the ICTR’s completion strategy — including
the completion of all appeals by the end of 2014 — and
Judge Meron has requested the extension of the terms of
office of ICTY judges. We are constructively engaged
with the Working Group to consider those requests and
to decide on an appropriate duration for the extension
of the Judges’ terms.
There has been progress in the completion strategies
of the ICTR and ICTY during the period covered by the
latest reports of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
two Tribunals (see S/2012/836 and S/2012/847). In the
past six months, the Tribunals continued to conduct trial
proceedings and appeal proceedings, draft judgements
and refer cases to domestic jurisdictions. They also
continued to contribute to procedural and evidentiary
international criminal law in a professional manner and
to implement various reforms to improve drafting of
judgements, translation, outreach, and preservation of
archives. The Tribunals’ initiatives on assistance and
support to victims, as well as legacy and capacitybuilding projects, are steps in the right direction.
The Tribunals have made efforts to transfer their
functions to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. We are glad to know that
the necessary arrangements are almost complete,

12-62879

S/PV.6880

as the ICTR transfers records and archives, as
well as prosecutorial tasks, to the Mechanism. We
hope that the ICTY will complete its preparations
for the transfer of other functions to the Residual
Mechanism by 1 July 2013, in accordance with Council
resolution 1966 (2010).
The Tribunals need to show commitment to the
timely conclusion of their proceedings and ensure full
compliance with the requirements of due process. We
recognize the difficulties in the assignment of work
to judges and in staff management in the process of
winding down the Tribunals’ work. The recruitment
of workers and retention of staff with institutional
memory of cases pose major challenges to the work of
Tribunals in the completion process.
Over time, decisions of the Tribunals have produced
an impressive body of jurisprudence that can influence
the fight against impunity and shape the future of
global justice. It is therefore important to preserve the
legacy of the Tribunals because of their contribution to
the fields of international humanitarian law and legal
doctrines.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
today and for their service.
As President Obama has said, “Preventing mass
atrocities and genocide is a core national security
interest and a core moral responsibility of the United
States of America”. A key element of that endeavour is
our commitment to seeking justice for the perpetrators
of heinous crimes regardless of where or when they were
committed. The system of international tribunals, which
now includes the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals as its newest member, is a critical
institution in that process.
Since the last reports, much progress has been made.
The Residual Mechanism has passed down its first
decision — to transfer a case for trial in Rwanda — and
opened its Arusha branch on schedule on 1 July 2012.
The Hague branch of the Mechanism is slated to open
in July 2013. As we commend the Tribunals for their
historic contribution to justice and accountability,
including the apprehension of all International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) fugitives, we also
recognize the substantial work that remains at both
Tribunals in concluding trials, downsizing staff and
transferring remaining functions to the Mechanism.

12-62879

The Tribunals still face significant challenges in
completing their mandates, and we recognize the need
for flexibility in assigning cases and determining the
appeal and trial schedules.
In light of those tasks, we appreciate the ongoing
efforts by the Tribunals to improve efficiency, share
resources and economize on costs. Efficiencies
instituted by the Mechanism, including having a
single set of Principals — President, Prosecutor and
Registrar — for both the Arusha branch and the branch
in The Hague and having the Mechanism President
preside over the Mechanism Appeals Chamber will
ensure a more efficient use of resources.
We also welcome other cost-saving measures,
such as allowing Judges to carry out their functions
remotely where possible and the common use of certain
administrative support services and other best practices.
We look forward to other measures that economize on
costs while maintaining the highest standards of justice.
Turning to the ICTY, we note the recent judgements
of the Appeals and Trial Chambers and fully support
the Tribunal and respect its rulings. The pace of work at
the ICTY remains high, with 18 individuals on trial and
15 in appeal proceedings at the close of the reporting
period. The last of the ICTY trials has begun, that of
Goran Hadžić. We commend the ICTY for expediting
trails such that it anticipates concluding all but three
trials during 2013.
While the Tribunal has implemented several
reforms to expedite trials and appeals, it was not able
to redeploy four trial judges to the Appeals Chamber,
as authorized by the Security Council in 2009, because
they are still needed at trial. We look forward to the
President’s proposals as to how that situation can be
remedied.
We recognize that staff retention will continue to be
a problem as the Tribunal nears the end of its mandate,
and we urge the General Assembly to reconsider
proposals put forward earlier for a modest financial
incentive to save funds through reduced staff turnover.
We also support the Tribunal’s outreach programme,
given the continued need for reconciliation in the States
of the former Yugoslavia.
With regard to the International Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we commend that Tribunal on the
completion of numerous cases during the previous
reporting period, including the completion of work

25

S/PV.6880

at the trial level with regard to 92 of the 93 accused.
The Trial Chamber delivered two judgemenets, in
the Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana cases, with a third
trial judgement expected in December. The Appeals
Chamber delivered four judgements in 2012. We
welcome the Tribunal’s projection that it will conclude
all cases at the trial level by the end of 2012.
We continue to urge all United Nations Member
States, in particular those in the Great Lakes region,
to cooperate in the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives from the ICTR. The United States continues
to offer monetary rewards for information leading to
the arrest or transfer of ICTR fugitives, whether those
individuals will be prosecuted by the Mechanism or in
Rwandan courts. Those who harbour fugitives obstruct
justice and stand on the wrong side of history.
We also welcome Rwanda’s commitment to
adjudicating fairly the cases transferred from the
ICTR to Rwanda. We commend the ICTR and the
International Residual Mechanism for creating a robust
monitoring mechanism for the transferred cases. We
will be watching those cases to satisfy ourselves that
the conditions for referral continue to be met ahead of
the Mechanism’s transfer of six more cases to the courts
of Rwanda as and when fugitives are apprehended.
The ICTR and the Rwandan authorities have also
shown close cooperation in holding skills-sharing
workshops and capacity-building seminars, which
will ensure fair proceedings at the national level.
Strengthening national legal and justice institutions is
one of the most important and lasting legacies of the
international tribunals such as the ICTR.
The defendants convicted in the Tribunal
proceedings have been found guilty of the most
heinous crimes known to humankind. The legacy
of the Tribunals, however, does not only consist of
bringing individual perpetrators to justice. Thanks to
the dedication of the Tribunals, these crimes have been
etched in the ledger books of history, and the records
and archives of these crimes will be accessible to future
generations, providing a corrective against distortions
of the historical narrative. The Tribunals have fostered
respect for the rule of law, developed capacity at
the national level, and enhanced reconciliation and
peace. Those are long-term achievements that not
only strengthen the societies affected by such heinous
crimes, but help ensure that those crimes will not be
repeated elsewhere. Our commitment to working with

26

the international community on behalf of this collective
moral responsibility is unwavering.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me, at the
outset, thank Judge Meron and Judge Joensen for their
briefings and assessments of the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We also appreciate the briefings given by the
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals. I also want to reiterate
our appreciation for the work done by Ambassador
Rosenthal.
We welcome the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work. We are reassured
by the assessment of Judge Meron and Judge Joensen
that the preparations for the commencement and the
functioning of the Residual Mechanism are on track.
We have noted that the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism commenced its work on 1 July, and hope
that the Hague branch of the Residual Mechanism will
begin its work on 1 July 2013, as scheduled.
We appreciate the fact that Judge Meron has
undertaken a variety of reforms to improve the
functioning of various sections of the Tribunal. As a
result, all trials will be completed by 2013, except a few
which came before it later.
We are happy to note that the ICTR has completed
work at the trial level with respect to 92 out of the
93 accused persons, and that the one remaining trial
judgement will be delivered before the end of 2012.
While appellate proceedings have been concluded
in respect to 44 persons, the remaining appeals are
projected to be completed by the end of 2014.
We also commend the efforts of the two Prosecutors
to undertake outreach initiatives, including training
aimed at strengthening the capacity of national systems
to handle referred cases effectively.
We have listened carefully to the concerns raised by
the Presidents of the two Tribunals in relation to their
ability to keep pace with their work while adhering
to expected timelines. The Judges have pointed out
that trials and appeals continue to be affected by
staffing shortages and the loss of highly efficient
staff members. We share the concerns expressed by
the Judges, especially on the need to retain adequate
and experienced staff. Careful consideration should be
given to the suggestions made by the Judges on how to

12-62879

S/PV.6880

address those challenges. Any functional, operational
or institutional issue in the implementation of the
completion strategy or the Residual Mechanism should
be addressed by the Council in consultation with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The Judges have also raised the issue concerning
the relocation of acquitted persons and those who have
already served their sentences. Some of them have been
living in safe homes in Arusha for a long time. This
is an important humanitarian issue and needs to be
resolved soon.
We welcome the cooperation extended by all States
concerned with the Tribunals, which is vital to ensuring
the completion of the mandates of the Tribunals, as well
as to the successful implementation of the completion
strategy and the Residual Mechanism. We hope that
the remaining three fugitives indicted by the ICTR
will be located soon and surrendered to the Residual
Mechanism to stand trial.
The two Tribunals should continue to implement
their mandate strictly and in accordance with the
principles of justice, impartiality and fairness. There
should be no political consideration in their work.
In conclusion, while we believe that the support
of the Security Council to the two Tribunals is crucial
at this critical stage, we urge both Tribunals to take
all necessary measures to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track. In that connection, we support
the extension of the tenures of some of the judges, as
requested by the Presidents of the two Tribunals. This
will pave the way for the completion of trials and appeals
of the remaining accused and a smooth transition to an
efficient Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to extend our appreciation to the Principals of the
Tribunals for their very useful briefings and for the
important work that they are doing. We also express
our appreciation to Ambassador Rosenthal and his
delegation for their able chairing of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
Allow us to extend particular gratitude to the
President, Prosecutor and Registrar of the newly
established Residual Mechanism, whose first report to
the Council we received today (S/2012/849, annex I).
We applaud their commitment, given that they have
assumed their responsibilities under the Residual
Mechanism while simultaneously serving as President

12-62879

of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and Registrar of the ICTY,
respectively.
When the ICTY and the ICTR were established
by the Security Council, it was understood that, as
ad hoc tribunals, their existence would not continue
indefinitely. The establishment of the Residual
Mechanism under resolution 1966 (2010) and the
beginning of the operations of the Arusha branch in
July 2012 are a reflection of the temporary nature of
those Tribunals, coupled with the recognition of the
need to prevent any impunity gaps that may arise from
the abrupt conclusion of the work of the Tribunals.
South Africa looks forward to the full realization of that
dual objective once the Hague branch of the Residual
Mechanism begins functioning.
My delegation wishes to pay tribute to both the
ICTY and the ICTR for their immense contribution to
the promotion of the rule of law and the fight against
impunity, thereby significantly contributing to the
development of international criminal law. Notable
in the jurisprudential contribution of the Tribunals
is the development of a set of criteria, including fair
trial requirements for the transfer of trials to national
jurisdictions. We are confident that those standards
will contribute meaningfully to the development
of the principle of complementarity to which South
Africa attaches particular importance. Additionally,
the two Tribunals have set a high standard for judicial
independence while operating in a highly charged
political environment.
The phasing out of the functions of the ICTR,
which is now in its final phase, is indicative of the
strides made towards its completion strategy. We look
forward to the ICTR delivering its final judgement in
the Ngirabatware case and we encourage the Tribunal,
while adhering to due process standards, to expedite the
appeals that are currently pending by 2014, as initially
determined.
While the ICTY will continue its functions into
2013 and with the Mladić, Hadžić and Karadžić trials
beyond 2013, we recognize the immense efforts of the
Tribunal in securing cooperation and ensuring the
arrests of all indictees. We encourage the ICTY, even
with the constraints and challenges highlighted in the
report (see S/2012/592), to proceed in finalizing the

27

S/PV.6880

remaining trials and appeals, as determined by the
Council.
We have taken note of the activities of the Arusha
branch of the Residual Mechanism and we commend
the Residual Mechanism for its efficiency and costsaving efforts. Those include the appointment of a judge
already residing in Arusha to act as duty judge for the
branch, the Prosecutor’s decision to designate, as an
interim measure, members of the ICTR Office of the
Prosecutor to double hat in the Residual Mechanism,
and the President’s decision to preside over the appeal
against a decision to transfer the Munyarugarama case
to Rwanda. We have also noted, in that regard, the
intention of the President to preside over any potential
appeal in the Ngirabatware case and to appoint judges
already residing in the Hague in that appeal.
We welcome such attention to efficiency and the
economical use of resources, while also calling for
burden-sharing in the management of judicial caseloads.
Consistent with its mandate under the statute, we
encourage the Residual Mechanism to continue its
effort to track fugitives and to secure the cooperation
of States in the arrest of those individuals under ICTR
arrest warrants. We are encouraged by the consultations
between the Prosecutor and the States where those
individuals are believed to be present. We urge States,
in compliance with their obligations under the statute, to
increase their efforts to secure the arrest of individuals
with outstanding arrest warrants.
Finally, we wish to welcome the high level of
cooperation among the ICTY, the ICTR and the
Residual Mechanism, including through the sharing of
resources. We encourage continued and, to the extent
possible, increased cooperation to ensure a smooth
transition, particularly as the ICTY and the ICTR wind
down their functions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents of
the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Meron and Judge Joensen, as
well as the Prosecutors, Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow,
for their very useful and thorough briefings. We would
also like to express our thanks to and appreciation of
the work of Ambassador Rosenthal as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
28

We were pleased to note the efforts and the progress
made by both Tribunals during the period under review
in the reports (see S/2012/847 and S/2012/836) with
regard to completing their work and to ensuring a
smooth transition towards the International Residual
Mechanism, which is to take over the residual functions
of the Tribunals, as provided for in resolution 1966
(2010).
We also note the steps taken by both Tribunals
to increase the pace of their work, while ensuring
due process and fair trials. We therefore positively
view the steps taken to set up the Arusha branch of
the International Residual Mechanism as of 1 July.
We support the progress to date in the transition of
the functions of the ICTR into that Mechanism. That
outcome would not have been possible without the
preparatory steps undertaken, particularly with regard
to human, logistical and legal resources, to launch the
work of the International Residual Mechanism and for
it to carry out its functions as soon as possible.
We appreciate the fact that the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has been able to meet
the schedule that it itself presented to the Council for
dealing with outstanding issues, including a verdict
on the only remaining case by the end of the year, and
for completing the appeals phase by the end of 2014, to
which it has committed.
The work of that Tribunal is coming to an end.
We commend its commitment to achieving justice,
reconciliation and national capacity-building in Rwanda
and in the region, so that the national jurisdictions can
complete some follow-up matters, in particular with
regard to bringing fugitives to justice.
Regarding the Residual Mechanism branch for
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we hope that its inauguration in The Hague
will take place at the beginning of July 2013, as planned.
We are aware of the difficulties in completing the trials
of three indictees arrested long after the other accused
persons. It is therefore vital to respect due process and
for the Tribunal to take the necessary steps to speed up
the verdicts and the implementation of the completion
strategy. We hope that such measures by the Tribunal
will help mitigate the unforeseen factors that led to
certain changes in the earlier projections with regard to
the verdicts in the remaining cases.
In conclusion, we are convinced that the ongoing
dialogue among the two Tribunals, the United Nations

12-62879

S/PV.6880

Office of Legal Affairs and the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will help to overcome the practical and institutional
difficulties facing the two Tribunals in this sensitive
period of the completion of their work. The dialogue
continues to be important to allow the Council to fully
understand the developments and challenges facing the
two Tribunals so as to enable it to receive more support
for its mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Aleksandar
Vučić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence of Serbia.
Mr. Vučić (Serbia): Due to a lack of time, I will not
read out all of my statement. I hope that members will
receive it in its full written form.
First of all, I would like to point out that Serbia, its
President and its Government are fully committed to
peace and reconciliation in the region of the Western
Balkans and that we are building a modern State, ruled
by law, that promotes the fundamental principles of the
United Nations, one of the key aspects of which is the
implementation of international law and the pursuit of
justice. It appears, from the statement of the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), that this meeting is one in a series
of regular meetings and that everything is as before and
is following the well-known and regular bureaucratic
procedure. For my country, Serbia, this is not an
ordinary meeting. It is an opportunity for us to state,
loud and clear, that international law should apply to
all evenly, rather than selectively and more to some
than others. For Serbia, law and justice trump politics.
However, we consider that law and justice have not
always been the guiding principles of the ICTY.
I would like to bring to the attention of the Council
the results that the Republic of Serbia has achieved in
its cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in preceding years, not only
in the course of fulfilling its international obligations
but also with respect to its goodwill to contribute to
achieving international justice and reconciliation in the
region.
With the arrest of Goran Hadzić in July 2011, the
Republic of Serbia completed its cooperation with the
ICTY in terms of handing over all fugitive indictees to
the Tribunal. Among the 45 indictees that the Republic
12-62879

of Serbia has transferred to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal were two former Presidents of the Republic,
a former Prime Minister, a former Deputy Prime
Minister, three former Chiefs of Staff, a former head
of the State security service and numerous military and
police generals.
With regard to cooperation on access to documents,
archives and witnesses, I must say that the Republic of
Serbia has replied to almost all the 3,200 requests for
assistance received from the Office of the Prosecutor
and the defence teams. Only newer requests are in the
process of being met. Not a single request of the Office
of the Prosecutor for assistance regarding access to the
State archives has been denied.
The information presented clearly points out the
commitment of the Republic of Serbia to determining
the truth about the crimes perpetrated during the armed
conflicts on the territory of the former Yugoslavia.
That includes punishing those responsible for crimes
regardless of their ethnicity or the ethnic origin of the
victims.
Taking those words into account, our faith in
international justice suffered the severest possible blow
in the wake of the shameful judgement of acquittal
rendered by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia’s Appeals Chamber on
16 November, which absolved Ante Gotovina and
Mladen Markač of responsibility for the crimes
committed against the Serbian civilian population in
the offensive by Croatian forces code-named Operation
Storm. The judgement, which provoked understandable
acrimony in many parts of the world — including
reactions by both officials of the Republic of Serbia
and, more importantly, the people of Serbia, as well as
international experts — caused great damage, first and
foremost to the families of the victims of the crimes
committed during Operation Storm.
It is very relevant to raise some questions. Do
Serbs, too, have a right to justice? Who is responsible
for the numerous killings of Serbian civilians in Croatia
and for the largest and most extensive ethnic cleansing
on European soil since the Second World War?
The general attack on the Republic of Serbian
Krajina began on 4 August 1995 at 5:06 a.m. with the
indiscriminate bombing of military and civilian targets
in Sectors North and South — the zones under the
protection of United Nations forces. More than 250,000
Serbs were expelled or fled the territory of the Republic

29

S/PV.6880

of Serbian Krajina taken by the Croatian military.
Representatives of the United Nations and the European
Union Monitoring Mission in Zagreb witnessed
numerous crimes against the Serbian population
during Operation Storm, which is evidenced by reports
sent to their superiors. The decision to forbid United
Nations representatives from leaving their barracks at
Knin to patrol the area at the beginning of Operation
Storm leads us to believe that the decision was made to
prevent them from witnessing the killing and expulsion
of Serbs from the Republic of Serbian Krajina.
The international community was faced with the
largest humanitarian catastrophe since the beginning
of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, while United
Nations staff reported that serious crimes were being
committed against captured Serbian soldiers and
civilians as well as reporting the removal of bodies and
the destruction and looting of Serbs’ property.
I would like to bring to the Council’s attention
some of the crimes and murders committed against the
Serbian population by the forces under the command of
Mladen Markač and Ante Gotovina. In Sector South, at
about 10.00 a.m. the Seventh Brigade — the so-called
Pumas — entered Knin and immediately blockaded
United Nations forces with five tanks, and then
proceeded to “mop the terrain” — meaning to liquidate
the remaining Serbs. As a result, the lifeless bodies of
dead civilians could be seen on 4 and 5 August 1995.
They were removed by night on 5 and 6 August 1995.
On 4 August 1995, at 11.15 a.m., United Nations
forces tried to force their way to a hospital in five
armoured personnel carriers to evacuate the wounded.
They were prevented from doing so by the Pumas. The
“mopping” of the other parts of Sector South was carried
out on 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 August 1995, in an ongoing
attempt to kill all remaining Serbs. Entire villages
were looted and burned before the very eyes of the
representatives of the United Nations. One example of
those crimes is the town of Kistanje, which was burned,
leaving no survivors. The same fate befell the village
of Kosovo and the village of Parcice. On 10 August,
United Nations forces found the decomposed bodies of
seven Serbian civilians in the village of Uzdalje.
A 2.5-ton refrigerated truck and an ambulance were
used to ferry the bodies of killed Serbian civilians to be
buried in the local cemetery near the Knin church on
10 August. The operation was once again commanded
by the Puma commander. United Nations staff members
were prevented from testifying about the event.
30

The same types of crimes were committed in Sector
North. Crimes against the Serbian population took
place in other areas targeted by Operation Storm in
the immediate aftermath of the operation. On 6 August
1995, Đuro Borojević, from the village of Borojević, in
the municipality of Kostajnica, was killed in front of
his house. His home was set on fire. Milos Borojević,
born in 1948, from the same village was also killed. He
was slaughtered and burned with his house.
Husband and wife Luka and Milica Dobre from the
village of Prukljen were killed and burned with their
house in the village of Josevci, in the municipality
of Glina. When the old man’s body was found he
was decapitated and both his arms were cut off. The
remains of at least four burned persons were found in a
haystack. Two of them were identified as husband and
wife Cvijo and Desanka Matijević.
Who killed those people? The question remains
unanswered.
On 6 August, Mara Ugarković, 74 years old and
bedridden, was burned in her home in the village of
Komić, near Udbina. Petar Lavmić and his mother
Sava and Mika Pavlica were also killed and burned.
Boja Mirković was killed in the hamlet of Poljice. On
27 August in the village of Gosić, near Djevrska, eight
civilians were killed, aged about 70, seven of them
from the Borak family — Savo, Vasilj, Grozdana,
Mania, Kola, Milka and Dusan. The eighth casualty
was Joko Mazibrada. All of them were buried secretly
at the Knin cemetery under serial numbers 550 to 557
without first or last names. The Ministry of the Interior
of Croatia refused to give the bodies to the relatives, in
an attempt to hide the crime.
Who killed those people?
In the report of the representatives of the Monitoring
Mission of 6 September 1995 it is stated, inter alia, that
United Nations military observers inspected about
10,000 houses in 140 small villages and found that
69 per cent had been partially or completely destroyed
or burned. The report proceeds to describe the looting
and burning of Serbian houses at Petrovac that took
place at the beginning of September, a month after
Operation Storm.
Those are just a few important pieces of information
about the crimes committed against the Serbian people
during Operation Storm.

12-62879

S/PV.6880

I shall end my presentation by raising the question
once again: If Gotovina and Markač are not guilty of
the crime, who is? The question has not been answered
by the Tribunal.
It is important to emphasize several striking facts
and controversies related to the acquittal judgement.
The judgement was rendered by three votes to two
of the Appeals Chamber judges. The two dissenting
judges explained their dissenting opinions in an
unusually fierce tone. Judge Fausto Pocar, one of
the dissenting judges and a former President of the
Tribunal, emphasized that the verdict was contrary to
any sense of justice, and he described it as grotesque.
It is also surprising that the majority of the judges of
the Appeals Chamber — which was established by the
United Nations — have little confidence in the generals
and other high-ranking United Nations Member State
officials who were in the field under the United Nations
flag at the time of the events that were the subject of
the Trial Chamber’s decision and who gave testimony
about the events before the Trial Chamber. All those
testimonies were dismissed in the Appeals judgement.
In addition, both the former and present Prosecutor
of the Tribunal expressed their disappointment in the
judgement and emphasized that the verdict was unjust.
In assessing the effects of that judgement, we
have to emphasize that, considering the results of the
Tribunal’s work, the Tribunal failed to sentence the
perpetrators responsible for more than 1,500 Serbs
from Croatia killed, for more than 250,000 Serbs
from Croatia forced to leave their homes — expelled
from their thresholds — and for various other crimes
committed against the civilian population in Operation
Storm, regardless of the fact that the Tribunal found in
its judgements, with absolute certainty, that the crimes
were committed during that period. I deeply thank
Mr. Brammertz for confirming that today.
It should be emphasized that this is not the first
time that the Tribunal has concluded in its practice that
crimes took place but found that neither the indictees
nor anyone else was responsible for the crimes that
were perpetrated.
The second decision, a retrial by the Trial Chamber,
acquitted of all charges Ramush Haradinaj, a former
commander of the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army,
Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj for crimes committed
in the Jablanica camp in 1998 against ethnic Serbs and
others in the Metohija area of the Serbian province of
Kosovo and Metohija.
12-62879

The judgement of acquittal in the proceedings
Prosecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj and Lahi
Brahimaj, which was rendered on the retrial based on the
six counts of indictment for the crimes perpetrated in the
Kosovo Liberation Army camp in Jablanica in Kosovo
and Metohija in 1998 had similar effects. The Trial
Chamber allowed the provisional release of Haradinaj
and permitted him to engage in political activities,
which represents a unique case in the Tribunal’s
practice, even though at the time the Tribunal must
have been aware of the fact that there was a problem of
witness protection in the case. The attitude of the staff
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) towards the case and towards the
accused Haradinaj was very strange as well. In spite
of the obvious problems, UNMIK provided assurances
for Haradinaj’s provisional release, while the UNMIK
Head at the time, Mr. Petersen, publicly declared
Haradinaj his friend.
That decision added insult to injury, as it is well
known that a significant number of eyewitnesses were
killed under extremely suspicious circumstances or
refused to testify after heavy pressure was placed on
them. A few potential witnesses in the case died under
controversial circumstances, while several of the key
witnesses, according to the Office of the Prosecutor,
refused to testify before the Tribunal out of fear for
their personal safety. Despite the clear obligation to
protect witnesses, the Tribunal failed to do so.
Let me now give just a few examples of crimes
committed against the Serbian, non-Albanian and
Albanian populations in the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija under the command of Ramush Haradinaj.
In 1998 and 1999, Ramush Haradinaj organized and
carried out terrorist attacks against members of the
Army of Yugoslavia and the Ministry of the Interior
of the Republic of Serbia, including crimes against the
Serbian population and non-loyal Albanians.
On 22 April 1998, Slobodan Radosevic, Milos
Radunovic and Milica Radunovic from the village of
Dasinovac, Municipality of Decane, were kidnapped.
All of them were taken to the prison established by
Ramush Haradinaj in the village of Glodjane, in the
municipality of Decane, where they were abused.
Radosevic was brought back to the village, where
he was killed. Radunovic was also brought back to
Dasinovac and killed and burned in his home, while
Milica Radunovic was killed in the village of Glodjane

31

S/PV.6880

and thrown into Lake Radonjic. Haradinaj and Balaj are
suspected of committing the crime.
On 18 June 1998, Vucic Vukovic, Novica Vujsic and
Izet Gutic were kidnapped in the village of Glodjane
and taken to the local prison, where they were killed
after being tortured. Ramush Haradinaj is suspected of
having committed the crime.
On 14 December 1998, six young men — Ivan
Obradovic, Dragan Trifovic, Zoran Stanojevic, Svetislav
Ristic, Vukosav Gvozdenovic and Ivan Radevic — were
killed in a terrorist attack on the Panda Cafe in Peć.
The perpetrators of the crime were under the command
of Ramush Haradinaj. My question today is: Who is
responsible for the deaths of those people?
Among 40 Serbian children who were killed,
massacred or kidnapped in Kosovo and Metojiha
was also little Ana Takic from Prizren, six-years old,
abducted with her 71-year old grandfather Veselin
by a group of Albanians on 28 August 1999. In
mid-September, Ana was found dead on the PrizrenZur road. She had one of her arms cut off. Who killed
little Ana and who is responsible for it?
The Sutakovic family — Nedeljko, his wife
Dara and their three sons Aleksandar, Djordje and
Radoman — from Djakovica were kidnapped on their
way to the church in Djakovica, where they wanted
to hide from Albanian terrorists. All of them are still
missing and unaccounted for.
We have to emphasize the fact that when the
results of the Tribunal’s practice are summarized, it
becomes clear that despite the hundreds of thousands of
Serbian refugees, and thousands of dead and wounded,
the Tribunal has sentenced only a few guards from
the Celebici prison camp in Bosnia and two Kosovo
Albanians who were direct perpetrators of lower rank.
We emphasize that Serbia has never asked for
symmetry in relation to the Tribunal’s indictments and
judgements. However, that outcome makes a case for
the claim that justice in the Tribunal’s proceedings
has been selective, and it is clear that selective justice
cannot be regarded as justice. In conclusion, the result
of the Tribunal’s work in relation to justice served for
the numerous Serbian victims of the armed conflicts
that occurred in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
can be described as grotesque — the exact same word
that Judge Pocar used to describe the judgement entered
by the Appeals Chamber in the case of Prosecutor v.
Ante Gotovina and Mladen Markač.
32

The most important task before the Tribunal was to
contribute to the reconciliation efforts in the Western
Balkans. In its more than 10 years of existence, it has
convicted a number of former Serbian political and
military leaders for war crimes. At the same time, it has
failed to convict a single senior official from Croatia
or Bosnia, and failed to convict a single senior Kosovo
Albanian official for war crimes or crimes against
humanity.
In view of the recent judgement, the Serbian nation
has therefore been singled out as the sole perpetrator
of such acts and the sole people responsible for the
terrible violence that engulfed the former Yugoslavia
in the 1990s. That is manifestly not in conformity with
the facts. The Tribunal has failed to deliver justice by
failing to adequately apportion blame.
It is to be underlined that the wars in the former
Yugoslavia were civil, ethnic and even religious. There
was no innocence in the face of evil. All parties were
warring parties, and there were victims and criminal
acts on all sides.
We say all of this today before the Security Council
not because we expect the judgements of the Tribunal
so far can be altered, but because the Tribunal was
established by the Security Council. We recall that the
Tribunal was established for the purpose of bringing
peace and maintaining peace and security in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia. Today, almost 20 years after
the establishment of the Tribunal, the question arises as
to whether the Tribunal has succeeded in that intention.
The Government of the Republic of Serbia will
continue to cooperate with the Tribunal at the technical
level.
The Republic of Serbia believes that a full
understanding of the work of the Tribunal and the
consequences of its decisions need to be brought to
light before the entire international community so that
never again can evil deeds be amnestied or glorified
by those who defend them. That will only serve to
incentivize their repetition, the exact opposite of the
Security Council’s intent when it established the ICTY.
With regard to the activities of the Tribunal, I
have to emphasize that the following issues are of the
utmost importance for Serbia: the initiative to allow
individuals convicted before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to serve their prison
sentences in the States that emerged in the territory of

12-62879

S/PV.6880

the former Yugoslavia of which they are citizens, and
the future of the archives of the Tribunal.
With regard to the initiative to allow individuals
convicted before the ICTY to serve their prison
sentences in the States that emerged in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia of which they are citizens, I recall
that the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council contained in paragraph 121 of his
report dated 3 May 1993, in which he indicated that he
“is of the view that, given the nature of the crimes
in question and the international character of the
tribunal, the enforcement of sentences should take
place outside the territory of the former Yugoslavia”
(S/25704, para. 121),
remains in effect. Although that attitude could have
been justified in 1993 during the armed conflict in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia, it is clear that
it has lost its validity and that the circumstances have
changed.
I would like to emphasize that the primary motive
of this initiative is the readiness of the Republic of
Serbia to assume the responsibility of the prison
sentences imposed on the citizens of the Republic
of Serbia convicted before the Tribunal in The
Hague. In addition, it should be emphasized that the
purpose of the conviction, among others, includes the
resocialization of the convicts. In that context, we
consider it unlikely to expect that convictions will be
effective in cases when convicts serve their sentences
in remote countries, without knowing the language and
where visits by family members are rare. We therefore
strongly appeal to the Security Council to urgently and
favourably consider that request.
Also, I would like to reiterate that Serbia is highly
interested in the issue of the future of the Tribunal’s
archives. The official position of Serbia relative to that
issue was provided to the Security Council in October
2008. Serbia is ready to actively participate in all
future discussions regarding that matter and continue
its cooperation with the Security Council Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals in relation
to those issues.
It is our belief that the accomplishment of the
aforementioned aims is of exceptional importance,
primarily in order to ensure that justice is done for
the victims of the gruesome crimes that I have spoken
about, but also for the future of the region of the
Western Balkans. If the Security Council is serious
12-62879

about furthering reconciliation in the Balkans, it is
critical now to avoid any perception of impropriety or
undue influence. That is why the Security Council must
remain actively involved.
Serbia is on its road to Europe and is interested
in cooperating with all peoples and countries of the
region. It has undertaken to fulfil all of its international
obligations. It conducts dialogue with Pristina under
the oversight of the European Union, and the only thing
that Serbia is asking for is justice — nothing more,
nothing less.
Finally, it has been my honour to address the
Council today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Since this is the first
time that my delegation takes the floor this month, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
At the same time, I would like to thank Ambassador
Hardeep Singh Puri and the Indian delegation for their
excellent work last month.
Allow me to begin by welcoming Presidents Meron
and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow, and by thanking them for the reports on the work
of the Tribunals and on the progress and challenges in
the implementation of the completion strategy.
The Republic of Croatia advocated the
establishment of the Tribunal and its operation from
the outset. Its establishment was a welcome and muchneeded development that signaled the international
community’s opposition and response to the culture
of impunity that had for centuries prevailed in matters
concerning responsibility for crimes committed during
war and armed conflict.
The main purpose of the Tribunal has been to
prosecute persons responsible for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and to contribute
thereby to the restoration and maintenance of peace, as
well as to the promotion of justice and reconciliation in
the region.
Despite certain shortcomings, the Court has played
an important role in enhancing the universality of
justice. We sincerely hope that judicial proceedings
against indicted individuals will be concluded in a
short period of time, taking into account the deadlines

33

S/PV.6880

for completion of the work of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
Prosecuting war crimes is a process that must
continue. An important element of that process is
confronting the past, however difficult it may be. The
acceptance of the substantiated truth is a prerequisite
to the process leading to reconciliation. We understand
the possible frustration of those who developed their
positions based on attempts to create a false sense of
parity by equating criminal policy in se with individual
crimes committed on the other side that did not have
support in Government policy. However, we cannot
accept reactions that are tantamount to questioning or
even rejecting the decisions of the Tribunal and that
contribute to creating an atmosphere that makes it
difficult to continue the positive processes under way
in the region. We are of the view that every responsible
member of the international community should respect
legal order and the commitments undertaken, whether
they agree with them or not.
The initial purpose of the Tribunal can be achieved
only by determining the truth. Part of the truth that
the Tribunal confirmed in the recent judgements
concerning retired Croatian generals is that Croatia
was not involved in and did not conduct any joint
criminal enterprise, and that it was not Government
policy to plan or commit war crimes. On the other
hand, the judgement did not state that there were no
individual crimes, including war crimes, committed by
the Croatian side. We are aware that on an individual
level such crimes did occur, and this judgement does
not by any means trivialize those crimes or negate the
fact that they are unacceptable. The Republic of Croatia
has prosecuted many individuals for such crimes, and
I particularly stress that it will continue to do so. In
doing this, we count on the cooperation of all interested
States and organizations. Furthermore, we call upon
other successor States of the former Yugoslavia to
process war crimes committed by their own citizens.
An additional reason why Croatia supported the
work of the Tribunal was its contribution to building
sound foundations for post-war and future cooperation
in the region. An independent outside judicial body
that recognizes and sanctions individual responsibility
for specific war crimes reduces the danger of mutual
arbitrary accusations and retribution against whole
nations and peoples in the region. The recent verdict
in the case of the retired Croatian generals was met
with criticism by Croatia’s neighbour, Serbia. While

34

we fully cooperated with the Tribunal, the final verdict
was reached by the Tribunal alone. Since the Tribunal
was established by the Security Council, we feel that
any grievance regarding the decisions of the Tribunal
should be addressed by the founding body rather than
by Croatia.
Croatia is deeply committed to the continuation
of the process of reconciliation between the successor
States to the former Yugoslavia, and fully supports
regional cooperation in the area of war crimes. We are
confident that such cooperation should be conducted
pursuant to well-established principles of international
criminal law, one of which is the principle of double
jeopardy, and in full observance of respective national
jurisdictions and competencies. In this context, we
would like to recall that, in March 2012, Croatia
presented Serbia with a draft bilateral agreement on
the prosecution and punishment of war crimes. Croatia
firmly believes that this type of proposed cooperation
presents the best approach to solving war-crime issues,
as opposed to the practice of one country claiming
jurisdiction for war crimes that were not committed
in its territory or by its citizens. However, we regret
to inform the Council that we have not received any
response from the Serbian side to date.
To conclude, in all the years that the Tribunal
has operated, there have been instances in which the
Republic of Croatia was unsatisfied, but it has always
cooperated with the Prosecutor and the Tribunal.
Regardless of the public perception of the Tribunal’s
decisions, we have always fully respected them. Finally,
although the ICTY office is set to be closed, my country
is determined to continue to cooperate until the final
completion of the Tribunal’s mandate. Croatia would
also like to reiterate its commitment to the prosecution
of war crimes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): The
establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and their legacy
should serve as a message to future generations that
no one is above the law and crimes such as those that
claimed lives in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will
not be tolerated anywhere. I thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors for their comprehensive briefings today.

12-62879

S/PV.6880

Moving on to the issue of the completion of the
work of both Tribunals, we note the further efforts
that the Tribunals have made recently, together with
the additional reform of the Tribunals’ procedures,
focusing on enhancing productivity and maximizing
efficiency, without sacrificing standards of due
process. It is evident that they continue to face all the
same challenges, which unavoidably have a substantial
impact on the completion of their work and the
fulfilment of the requirements necessary for transition
to the Residual Mechanism.
We are hopeful that, in their final stages, the
Tribunals will be able to swiftly overcome temporary
delays in confirming their firm, final promises and that
justice will be served on the perpetrators of atrocities.
The victims and their families have waited long enough
for the opportunity for redress and closure, and further
delays only undermine such solemn promises. In that
regard, the reassignment of judges, both permanent and
ad litem, according to the current requirements of trial
and appeal proceedings in the ICTY, was a positive
and necessary step in order to increase their ability to
effectively address simultaneous cases.
For those reasons, strengthening international
criminal justice, ensuring accountability and not
leaving room for impunity for registered crimes
committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia
are some of the priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and our commitment and dedication to them are strong
and unwavering. In that regard, we note that the
crimes committed, which were undoubtedly confirmed
by the Tribunal in The Hague, should not remain
unpunished. We note the assessments and concerns of
the Prosecutors, and we are fully aware that there is a
lot more to be done.
It is necessary to bear in mind, however, that
Bosnia and Herzegovina bears the greatest burden
of prosecutions for war crimes, and that since 2005
over 100 cases have been prosecuted successfully
and all cases transferred pursuant to Rule 11 bis have
been completed. The fact remains that my country is
still faced with a difficult task, as some 1,300 cases
remain to be processed. Furthermore, we fully agree
that cooperation between the countries of the region
is highly important, and that every effort should be
devoted to its improvement through numerous bilateral
agreements to address possible deficiencies.

obligations and ensuring accountability for all crimes
committed. With the Mechanism ready to continue
carrying out the functions of both Tribunals, we have
ensured that the comprehensive corpus of precedents
in international criminal law created by the Tribunals,
their ground-breaking contribution to international
jurisprudence and the international justice system, will
be permanently preserved. It is our pledge to future
generations, and our obligation to the victims and their
immense pain and suffering, to ensure that for every
crime committed and every victim, on every side, a
perpetrator brought to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): First,
Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming this precious, even coveted seat on behalf of
the goodf and beautiful Kingdom of Morocco. It is clear
that the world will be in good hands in December, as
it also was during the very busy month of November
under the leadership of Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri, whom I commend for his outstanding work.
(spoke in English)
My delegation wishes to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports on the
completion strategies of their respective Tribunals
(S/2012/592 and S/2012/594).
My delegation commends the ICTR’s achievements
since its inception and hopes that it will complete its
trials successfully, despite the challenges it faces
relating to staff retention and recruitment. Indeed, it
has so far delivered 54 first-instance judgements on 74
accused persons, and we look forward to a judgement in
the case of Augustin Ngirabatware, which is scheduled
in just two weeks and will close the Tribunal’s trials at
first instance.
However, despite those encouraging steps towards
the completion of the ICTR’s work, much more needs to
be done. In that regard, Rwanda urges the countries of
the region and beyond to cooperate with the Tribunal in
making additional efforts to track, arrest and transfer
the remaining genocide fugitives, particularly those
most wanted, such as Félicien Kabuga and Protais
Mpiranya.

Finally, I wish to reiterate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina affirms its commitment to fulfilling its
12-62879

35

S/PV.6880

Earlier this year, Rwanda welcomed the decision
of the Federal Court of Canada to extradite Léon
Mugesera to Rwanda, a genocide suspect well known
for his November 1992 hate speech against the Tutsi.
However, many more genocide fugitives are living
quietly in Europe and North America. We would
encourage those countries concerned to arrest and/or
extradite all genocide fugitives or suspects living on
their soil instead of harbouring them and sometimes
participating in their negative campaigns against our
country.
As stated in the ICTR report, the Tribunal referred
eight cases to Rwanda, among which were those of two
apprehended fugitives, Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard
Munyagishari. Although the appeal decision on the
latter case is still pending, my delegation thanks the
ICTR for this vote of confidence in Rwanda’s justice
system, and pledges its cooperation in completing those
trials successfully.
In November 2007, the Tribunal also referred two
other cases — those of Wenceslas Munyeshyaka and
Laurent Bucyibaruta — to the national jurisdiction
of France. However, five years after that referral,
little has been done to try the accused, and Rwanda is
concerned about that. We take note of the ICTR report,
which states that “significant progress” was made in
those cases during the reporting period. Nonetheless,
we would like to see more details on the state of the
proceedings in the next ICTR report, and we call on
France to expedite those proceedings.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to paragraph 2 of article 25 of the Statute of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals (resolution 1966 (2010), annex 1), which
provides that
“the Mechanism shall have the power to supervise
the enforcement of sentences pronounced by the
ICTY, the ICTR or the Mechanism, including
the implementation of sentence enforcement
agreements entered into by the United Nations with
Member States”.
In that regard, Rwanda, while deeply concerned
about the political, security and humanitarian situation
in Mali, is also alarmed by information according to
which genocide convicts who were transferred to
Mali to serve their sentences are leading lavish lives
and running businesses. We have been informed that
the 14 convicts, including former Prime Minister Jean

36

Kambanda, run businesses in Mali’s capital, Bamako,
and are allowed to leave their cells, unguarded, in
order to visit their friends and families. We call on
the Mechanism to investigate this serious matter and,
if it is confirmed, to take appropriate measures to end
the situation, including by reviewing the sentence
enforcement agreement with Mali.
Rwanda commends the work being done by the
ICTR to transfer its archives to the Mechanism, but, as
the Council may know, our country is looking further
ahead. We have always believed that the ICTR archives
should remain the property of the United Nations, since
genocide is a crime committed against humanity. At the
same time, however, we also believe that the archives
are an important part of the heritage of the Rwandan
people, since genocide was committed by Rwandans
against their fellow Rwandans and on Rwandan territory.
That is why, on many occasions, my Government has
requested that we host the United Nations archives in
Kigali, upon completion of the work of the Mechanism.
That request was also recently supported by the
East African Community, a subregional organization
whose members are Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda
and Tanzania, which is the ICTR host country. Indeed,
these records constitute an integral part of our history
and are vital for the preservation of the memory and
education of our younger generations. Locating the
archives in Rwanda would ensure easy access for
genocide survivors, researchers and the broader
international community, with a view to achieving
the mission of the United Nations to promote peace,
prevent genocide and protect civilians under threat of
extermination.
Eighteen years after a devastating genocide,
Rwanda, with the support of the Security Council, has
come a long way in delivering justice to victims and in
promoting reconciliation in Rwanda. The communitybased Gacaca jurisdictions were officially closed on
18 June, after trying more than 400,000 people and
fostering truth and reconciliation.
With the upcoming closure of the ICTR, Rwanda
will symbolically close a dark chapter in its history and
will focus on the consolidation of peace, reconciliation
and development
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, Rwanda wishes once again to
pay tribute to the ICTR, which has largely been able
to render justice to the people of Rwanda and to
12-62879

S/PV.6880

humankind. We would also like to sincerely thank
the Security Council for the work that has been
accomplished in that regard, in particular through the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
led by my dear friend, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of
Guatemala, to whom I also wish to pay tribute. Rwanda,
which will become a Council member in a few weeks’
time, will naturally work with the Council to ensure
the successful completion of the work of the ICTR as

12-62879

well as of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

37
