Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
771 (VIII). Acceptance by the specialized agen•
cies of the jurisdiction of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal in matters involving
applications alleging non-observance of the
regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the interim report 17 presented by
the Secretary-General, pursuant to paragraph 4 of
General Assembly resolution 678 (VII) of 21 December 1952;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report further through the Joint Staff Pension Board on the
action taken by the appropriate governing organs of
the specialized agencies concerned in response to the
recommendation of the General Assembly that they accept the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in matters involving applications alleging
non-observance of the regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
772 (VIII). Amendments to the Regulations of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendations 18 proposed
by the Joint Staff Pension Board in pursuance of article
XXXVII of the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund, with respect to amendments
and additions to be made to articles V, VII, XI, XVI
and XXVII of the Regulations,
1. Approves the amendments and additions to articles V, VII and XVI of the Regulations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund as set forth in the
annex to the present resolution and decides that the
articles so amended shall take effect as from 1 January
1954;
2. Approves the amendment to article XXVII of
the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as set forth in the annex to the present
resolution and decides that the article so amended shall
take effect as from 1 January 1955 ;
3. Decides that article XI of the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be retained in its present form for the time being and requests the Joint Staff Pension Board to re-examine its
provisions and to report to the General Assembly at its
tenth session.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
ANNEX

Revi•ed Regulation. of the United Nation.
Joint Staff Pen•ion Fund
REVISED AUICLE

V

Disability benefits
Subject to the provisions of articles X, 1 (b) and XVI, a
participant, who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the
opinion of the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to
Perform his duties owing _to serious physical or mental im17 See document A/2463.
1 8 See document A/2422.

37

pairment shall be entitled, subject to article IX, while such
disability continues, to a disability benefit payable in the same
manner as a retirement benefit and equal to nine-tenths of onesixtieth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the
number of years of his contributory service not exceeding
thirty years. This disability benefit shall be not less than the
smaller of:
(a) Three-tenths of the final average remuneration;
or
(b) Nine-tenths of the retirement benefit to which he would
have been entitled if he had remained in service until he had
reached the age of sixty and his final average remuneration
had remained unchanged.
REVISED ARTICLE

VI I

Death benefits

1. Subject to the provisions of article XVI, if a married
male participant dies, his widow shall be entitled, subject to
article IX, to a widow's benefit amounting, except as provided
in paragraph 3 below, to half of the benefit which would have
been paid to the participant had he qualified for a disability
benefit at the time of his death or, if such deceased participant
had attained the age of sixty, to one-half of the benefit which
would have been paid to the participant had he retired under
the provisions of article IV at the time of his death. This
benefit shall cease on the widow's re-marriage.
2. (a) If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement
benefit as provided under article IV dies, his widow, provided
she was his wife at the time of the cessation of his service with
the member organization, shall be entitled, except as provided
in paragraph 3 below, to a widow's benefit half as large as the
benefit which was being paid to the deceased at the time of his
death. However, if the deceased at the time of his retirement
had received a lump sum as provided in article IV, in lieu of
part of the retirement benefit to which he was entitled, the
widow's benefit shall be half of the total retirement benefit to
which the staff member was entitled at the cessation of his
service. This benefit shall cease on the widow's re-marriage.
(b) If a married man who is a recipient of a disability
benefit dies, his widow, provided she was his wife six months
before he qualified for a disability benefit, shall be entitled,
except as provided in paragraph 3 below, to a widow's benefit
half as large as the benefit being paid to the deceased at the
time of his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's remarriage.
( c) Notwithstanding sub-paragraph ( b) above, when the
disability of the deceased was the result of an accident or of
damage to health arising from service in an unhealthy area, his
widow, provided she was his wife at the time he qualified for
the disability benefit, shall be entitled to a widow's benefit half
as large as the benefit which was being paid to the deceased at
the time of his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's
re-marriage.
3. If a widow eligible for a benefit under paragraph 1 or 2 is
younger than the deceased by more than twenty years, the annual
amount of the benefit shall be reduced so that the value of the
benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the benefit which
would have been payable to a widow twenty years younger
than the deceased.
4. Upon ceasing to be entitled to a widow's benefit by reason
of re-marriage, the widow shall be entitled to a lump-sum payment equal to twice the annual amount of her widow's benefit.
5. Upon the death of a participant who does not leave a
widow entitled to a widow's benefit, there shall be paid to his
designated recipient a sum equal to:
(a) His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2¾ per cent per annum, plus
( b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a member organization at the time of his entry into the Pension Fund,
without interest.
If a designated recipient does not survive a participant or

38

General Assembly-Eighth Session

if a participant has not made, or has revoked, a designation,
such sum shall be paid to the participant's estate.
6. A widow whose annual benefit under this article is less
than 120 dollars may, prior to the first payment of such benefit
and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension Board, receive
in lieu thereof a lump sum which is the actuarial equivalent of
such benefit.
7. Should a married woman participant die and her widower
be found by the Joint Staff Pension Board on the basis of a
medical examination to be totally and permanently incapable
either physically or mentally of providing for his own support,
at the time of her death, he shall be entitled to the same benefits
as set forth in this article, as would a widow of a male participant.
REVISED ARTICLE

XVI

Contributions on account of participants
1. Seven per cent of the pensionable remuneration of each
participant shall be deducted from his remuneration and paid
each month to the Pension Fund.
2. During any period of sick leave on full or partial pay,
a participant shall continue to contribute to the Pension Fund
by deduction from such payments on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration, and any benefit under these regulations
to which he becomes entitled during such period shall be calculated on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration.
3. (a) A participant on leave without pay, granted for reasons other than the performance of military service, shall be
covered by the full benefits provided under these regulations if
full contributions on his account are received on the dates on
which they would normally become due.
( b) A participant on leave without pay, granted for reasons
other than the performance of military service, on whose account full contributions arc not so received, shall be covered by
the full benefits prm·ided under these regulations for a period
of four months, or for such longer period as the Board, upon
the application of the participant, may allow; thereafter he
shall be covered only by the benefits provided in paragraph 5
of this article.
4. A participant on leave without pay, granted for the performance of military service, shall be covered only by the benefits provided in paragraph 5 of th,s article, and the Joint Staff
Pension Board shall not accept contributions on his account
during the period of such leave.
5. (a) A participant on leave without pay who is not covered by the full benefits provided under these regulations, who
reaches the age of sixty and retires, shall be entitled to a retirement benefit as provided under article IV.
( b) Any such participant who before reaching the age of
sixty becomes disabled or withdraws from the Fund shall become entitled to a withdrawal benefit under article X.
( c) If such a participant dies, his designated recipient shall
become entitled to a benefit calculated in the same manner as
a withdrawal benefit under article X.
(d) If a participant on leave without pay, grantee\ for the
.performance of military service, becomes disabled or dies before reaching the age of sixty, the benefit payable under subparagraph (b) or (c) of this paragraph shall not be less than
the individual actuarial resene of such participant calculated at
the time disability or death occurred.
6. A period of leave without pay shall not be included in a
participant's contributory service unless full contributions are
received during the currency of such lea\'e or unless, within
a period of twelve months from the participant's return to
work, f nil contributions in respect of such period, with interest
at the rate of 2)/, per cent per annum, are received by the
Fund.
7. Payment of full contributions in accordance with the
provisions of this article on liehalf of a participant who is or
has been on leave without pay may be made either (a) in full
by the participant, or (b) in full by the member organization,
or ( c) by the participant and the member organization in such
shares as they may determine.

8. For the purpose of this article, "full contributions" means
the sum of the contributions payable by a participant under
paragraph 1 of this article, and the contributions payable by a
member organization under article XVII in respect of his
participation.
REVISED ARTICLE XXVII

Administrative expenses
Expenses incurred in the administration of these regulations by the Joint Staff Pension Board shall be met by the
Fund.
2. Estimates of the administrative expenses referred to in
paragraph 1 shall be submitted annually to the General Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
3. Expenses incurred in the administration of these regulations by the staff pension committee of a member organization
shall be met out of the general budget of that organization.
1.

773 (VIIl). Admission of staff members of the
Interim Commission for the International
Trade Organization to membership in the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report 19 of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board regarding the participation
of the staff of the Interim Commission for the International Trade Organization in the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Taking note of the comments 20 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its ninth report to the eighth session of the
General Assembly,
1. Decides that, upon request of the competent authority, the Interim Commission for the International
Trade Organization may be admitted to participation
in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund but
without representation with voting rights on the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
2. Requests that, upon the receipt of such a request
on behalf of the Interim Commission for the International Trade Organization, the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board prepare amendments to the Regulations of the lT nited Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
which would give effect to this decision and report to
the General Assembly at its ninth session.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
774 (VITI). Assumption by organs of the United
Nations of functions and responsibilities assigned to them under the terms of the Protocol for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation of the Poppy Plant, the Production of,
International and Wholesale Trade in, and
Use of Opium, 1953, and of the financial burdens resulting therefrom
The General Assembly,
Having regard to resolution 505 I (XVI) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council on 28 July 1953,
Decides:
1. To approve the assumption by organs of the
United ~ations of the functions and responsibilities
assigned to them by the Protocol, 21 adopted by the
19

20

21

See document A/2422, part II.
See document A/2524.
See United Nations Publication, Sales No.: 1953.XI.6.
