A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/5
1 November 1994

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 21
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/L.6)]
49/5. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/11 of 29 October 1992 relating to the
promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of 28 September 1994
on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of American
States, 1/
Taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" 2/ and "An Agenda for Development" 3/ and the related
consultations within the United Nations and with regional organizations on
these subjects,

_____________
1/

A/49/450.

2/

A/47/277-S/24111.

3/

A/48/935.

94-60027
/...

A/RES/49/5
Page 2

Recalling that the purposes of the United Nations are, inter alia, to
achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an
economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to be a
centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of these
common ends,
Bearing in mind that the Charter of the United Nations provides for the
existence of regional arrangements and agencies for dealing with such matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace and security as are
appropriate for regional action, and whose activities are consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recalling also that the Charter of the Organization of American States
reaffirms these purposes and principles and provides that that organization is
a regional agency under the terms of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction that the second general meeting between
representatives of the United Nations system and of the Organization of
American States was held at the headquarters of the Organization of American
States on 3 and 4 May 1993, and that a sectoral meeting on natural disasters
management in the Americas was held in Barbados on 28 and 29 April 1994,
Welcoming the meeting on peace, held at United Nations Headquarters on 1
August 1994 between the Secretary-General and heads of regional organizations,
Bearing in mind the adoption by the General Assembly of the Organization
of American States, on 8 June 1994, of resolution AG/RES.1289(XXIV-O/94), also
on cooperation between the Organization of American States and the United
Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 47/20 A, 47/20 B and 48/27 B of
24 November 1992, 20 April 1993 and 8 July 1994, respectively,
Aware that the effective consolidation of a new international order
requires regional action in harmony with that of the United Nations,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of
American States, as well as of his efforts to strengthen that cooperation;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
initiative in meeting with heads of regional organizations on 1 August 1994
and recommends that similar meetings be held more frequently;
3.
Expresses its satisfaction at the close cooperation between the
two organizations and, in particular, the joint operations of the
International Civilian Mission to Haiti, as well as over the work carried out
by the former Special Envoy of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations
and the Organization of American States in relation to the situation in Haiti;
4.
Welcomes the offer of the Chairman of the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States to the President of the Security Council
concerning the readiness of the Organization of American States to cooperate
with the United Nations in its efforts to improve measures for the prevention
and peaceful solution of regional and international conflicts;
/...

A/RES/49/5
Page 3

5.
Also expresses its satisfaction at the close cooperation between
the two organizations in the observation and verification of the electoral
process, and recognizes the effectiveness of that cooperation when it is
requested by national authorities;
6.
Welcomes the meeting between the Secretary-General and the new
Secretary-General of the Organization of American States, soon after the
latter took office, as well as regular meetings between their representatives
throughout the period under review;
7.
Requests both Secretaries-General, or their representatives, to
resume consultations with a view to signing during 1995 an agreement for
cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of American
States;
8.
Approves the conclusions and recommendations of the second general
meeting between representatives of the two organizations held in May 1993, as
well as the sectoral meeting on natural disasters management in the Americas,
held in April 1994, and urges the relevant authorities of both organizations
to take the necessary steps to implement those recommendations and promote
further cooperation;
9.
Recommends that a third general meeting between representatives of
the United Nations system and the Organization of American States be held in
1995 to continue to review and appraise progress, and that sectoral and focal
point meetings be held on areas of priority or mutually agreed issues;
10.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States and expresses the hope that he will continue
to strengthen and broaden the mechanism for cooperation between the two
organizations;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
12.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States".
41st plenary meeting
21 October 1994
