UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2388)

,. .. . ... .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .... . ... .. ..

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
(CI) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Councii
(S/lS162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) . . . . . , , , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

I

SlPV.2388

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention,of
such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
:
:
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
:
information about it is given,
‘,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2388th MEETING
Weld in New York on Wednesday, 4 August 1982, at 10.45 a.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

PWSLW: The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2388)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(CI) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ I5 162);
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15316)

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting has been convened in response to a request made by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
3. Members of the Council have before them document S/15343, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Jordan and Spain.
4. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (ilztclp,‘etcrtionfi’otn
Russim):
A few hours
ago, at a meeting of the Council held last night and
during the first half hour of today, 4 August, the Soviet
delegation drew the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that Israeli military
forces had
once again undertaken
large-scale attacks against
west Beirut.
5. In this connection,
stated the following:

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)
I.
The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken
at previous meetings on this item [2374th,
2375th,
2377th crnd 2384th meetings],
I invite the
representatives
of Lebanon and Israel to take places
at the Council table; I invite the representative of the
Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a
place at the Council table; I invite the representatives
of Egypt and Pakistan to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

the representative

of Israel

“The representative of the Soviet Union alleged
that the Israel Defence Forces were moving into
west Beirut. It is not quite clear to me what this
statement was based on; presumably, on a report
from the TASS news agency. The veracity of the
statement would strongly indicate that.
“The facts are different. My Mission was in
contact with Jerusalem 10 minutes ago, and I am
authorized to say that the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union is untrue. The Israel
Defence Forces have not been moving into west
Beirut.” [2387th tnecting, prrws. 33 rrnd 34.1
6. In the light of what is now well known to the
entire world, I could say that the statement by the
representative of Israel which I have just quoted was
simply a lie on his own, personal level. But the representative of Israel said that he had just consulted with
his Government.
Therefore, it would be more correct
to say that that statement by the representative
of
Israel was an Israeli lie on a State level. Now, the
facts of the new Israeli acts of aggression in west
Beirut are widely known. Only those who are blind.
only those who have deliberately
amputated
their
consciences could fail to know them,

7. The Council is now faced with an extremely
serious and dangerous situation, and in the view of
the Soviet delegation it must take effective and decisive measures, It is necessary firmly to condemn
Israel for the flagrant violations of Council resolution 516 (1982), which was adopted unanimously on
I August. It is necessary to demand an immediate and
full cease-fire, which must be fully observed by Israel,
and Israeli troops must be returned to the positions
they occupied at the moment of the adoption of resolution 516 (1982). It is necessary to propose to the
Secretary-General,
as an immediate
measure, an
increase in the number of United Nations observers
in and around Beirut. It is important to request that
the Secretary-General
continue to report to the Council on a daily basis, regarding the situation in and
around Beirut, and perhaps even more frequent reports
will be necessary. In our view, those reports should
reflect the situation regarding the implementation
of
Council decisions.

the destructive, illegal and internationally
forbidden
weaponry which the Israelis’ ally, the United States,
has been providing to them year after year, month
after month and day after day.
14. I still recall that during the 1973 war, when four
Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs met the President
of the United States, he told them that he had received
a message from the Prime Minister of Israel, Golda
Meir, that if the United States did not come to the aid
of Israel and supply it with arms and ammunition,
then lsrael would have no alternative but to surrender. Given the incalculable amount of ammunition
that Israel has been showering on small Lebanon, the
Israelis have apparently been regularly supplied with
weaponry so that they could commit the present
genocide. I must say that that surprises me.
15. The United States must therefore share equal
responsibility with Israel for this carnage. The Israeli
top officials have publicly stated that they are in total
accord with the United States on the abominable
objectives which the bloodthirsty and terrorist clique
governing Israel has been perpetrating for two months,
since 4 June, when they launched their massive air
attack against Lebanon,

8. Finally, we cannot any longer postpone taking
effective measures to put an end to aggression, By its
crimes-and
it is extremely important to remember
this--Israel
is for practical purposes putting itself
beyond the pale of the international
community.
It is
necessary for the Council most urgently to consider
and to take all possible measures, as regards the
aggressor, provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
9. The Israeli
immediately.

16. In yesterday’s edition of the reputable Clzri.sfiatr
it was reported that last Sunday
alone-which
the Lebanese victims in Beirut have
dubbed “Black Sunday”--180,000
rockets and shells
from land, sea and air were showered on west Beirut,
a mere 10 by 5 blocks, less than 10 square miles. One
can well imagine what the share of every man, woman
and child was in that deadly dispensation in proportion to the half million Lebanese civilians.

Scirrzcc Monitor,

acts of aggression must be halted, and

IO. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Since this is the first
time I have spoken at a formal meeting of the Council this month, it is my pleasure and privilege to extend
to you, Mr. President, my heartiest felicitations
on
your accession to the presidency of the Council fog
this month. We have all known Mr. Dorr to be one of
the most versatile and outstanding of diplomats, both
inside and outside the Council, and we are certain
that in the tumultuous
days we are facing he will
perform his arduous duties in his usual exemplary
manner.

17. The Israeli representative
made a beguiling
statement on television today that, after hours and
hours of meeting and informal consultations, we had
agreed on a consensus statement to be read by the
President and that not a single Arab Government had
spoken a word for the Palestinian cause or the resolution. I do not know how many lies the Council must
hear from the representative of Israel. He knows full
well that the consensus statement [S/15342] was made
on behalf of the entire Security Council, collectively,
and that it had been agreed that there would be RO
discussion because, as members of the Council, we
were in complete agreement on the contents of the
statement, after having made all sorts of compromises
-which we did not like but accepted so as to have
a consensus statement.

1 I. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
extend my delegation’s
appreciation
to his predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair, of friendly Guyana, who had
to grapple with equally serious tribulations during the
month of July. His performance was outstanding.
12. This is one of the most momentous meetings the
Council has convened in its crisis-ridden
history.
Before our eyes and the eyes of the world, the Israeli
Nazis are at present continuing
to perpetrate theil
barbaric assault on and genocide against the independent sovereign State of Lebanon and its capital Beirut,
its civilian
population
and its Palestinian
refugee
guests.

18. What is more, the Israeli representative’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, in another piece of deception, has been telling the United States media that his
Government has no intention of launching an all-out
assault on west Beirut. He is so peace-loving that he
seems to have forgotten that in 1948 he was the murderer of Count Folke Bernadotte, the Secretary
General’s Mediator. in the streets of Jerusalem. SO

13. The casualties are staggering; the devastation is
almost complete. Hardly a single building has escaped
2

heis law-abiding, and he wants a peaceful settlement,
andhe has been telling that to everybody.

conflict. It SOhappened that 600,000 refugees, forcibly
expelled from Palestine at the point of the bayonet,
had been living there as refugees for the past 34 years.

represent.atiVe
here told the Council yesthat he was authorized at the highest level to
inform the Council that Israel WAS not planning to
launchan attack on west Beirut. That was at a time
whenthe Israeli army was going in with hundreds of
tanks and troop-carriers, and a naval bombardment
sparing
no buildings wx under way.

19, His

terday

25. What, then, is the objective, apart from the
bloodthirsty butchery of another Arab State and the
occupation of another Arab capital? What is really
behind all this madness? I should like to cite a statement made by the Mayor of Bethlehem, Mr. Ilyas
Freij, in which he declared that the occupied West
Bank is now facing the most extensive act of confiscation and sequestration of Palestinian lands ever
committed. The Israeli military authorities-or
are
they civilians, for they have doffed their khakis and
put on ties or dresses, as the case may be?-are making
use of the war in Lebanon to cover up this foul deed,
this high robbery of the West Bank. That is the objective of what is now going on in Lebanon: once and for
all to take over the West Bank, East Jerusalem and
the Gaza Strip.

20, The Prime Minister’s
house was shelled with
rockets and received direct hits today, so that
Mr, Tut$ni, the representative of Lebanon, was unableto talk to him. A couple of days ago, as Mr. Tukni
wastalking to Mr. Saeb Salam, the former Prime
Minister of Lebanon and the intermediary in the negotiations that have been taking place between the
various parties and Mr. Philip Habib, Mr. Salam’s
housewas struck by two rockets.
21. Incidentally, the barbaric Israeli assault is continuing. The latest that I heard was that there is indiscriminate shelling and bombing. I heard a CBS correspondent reporting from the Commodore
Hotel,
which houses the foreign correspondents
in west
Beirut; he was breathless. Indeed, a shell or rocket
wasbeing dropped on that tiny area every second; that
means60 shells or rockets every minute. Those are
actsof the Israel that the Israeli clique would have us
believeis peace-loving.

26. London’s Srtn&ry Timrs reported the Mayor of
Bethlehem to have said that the Israelis have launched
a war to confiscate the land of the West Bank under
the smoke-screen of the war that is now taking place
in Lebanon. The Su&y Times added that Israel has
actually begun intensifying the implementation
of its
plans without any impediment from the outside world,
for the eyes of the outside world are occupied elsewhere: by the carnage that is being perpetrated,
primarily against innocent civilians in Lebanon. The
Mayor went on to describe the very extensive areas
which have been confiscated and colonized in the
West Bank. These include the entire, expanded city of
Jerusalem, the Jordan Valley, five big towns and
numerous villages all over the occupied territories.
He added that, in accordance with the Israeli plan,
40 per cent of those areas have been allocated for the
establishment of Israeli colonies and are indicated
on the map in yellow, the colour used to denote COIOnies. Fifty per cent of the area has been earmarked
for Israeli agricultural use, and extremely stringent
laws have been imposed to prevent the Arabs from
building homes or engaging in any development. Only
10 per cent has been left for Arab towns and villages
in the confiscated area. Finally, the Mayor described
the intensified implementation
of these Israeli plans
as the greatest catastrophe to have faced the West
Bank to date.

22, If the Israeli ruling clique believes that it can kill
the rights of the Palestinian people by the present
carnagein the capital of Lebanon, a sovereign, independent State, then I should tell its representative
that it is wrong, for the Palestinian question is not
representedmerely by 5,000 or 6,000 heroic fighters.
lt will last for ever in the heart, soul and mind of every
single Palestinian-man,
woman and child-born
and unborn. No matter what the outcome of this
Beirut carnage, the struggle wiII continue relentlesslyand undiminished,
23. Why did the Israeli authorities decide to launch
this onslaught? Quite obviously for those who know,
they have done so because the tripartite discussions
goingon in Beirut among Mr. Habib, the PLO and the
LebaneseGovernment were on the verge of success.
Therewas only one point that still had to be resolved.
Of course, the Israelis would not wish to see such a
diplomatic solution reached. Also, the onslaught came
a few days after a conference of six Arab Foreign
Ministers, held at Jeddah, in which the basic principles for withdrawal were adopted [see S/15329,
oflfl~.rl.Therefore, the Israelis found themselves
impelled to advance the hour SOas to abort any chance
of a diplomatic and peaceful solution to the agony of
thehalf million inhabitants of Lebanon.

27. I apologize for having digressed from the main
theme of the Council’s discussion. As’1 speak, several
hundred heavy tanks and heaven knows how many
hundreds of heavy guns, including naval guns, are
showering shells on the tiny area of west Beirut. The
Israelis are attempting in the face of determined resistance to advance and to take over the, capital of Lebanon. This poses one of the most serious challenges
ever faced by the Council in its long history.

24. The present carnage is taking place in Lebanon
which is not a direct party
to the Palestinian-Israeli

28. It is my firm belief that if the Council is to maintain its credibility in the eyes of the world it must take
3

the firmest and most determined measures to let Israel
know that it cannot do what it wishes and remain a
Member of the United Nations. As a Member it is
obligated to abide by the mandatory injunctions of the
Council. The international
community
has the right
to.pass judgement on the behaviour of any State.

presided over this body last year, but your activities
this year have been extraordinary. We hope that they
will enjoy the support of members and non-members
of the Council alike.
32. We would also like to thank the representative
of Guyana for the manner in which he conducted
our deliberations during July, a month that was,
unfortunately, a very eventful one.

29. This is not the time for speeches, so in the light
of what I have said I should like to present the following draft resolution,
sponsored by Spain and
Jordan [S//5343]:

33. We have heard the presentation made by Mr. Nuseibeh, on behalf of his country and my own, of the
draft resolution that has had to be submitted to the
Council because of Israel’s rebellious attitude towards
the decisions of the United Nations,

“Deeply shot-kcd und almm~d by the atrocities
committed by the Israeli forces and the invasion of
Beirut on 3 August 1982,

34. As is well known, my delegation was the sponsor
of the draft that became Council resolution 5 15 (1982)
and a co-sponsor of the draft that became resolution
5 16 (1982). Of course, if the Government of Israel had
complied with all the resolutions the Council has
adopted in connection with its aggression against Lebanon, we would not be meeting now, nor would we
have the large toll of victims that has alarmed the international community and filled it with indignation

“1. Rec~lnfi/*ms its resolutions 508 (1982), 509
(1982), 512 (1982), 513 (1982), 515 (1982) and 516
(1982);
“2. Confilms
OIKY a&n
its demand for an
immediate
cease-fire and withdrawal
of Israeli
forces from Lebanon;
“3. Condemns Israel for its failure
with the above resolutions;

to comply

35. In the opinion of my delegation, the fact that the
United Nations observers must wait until the Government of Israel can meet to authorize their deployment is an act of mockery of the Council. Reference
has even been made to misunderstandings
between
General Erskine and certain Israeli authorities, whereas there can be no doubt that one of the facts noted
in the report of the Secretary-General
[S/15334,
prrr’rr. 3]-namely,
that it is indispensable to obtain a
cease-fire and the co-operation of the parties in order
to proceed with the deployment of United Nations
military observers-has
once again served as a pretext for Israel to distort the truth to the extent Of
saying that on 2 August it could not authorize the
deployment of United Nations observers because that
could not be done until the Israeli Cabinet had met
[S/l5334/Add.I,
pcirc~. 31.

“4. C’crlls for the prompt return of Israeli troops
which have moved forward subsequent to 1325 hours
EDT on I August 1982;
“5. Expresses its appreciation
for the efforts
and steps taken by the Secretary-General
to implement the provisions of Security Council resolution
516 (1982), and authorized him, as an immediate
step, to increase the number of United Nations
observers in and around Beirut;
“6. Reyu~sts the Secretary-General
to report
to the Security Council on the implementation
of
the present resolution as soon as possible and not
later than three hours from now;

36. What about the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Lebanon? What does that mean
to the Government of Israel? Obviously, nothing.

“7. Decides to meet in three hours from now in
order to consider the report of the Secretary-General and, in case of f&ure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict, to consider adopting effective
ways and means in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.”

37. The Israeli war machine must be brought to a
halt; a stop must be put to such arrogance. The Council must take action to achieve that goal. Enough of
this total disregard for the resolutions of the Council!
Enough of this death and destruction reported to us
daily by the American media!

30. Now is the time to invoke Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United,Nations,
for if we do not the
floodgates of international
licence will be opened.

38. All I wish to say now is that the news that was
denied last night with regard to the invasion of Beirut
has, unfortunately, been confirmed this morning.

31. Mr. de PINIl%
(Spain) (interpwtcrtion
,f7om
Spanish): Since this is the first time I have had an
opportunity to express to you, Mr. President, our
pleasure at seeing you assume your post for this
month, I should now like to do so. We are familiar
with your ability, which was demonstrated when you

39. My delegation hopes that the draft resolution
the representative of Jordan has introduced on behalf
4

of his country and mine (S//5343]
unanimously by the Council.

will be adopted

mitted by Jordan and Spain l&J.].
We are deeply
shocked and alarmed by the atrocities committed by
the Israeli forces and the invasion of Beirut on 3 August. We call for the reconfirmation of Council resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982), 512 (1982), 513 (l982),
515 (1982) and 516 (1982). We call on the Council to
confirm once again its demand for an immediate and
sustained cease-fire and the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon. We do condemn Israel for its
failure to comply with the above resolutions. We call
for the prompt return of the Israeli troops which have
moved forward subsequent to 1325 hours EDT on
l August. We share in expressing appreciation for the
efforts and steps taken by the Secretary-General
to
implement the provisions of resolution 5 I6 (1982) and
support the call to authorize him, as an immediate step,
to increase the number of United Nations observers
in and around Beirut. We call upon the Council to
consider, in case of failure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict, to consider whatever steps it
deems necessary and appropriate under its responsibilities and powers.

40. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
4 I. Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt): My delegation has had
occasion at an earlier meeting to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. Today,
I wish to congratulate you once again on your effective handling and prompt action with regard to the
serious situation facing us, one that is fraught with
grave consequences.
42. Yesterday-or
rather, in the early hours of this
morning-we
heard in this very room assertions to the
effect that what the news agencies had reported about
the situation in Beirut and the violation of the ceasefire was no more than allegations and slanderous
exaggerations.
Minutes afterwards, that news was
confirmed:
the Israeli forces had violated the ceasefire, moved forward and occupied new positions.

47.

LING Qing (China) (infcrpretcrfion
.prn
First of all, Sir, in the name of the Chmese
delegation I wish to extend sincere congratulations
to you upon your assumption of the presidency for
this month. Your sense of responsibility
and your
diplomatic skills are well known to all of us.

43. The Israeli forces have intensified their aggression against the capital of Lebanon, the civilians of
Beirut, the refugees of Palestine and the freedom
fighters of the PLO,

Mr.

Chim.sc>):

44. It is upon instructions from my Government
that I have asked to speak today to condemn the new
Israeli assault in the strongest terms, In this respect,
I wish to state that Egypt is a solid party to the international consensus which unanimously and strongly
condemns the Israeli policies and practices in Beirut,
in Lebanon, on the Palestinian question and in the
Middle
East in general. We in Egypt wonder what
kind of peace could emerge as the result of such irresponsible
policies. We wonder what kind of peace
process could be pursued under the point of a gun.
We wonder what kind of normal relations could be
accomplished
under such horrible circumstances and
in the shadow of such irresponsible policies. We
wonder what is the use or what are the effects of
the diplomatic efforts that are taking place in the area
today if Israel is permitted to flout all rules, disregard
all efforts and foil all attempts to reach an honourable
and viable settlement of the problem before us.

48. I wish also to express our appreciation to Mr. Sinclair for the outstanding and effective results achieved
by him in presiding over the work of the Council.
49. Since 4 June, when the Israeli forces, aided and
abetted by the United States, launched a large-scale
invasion against Lebanon, the Israeli authorities have
all along disregarded the resolutions of the Security
Council and of the resumed seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly, which call upon
Israel to withdraw its forces from Lebanon immediately and unconditionally,
They violate the sovereignty of Lebanon at will, occupy by force vast territories in southern and central Lebanon, attempt to
encircle and destroy the PLO and deploy tens of thousands of troops to lay siege to Beirut, the capital of
Lebanon.
50. In the small hours of this morning, the Israeli
aggressor forces once again violated the cease-fire
and launched an attack against west Beirut by three
different routes, with large numbers of tanks and under
heavy artillery cover. All of west Beirut is now engulfed in smoke and flames, and countless innocent
inhabitants have been brutally massacred.

45.
The Government
of Egypt is of the view that
the exit of the Palestinians from Beirut should be a
step in a package towards a comprehensive and just
solution
and should take place together with, first,
security
guarantees for the Palestinians,
secondly,
simultaneous
withdrawal by Israel from the Beirut
area as a step towards the total withdrawal of Israel
from Lebanon and, thirdly, a clear and concrete step
towards the recognition of Palestinian national rights,
especially
the right to self-determination.

51. The Chinese Government
and people most
strongly condemn the Israeli authorities for this new
barbarous crime against the Palestinian and Lebanese
peoples.

46.
Bearing in mind the serious situation we are
faced with, we welcome the draft resolution sub-

52. Three’ days
adopted resolution
5

have passed since the Council
5 16 (1982). The Israeli authorities

have completely disregarded the demands contained
in that resolution for an immediate cease-fire and the
cessation of all military
activities.
They are also
procrastinating
in replying to the decision on deploying United Nations observers to supervise the
cease-fire. The reason the Israeli authorities
are
resorting to such delaying tactics, obviously, is that
they are determined
to launch a large-scale attack
against Beirut.

58. We wish at the same time to say how much we
appreciate the efforts made and the skilful work done
by last month’s President of the Council, the representative of friendly Guyana.
59, We are meeting today under very specific and
dangerous circumstances, The Israeli aggression is
proceeding in west Beirut in flagrant violation of all
the relevant Council resolutions. It is causing massive
loss of life and material destruction comparable to
Warsaw’s annihilation
by Nazi troops during the
Second World War. The path of the Israeli troops is
strewn with the blood and suffering of the population
of the besieged city. The Polish Government strongly
condemns the Israeli Government for these new crimes
against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples.

53. The Chinese delegation is of the view that, faced
with such lawlessness on the part of the Israeli authorities, as shown by their open violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, their
contempt for the authority of the Council, their wilful
trampling
upon the sovereignty
of Lebanon and
inhuman massacre of the Palestinian and Lebanese
peoples, the Council should put an end to this by
immediately
adopting
forceful measures and, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter, consider applying severe sanctions against
Israel.

60. These developments are creating a quite intolerable political situation, in which an aggressor is able
to continue its actions unpunished and in defiance of
the Council. At the same time, we are witnessing
openly delaying tactics by one member of the Council, the ally of Israel, which is impeding swift action by
the Council to stop the aggression and to establish
peace in the Middle East. Let us be frank: this is
harming the overall image of the Council and its future
credibility.

54. The entire international
community
has taken
notice that while the aggressor troops of Israel continue to tighten their stranglehold on the city of Beirut,
the United States, a permanent member of the Council, has time and again obstructed the Council from
adopting resolutions condemning Israel for its aggression and has, on all sorts of absurd pretexts, prevented
the applying of any pressure on Israel. Such behaviour
on the part of the United States Government in openly
shielding the aggressors has been-as it should beseverely condemned
by all peoples of the world,
including the American people.

61. What is also intolerable is that the representative of Israel repeatedly distorts facts in his statements, causing confusion in the work of the Council.
Today-at
1.5 minutes past midnight-the
representative of Israel said that “the Israel Defence Forces have
not been moving into west Beirut” [2387t/? meetil1g,
paw. 34].

5.5. The Chinese Government
believes that the
Israeli authorities must implement
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council, immediately
put an end to its aggression
against Lebanon and unconditionally
withdraw all its
forces from Lebanon, and from all Arab territories
they have occupied since 1967. The independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon must
be respected: the national rights of the Palestinian
people must be restored. The PLO, the sole, legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people, is entirely
entitled to participate in the solution of the Middle
East question. The most pressing task at present is to
put an end to the attack against Beirut by the Israeli
forces, to lift the siege of Beirut and to compel the
Israeli forces td withdraw completely from Lebanon.

62. When my delegation read out a dispatch by
United Press International [ikid., plo’tr. 361, he not only
maintained
his position but also indulged in brutal
personal remarks affecting the dignity of the Council
-remarks,
by the way, repeated many times, ad
Y~NI(S~JCXI~.
We understood his rage, because the facts
were brutal and the truth was painful. In other words,
the Israeli Government and the Israeli representative
lied to the Council, This fact puts in question his
credibility also.
63. In this situation, it is my delegation’s opinion
that the Council should act most promptly and decisively. I shall not dwell longer on the substance, since
my delegation is ready to subscribe to what was said
by previous speakers, especially the representative of
Spain, and also to lend its support to the draft resolution submitted by Jordan and Spain [S//5%3].

56. It is in that spirit that the Chinese delegation is in
favour of the draft resolution in document S/ 15343.

64. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the rePresentative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
on whom I now call.

57. Mr, NOWAK
(Poland): At the outset, Sir, let
me say how pleased my delegation is to see you as the
President of the Council for this month. We have full
confidence in your wisdom and in your outstanding
diplomatic skills, and we pledge our full co-operation
in the discharge of your onerous duties at this difficult
juncture in the international
situation.

65, Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Truth is truth and lies are lies: we have been hearing
that very often in this chamber. But exactly who is
going to determine what is the truth and what are lies?
6

66. Early this morning, in this chamber, Goebbels II
toId the Council that he had been authorized to say
that the Israel Defence Forces had not been moving
into west Beirut [2387tl? meeting, ,WII’LI. 341. Of course,
Goebbels II might have been right had he been making
that statement at 12.10 or 12.15 yesterday, in the early
afternoon. But he told us that he had been in contact
with his boss 10 minutes earlier. The onslaught had at
that time been under way for at least 10 hours. But
tangible facts are the truth, and Goebbels II is only a
henchman and the liar is his boss. So all this comes
as no surprise: lies, distortions, falsifications and misrepresentations-all
are intrinsic ingredients in racist
ideologies.

tional observers and when the enemy”-Israel“feels there is progress in political negotiations for
a solution to the Beirut crisis, as was admitted by
the United States envoy and noted by the Lebanese,
French and Saudi Governments.”
The spokesman

added:

“The aggression of Israel is an irresponsible
and
barefaced attempt to head off a political solution
and to make good on the enemy’s claims that Israel
was capable of imposing a military solution. In this
they have failed.”
72. Frankly, we are proud of the achievements of the
freedom fighters, the defenders of Beirut and the
other heroes who have shattered the myth of Israeli
military superiority.

67. The members of the Herut Party and the Irgun
Zeva’i Leumi are known for their close identification
with Hitlerian doctrines and policies. I shall refer to
that at some other stage, but I believe that it is very
relevant to mention it now,

73. Several
residential
buildings,
hospitals
and
tourist hotels have received direct hits from Israeli
shelling. Fire-fighters in Beirut are short of water: they
are battling flames which are consuming residences.

68. The facts have become public knowledge and
I shall not use up the valuable time of the Council by
reading out military communiquCs or press reports.
I must state, however, that two full divisions of the
Israel Defence Forces-one
armoured and the other
mechanized-were
deployed in this latest criminal
attack by the Tel Aviv junta against Beirut. Shells and
internationally
banned arms such as phosphorus, fragmentation and cluster bombs were directed by Israeli
land and sea artillery against residential Beirut. Israeli
artillery scored direct hits on some major hospitals in
Beirut, namely, the Barbeer, Lahoud and American
University
hospitals. Of course, the number of casualties is not yet known, but the damage is extensive and
the continued operation of these vital institutions is
in jeopardy.

74. The representatives
of Jordan and Spain have
submitted a draft resolution in document
S/15343.
We believe that this is a very serious attempt to have
the Council meet its responsibilities
and take immediate action. I should like merely to recall that earlier
today we suggested here that the Council was responsible for seeing to it that all powers vested in it by
the Charter are invoked in order to deal with the
aggressor and the spokesmen of the invasion forces.
Our trust in the Council still stands.
75. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

69.

A spokesman of the PLO issued a statement in
reply to the claims of an Israeli military spokesman
and Minister for Foreign Affairs Shamir that the attack
was not aimed at occupying west Beirut but only at
tightening
the siege of the Palestinians there. Of
course, we have to reflect a little about whether the
areas of the port of Beirut, the race track and the
museum
are “PLO strongholds”,
or even whether
Palestinians
live in those areas. To the best of my
knowledge,
those areas are residential and their
inhabitants
are mostly Lebanese,

1 call on the representative

of

76. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): The representative
of
Jordan, in concluding his remarks, told us that this
was not the time for speeches, For some reason, he
made that statement at the end of his long speech.
He also apologized to the Council and to you, Mr. President, for having digressed from the theme before
us. Well, this is not uncommon in the statements of
Mr. Nuseibeh. Over the years we have got accustomed
to that. I promise to bring him back to the theme in
a few moments.

70.

But, again, these are lies and they are an indication of the failure of the Israeli attack and show the
emptiness of their threats to have recourse to the military option.

77. The representative
of the Soviet Union has ’
again led the assault against my country, as he did last
night. That in itself is revealing, because he has made
evident here in the Council, through his behaviour,
what has been evident to observers of the Middle East
scene all these years: that the terrorists are but a stooge
in the hands of the Soviet Union and are being used
and exploited by the Soviet Union in the Middle East
in the same manner in which the Soviet Union uses
and exploits its stooges in other parts of the world.
I should like to thank the representative of the Soviet
Union for having made this fact so evident to all of us.

I now quote from that statement by a spokesman
of the PLO:

71.

“The
Lebanese
Government,
Mr. Habib,
the
French and all our friends know that the attack
comes at a time when Israel has refused Council
resolution
516 (1982) and the sending of interna7

78. The representative of the Soviet Union was kind
enough to quote from my statement of last night. I wish
to reciprocate his courtesy in kind. This is what the
representative of the Soviet Union had to say:

pale of the international
community.
I would invite
him to be very cautious with remarks of that kind,
Admittedly,
as I have had occasion to observe, my
country does not enjoy the veto power in the Council,
The Soviet Union does, and as a result it has been able
over the years to block any resolution that would have
given expression to the international
outrage over
the behaviour of the Soviet Union world wide since
the end of the Second World War. I would suggest,
Mr. Ovinnikov,
that you had better not raise the
question of who is putting himself beyond the pale of
the international community.

“While
the members of the Council were discussing the text of a possible statement by the
President, the Israeli war machine again was carrying out an attack on west Beirut, a massive invasion.” [2387th medng, pow. IS.]
Surprisingly.
the representative
of Poland dutifully
parroted his master’s voice and made a similar statement in the Council last night, and he has again dutifully parroted his master’s voice today.

84. The representative of Jordan did me the honour
of watching my television appearance earlier today.
I thank him for that. I am sorry to see that-perhaps
because of the early hour-he
could not accurately
reflect in his statement what I said there.

79.

This statement of the Soviet representative and
statement of the representative of Poland
are untrue. That is what I said last night, and that is
what I repeat now-and the fact that these two representatives have seen fit to repeat their untrue statements does not make them any truer.
the similar

85. We are all aware of the need to bring peace, long
overdue peace, to our war-torn region, and it was with
that in mind that we became a party to the Camp
David framework accords for peace in the Middle East,
which charted the course for peace in the Middfe
East.

80. Obviously,
the representative
of the Soviet
Union would like to draw me into a discussion on this
point, and he seeks some clarification from me. I shall
confine myself to saying that his statement was and
is untrue. I shall not go beyond that because I do not
feel I should oblige him. At the proper time it will
become obvious why his statement is untrue and
why my refutation of it is true.

86. Your country, Mr. Nuseibeh, was invited to join
in the peace process and your country, being the Palestinian Arab State, should have been there; but your
country has decided to boycott that peace process, so
you come here before the Council and pretend to be
unaware of events of recent years-not only the peace
process in the Middle East but also events that preceded that peace process.

8 I. The representative of the Soviet Union has again
repeated his calI for the stationing of observers in and
around Beirut. He knows, and the other members of
the Council know, that the matter which arises out of
Council resolution S 16 (1982) will be discussed at a
special meeting of the Israel Cabinet scheduled fol
tomorrow. But I should like to be able to inform my
Cabinet in anticipation of that meeting that the Soviet
representative whole-heartedly supports the principle
of the stationing of observers
at every flash-point
around the world. Let us start with Afghanistan. I have
already, last night, suggested that to the representative of the Soviet Union. For some reason I have not
had a response. It is high time that the United Nations,
through a group of observers, should be able to monitor the ongoing genocide by the Soviet army of
occupation of the people of Afghanistan as well as its
barbarous and inhuman practices of conducting bacteriological and chemical warfare against the people
of that country, whom they apparently use as.guineapigs, as a testing-ground.

87. You said it so happens that there are in Lebanon 600,000 Palestinian refugees, What you forgot,
Mr. Nuseibeh, is the fact that there are also in Lebanon, and there have been for some 12 years, a large
number of armed PLO terrorists, Where did they
come from? 1 would gladly yield the floor now if you
would be willing to tell the Council where they
came from. You know it full well. There were some
slight misunderstandings
in September 1970, as a 1
result of which they decided that they no longer wanted
to enjoy the hospitality of your country, I know that.
And you were terribly offended when they left. YOU
dumped them on Lebanon and thereby saved your OM
country. That is basically what I said earlier today On
my television appearance.
88. You, your country and your Government know
exactly who the terrorists are and what they are
capable of, and so do the other Arab countries. Lebanon was too weak to resist their visit and has paid
a heavy price for that.

82. I invite the representative of the Soviet Union
once again to indicate to us his country’s willingness
to accept the stationing of such observers. He would
then be in a much better position to make calls with
regard to other parts of the world,

89. What kind of cynicism is it for you to come here
and speak in support of the terrorists who almost
brought down your Government and whom you drove
out from your country, thereby saving its stability?
That is the naked truth: everybody knows it: and no

83. The representative
of the Soviet Union also
asserted that my country was putting itself beyond the
8

amount
facts.

of posturing

and rhetoric

will change those

94. We made an extremely generous offer: we are
prepared to let them go. It is an offer unprecedented
in the annals of mankind. Any other country. including
those represented around this table, would not have
permitted such criminals to go free. We are prepared
to do it not because they deserve it-they
do not.
They, Mr. Ovinnikov,
have put themselves beyond
the pale of the international
community:
they do not
deserve it. But this generous offer was made for one
reason and one reason only: to spare as many liveson both sides of the Green Line: Lebanese lives, the
lives of Palestinian Arabs, and the lives of Israelis-as
possible. This is a truly humanitarian approach, and not
the cynical and bigoted approach that has become so
manifest here.

90. You were also outraged at the fact that certain
hotels in Beirut have been shelled in the course of the
hostilities. Of course, when, in times of war, civilians
get involved through no fault of their own in those
hostilities and are caught up with them, that is regrettable everywhere, just as it was very regrettable in
September
1970, when the Jordanian Arab Legion
shelled the Intercontinental
Hotel in Amman, where
hundreds of journalists
were at the time. That was
done because the hotel was one of the strongholds of
the terrorists. We did not blame your Government for
that. We understood the constraints under which
your Government
was operating at the time: it was
dealing with criminals who had hijacked those civilians, as they are hijacking the people of west Beirut.

95. But the terrorists must go, and the sooner the
better, for all of us. They must not lay down conditions; they are in no position to lay down conditions.
They should be grateful for the fact that we are willing
to go through with this generous offer of letting them
go and sparing their lives.

91. The representative of Spain made a passionate
plea and posed as a genuine humanitarian. I think his
indignation
would not sound so hollow were it not for
the fact that he somehow failed to give expression to
his humanitarian
concerns for the people of Lebanon
all these years. If I am wrong, I should like to stand
corrected.
I invite the representative
of Spain to
indicate to the Council, chapter and verse, when and
where he has bewailed the plight and predicament of
the people of Lebanon since 1975--with 100,000 of
them massacred by the Syrians and the terrorists,
300,000 wounded and more than 1 million displaced.
I, for one, do not recall any humanitarian statement
by the representative
of Spain in the Council condemning those outrages.

96, That is the real problem and it should not be
obscured and obfuscated here through all kinds of
acrobatics and exercises and delaying tactics. Members of the Council realize this. Why then, I should
like to ask, do they hide behind all kinds of smokescreens.
97,

Mr.

de PINIl&
(Spain) (interpwtation
,fhmz
I am not surprised by the statements made
by the representative of Israel; we have become used
to them. I should like the representative of Israel to
reread earlier statements made by the representative of
Egypt: he would learn a lot about a State which maintains relations with Israel.

Spunish):

92.
The representative of Spain spoke of arrogance.
One wonders where is the arrogance. Let me just say
that I do not believe that bigotry and hypocrisy and
cynicism
should be made the pillars of foreign policy
and of statements in the Council.

98, I would remind the representative of Israel that
there is no need to disguise the truth behind smokescreens. The Government of Israel is in Lebanon as an
invader. My delegation has maintained, maintains and
will continue to maintain excellent relations with all
the Arab countries. There is absolutely no need,
Mr. Blum, .for you to try to drive a wedge between
them and us: it will do you no good and will be a
miserable waste of time. I should like to tell you that,
if the Palestinians are in Lebanon, it is quite simply
as a result of your massive expulsion of a people.
You stole their houses and their homes and expelled
them from their own territory.

93.
The problem before us is a very simple and
straightforward
one, despite the fact that some members of the Council try to obscure it and are carried
away by their own rhetoric. The problem is, as has
been rightly pointed out on many occasions in this
country
and elsewhere, that the terrorists have hijacked
the civilian population of a major city in what
must be considered the biggest hihacking operation
in history. The time has come for the terrorists to
realize that the game is up. They have got to leave
Beirut and they have got to leave Lebanon. That is also
the wish of the Government of Lebanon and of the
people of Lebanon. And everybody who has visited
those parts of Lebanon that have been relieved of the
terrorists’
presence in recent weeks knows full well
what kind of suffering lies behind those civilians who
were forced to extend their hospitality to the terrorists for seven years. Bgt.the terrorists do not want
to leave Beirut and they are devising all kinds of
delaying
tactics to avoid what is unavoidable.

99. I should thus like to remind the representative
of Israel that it is not a matter of the Palestinian people
-having
been expelled from their home, which was
sequestered-being
forced to turn to their brothers for
asylum. The Palestinian people has every right to return
to its territory, and however much you persist in
calling that territory Judea or Samaria, or whatever
you want to call it. I assure you that those Palestinians,
on that territory, will form a State tomorrow.
9

,

100. As the reDresentative of Israel has forgotten
Article 25 of the dharter of the United Nations, I &ould
like also to remind him of Article 24, which states in
part that:

Jerusalem. Furthermore, that Palestinian State should
have included western Galilee, that same Galilee from
which the 600,000 refugees who are now being chased
and butchered in Lebanon were forcibly thrown out.
He surely must know that.

“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary
responsibility
for the
maintenance
of international
peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility
the Security Council acts on their
behalf.”

107. The United Nations took a decision as far back
as 1948 in General Assembly resolution I94 (III), which
made it mandatory for the Palestinian
refugees,
whether in the Palestinian State or in the Jewish State,
to have an inalienable right to return to their homes
and their homelands, and for compensation to be paid
to anyone who, for one reason or another, might not
opt to return. I do not believe that there is any significant number of them who would not wish to go back
to their homes.

101. That means that when we speak collectively
here we are speaking on behalf of the representative
of Israel. Be clear about that, Mr. Blum, and do not
forget Article 24 of the Charter, which is very important in these matters.

108. The representative of Israel has chosen to talk
about the Camp David accords. I am not going ta discuss here the part of the Camp David accords that
pertains to the Egyptian-Israeli
problem. I am talking
about that part of the Camp David accords that pertains to a solution of the Palestinian problem. What do
we find there? It is not only in flagrant violation of
General Assembly resolutions to which I have already
referred, but equally in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which
mandate the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force and the withdrawal of the Israeli forces
from the territories they occupied in 1967. The Council is fully aware that at that time the Secretary-General appointed a special envoy, Mr. Gunnar Jarring,
who conducted a dialogue with the deaf, because the
Israelis would not give back an inch of that occupied
territory. Instead, they came up with an ingenious
idea. Because they did not know what to do with
those Palestinians who remained in the occupied territories and did not want to allow them into the mainstream of life because they would then have the right
to vote, they came up with the ingenious idea-and
in 1974, even before Begin-of giving to those Palestinians who were still there, until the time when they
would pass away through natural attrition,
what
Begin has since described as self-rule, meaning by that
that they would have municipal autonomy-and
not
even that, since most of the mayors of the municipalities have already been sacked because they were
opposed to Israel’s policy of de ftrcto annexation.

102. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Jordan, who wishes to make a statement in exercise
of the right of reply.
103. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The representative
of Israel recalled that I stated earlier that I had digressed from the theme-the
extremely grave themebeing discussed right now. I should like to retract my
description of what I had said as a “digression”:
I simply wanted to give higher priority to the holocaust
which Israel has been perpetrating against the Lebanese and the Palestinian peoples over the past two
months. They have already destroyed all the important ancient cities of Lebanon and have now almost
completed the destruction of its capital, Beirut.
104. I referred to what the Mayor of Bethlehem
said because it is so relevant to the second holocaust
-1 mean the Israeli-Nazi
holocaust-which
is being
perpetrated right now. It is so relevant because, while
the holocaust is being perpetrated on this massive
scale in Lebanon, the main immediate objective is to
deflect world attention and world opinion from the
ongoing and relentless cannibalization
and obliteration of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories and in dispersal. There are 4 million Palestinians
either under occupation or in dispersal.
105. The representative
of Israel must know that
Israel came into being as a result of a United Nations
resolution I(;r~ncsrrl Assc~t~zAlywLsolution /%I (II)], even
though we constituted a two-thirds majority in Palestine. He must know that this was given as a gift to the
Israelis by the United Nations as it was then, a United
Nations which represented a minority of the community of nations. That gift was made contingent on the
establishment
of a Palestinian
Arab State, which
would have included not only what is now called
Arab Jerusalem-a
dwarfed part of Jerusalem-but
also all the Arab quarters of West Jerusalem, which
constitute two thirds of West Jerusalem.

109. The Camp David accords maintain for Israel
all rights over the people, the land, the water, foreign
policy-over
practically
everything.
They would
perpetuate Israeli occupation
of those occupied
territories,
in flagrant violation of Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
1 IO. At this juncture, I would inform the representative of Israel that after the Camp David accords
were arrived at, I spoke to Ambassador Esmat Abdel
Meguid about this problem. and he told me that the
Israeli negotiators had tried to bargain over Egypt’s
territorial integrity. Mr. Esmat Abdel Meguid’s reply
to that was that if they were going to start playing

106. If the representative of Israel would only read
the report of Chief Justice Fitzgerald he would know
what was allocated to the indigenous Palestinians of
IO

(hosetricks, they might as well call it quits. That is
howEgypt impelled Israel to withdraw from every
inch of the internationally
recognized territory of
EgyPt.

refugees who have been living in Lebanon for 34 years.
If there were some who went to their assistance or
joined them, whether from Jordan or from Syria 01
from any other Arab country, it is only natural that
they should have done so.

ill, Where do we find a similar provision in the
camp David accords pertaining to the Palestinians?
l would tell the Israeli representative that for I4 centuries,even under the Ottoman Empire, we have been
legislators and commanders
of armies. Even under
the Empire,
every single town and every single city of
Palestine was represented in the Mabusan, the Congressin Istanbul, and that three quarters of the establishment governing the Empire were from our territory. Are we now going to be reduced to municipal
officersto look after the sewage system and the water
system and street cleaning‘? That is what Begin wants,
becausehe wants those people, the elder generation,
to passaway. He wants the younger generation to be
leftwith no opportunities for any gainful employment
$0 that they will have no alternative other than to
leave rather than remain with their grandmothers
doing nothing. It is clear to everybody what the
Israeli intention is. I have quoted the Mayor of Bethlehem,who is called a moderate, whose words prove
beyondany shadow of a doubt that even the five-yea]
transitionperiod is designed to increase the Israeli confiscationof Palestinian lands from almost 40 per cent
to 70 or 80 per cent.

116. The allegation about hijacking is another one
of those allegations which the representative of Israel
thinks will become credible by repetition. As I have
asked a number of times: who has hijacked whom?
Those whom his country is bombarding and shelling
now have been living in those same camps for ovel
30 years, since they were expelled from their ancestral
homes 33 years ago. How can they have hijacked the
camps in which they have been living? It is the Israeli
army, which conquered Lebanon, that is trying to
hijack Beirut, after having hijacked almost the whole
of the south. And God alone knows if they will also
hijack the north of Lebanon. Begin has said he would.
NOW it is Lebanon’s turn: tomorrow it could be
Syria’s turn, and then Jordan’s turn. This is the expansionism to which the world community will have to
respond-and respond effectively.
117. Finally, 1 should like once more to tell the
representative of Israel that Jordan has its official
name, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and that
when he refers to Jordan he is not entitled to call it
“the Palestinian Arab State”. I think he was warned
once before by a former President, and I think he
should abide by that ruling.

112. The present carnage and holocaust in Lebanon, therefore-apart
from wreaking havoc on an
Arab country-are designed to deflect world attention from the core of the Middle East crisis, namely,
the plight and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.Has Israel granted an iota of those rights ovel
thepast 33 years? Has it ever observed any resolution
ofthe Council, including resolution 242 (1967)? Where
is the Israeli army now’ ? It is in every street, in every
corner, on every mountain, in every road, at every
htion of the occupied West Bank, Gaza and East
Jer~isalem. This is not the way to solve a problem
-unless, of course, Israel wants the struggle to continuefor generations,

118. The PRESIDENT:
There are still two representatives who wish to speak in exercise of their right
of reply. 1 call first on the representative of the Soviet
Union.
119. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (htc~,p,‘ctrrtion J~om Rmsirrn): I really felt
sorry for the representative of Israel when I listened to
his statement today, because of those futile and
cheating devices to which he resorted as he was carried away by lies and tried to worm his way out of this
extremely unpleasant situation.
120. The statement today by the representative of
Israel reaffirms yet again the truth that when one is
dealing with an unjust cause one cannot defend it
with clean hands. It is only by using dirty devices
and dirty hands that one can defend an unjust cause.
That is precisely what the representative of Israel tried
to do today, with the assistance of dirty devices and
with hands which not only are dirty but are dripping
with Arab blood.

11% We have done everything we could to cooperate, not only with Mr. Jarring, but with all the
e”VOYS,United Nations and others, who have come
tous. We have said to them: “Let us have an honourableand just peace, but not at the price of forfeiting
inalienable Palestinian
rights and maintaining
the
Israeli OCcupation.”
“4, Mr. Blum has once again raised the question
Of‘970. As I have explained a hundred times, here and
jnother forums, this was a family quarrel, and Israel
hasabsolutely nothing to do with anything that happenswithin any Arab country. Israel is an intrude1
andthis is our business.

122. Mr, BLUM:
Because of the lateness of the
hour this indeed is not the time for long speeches, and
I promise to be very brief.

‘15+ Besides, the people who are fighting in Beirut
now are overwhelmingly
the indigenous Palestinian

123. I am deeply touched by the compassion the
Soviet representative expressed towards me. i would

121. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Israel to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

II

like to tell him that I am equally compassionate with
regard to him. So let us be sorry for each other.

he was referring to the Palestinian Arabs. I do not
agree, of course, with the tenor of the question, but
I do agree with his assertion that he, as the representative of Jordan, speaks on behalf of the Palestinian
Arabs.

124. I would also suggest, Mr. Ovinnikov,
that we
leave alone the question of who does and who does
not come here with clean hands. I hope that is agreeable to you.

134. Well, if he may say it, why should I’be prevented from saying it? It is the truth,

125. I listened with the utmost attention to the statement made by the representative
of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan-which
is the Palestinian Arab
State-

135. Then we were told that what happened bctween the Government of Jordan and the PLO terrorists in Amman and elsewhere in Jordan in September
1970 was a “family quarrel”; it was “our business”,
I quote the representative of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan: “our business”-others
should not meddle
in it.

126. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Jordan on a point of order.
127. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I request that the
representative of Israel call the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan by its name, without any adjectives, because
such use of ad.jectives is in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations.

136. Mr. Ambassador-and
I am sorry that we
always have to converse across the table; it would
be nicer if we could engage in direct negotiations,
as befits good neighbours-I
wish it were a family
quarrel. But it is not. The terrorist organization
which you created is a problem for the entire world,
This little Frankenstein that goes under the name of
the PLO, which was created by you, by the Arnb
League and not by the Palestinian Arabs, has become
a major source of international
tension mainly because it enjoys the support of a major Power, which
has been financing it, training it, equipping it with
all the arms that it possesses and supporting it diplomatically or otherwise,

128. The PRESIDENT:
1 note the point of order of
the representative of Jordan.
129. As President of the Council, I have no wish
-and, I believe, no right-to
curtail the right of free
speech here. I believe, however, that I would have
the strong support of members of the Council in asking
all representatives who speak at the Council table to
observe due courtesy and, in particular, to address all
States by the names by which they are customarily
known in United Nations practice. I express this as
a hope on my own behalf and on behalf of members
of the Councif.

137. So, unfortunately, this Iinchpin of international
terrorism is no longer a family quarrel. I wish it were.
138. You came back once again to the United Nations
resolution of 1947 [GP~~xII Assetnhly wsolittion 181
(101. You know, Mr. Ambassador, that at that time
the countries of the Arab League, including your
own, which at that time was called Transjordan, rejected that resolution and set out by force of arms to
destroy it. There are official Arab League resohrtions
to that effect; and there is United Nations documentation available which fully bears out my point.

130. At this stage I call again-noting
that he had
said he would speak briefly-on
the representative
of Israel.
131. Mr. BL.UM (Israel): I thought I had used the
full and official name of the State which Mr. Nuseibeh represents -fuller
than the name indicated on his
name plate, which says only “Jordan”.
I said “the
Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan”, and then I gave a
characterization
that I believe to be true-that
it is
the Palestinian Arab State-but
I used the full name.

139. So why try to rewrite history? Let us agree that
this is the domain of the representative of the Soviet
Union. In his country, history is being constantly
rewritten and even the pages ofthe Bolshcrycc SwiPtskn
Enc,yc,loprredi~l-the
great Soviet encyclopaediaare periodically torn out and replaced by new pages
to suit the changing needs of Soviet foreign policy
-and, I might add, Soviet domestic policy. We de
not have to indulge in such practices. We know the
truth; I am sure you know it: your country was among
those that destroyed by force of arms the General
Assembly resolution of November 1947.

132. I do hope, Mr. President, that the hope that
you have just expressed will find a favourable echo
among all our colleagues here who have a habit of
using all kinds of epithets and paraphrases when it
comes to the name of my country.
133. I cannot quite understand why the representative of Jordan-the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordanis always upset when I characterize his country as
the Palestinian Arab State. In his statement here today
there was a very revealing passage. He asked: Are we
going to be reduced to street cleaners-“we”:
first
person plural-in
referring to the autonomy regime,
which underlies
the Camp David framework
for
peace in the Middle East. Whom was he talking about?
It is quite obvious, and reasonable and justified, that

140. You also mentioned the figure of 600,000 Palestinian Arab refugees in Lebanon. To the best of mY
knowledge, no census has been taken. I quoted Yon~
fully knowing that the figures were apparently inflated1
as they are elsewhere. But this is not relevant new to
12

our discussion. The problem before us is not the presence of Palestinian Arab refugees in Lebanon, irrespective of their numbers. The problem has all along
been the presence of upwards of 15,000 armed terrorists. And let us draw a clear distinction between the
two, despite the fact that the terrorists try to identify
themselves
with the Palestinians
Arabs. To what
extent that identification
is justified was clearly evidenced last week when the United Nations issued a
press release that the PLO was barring food supplies
to the Palestinian
Arab refugees [2385r/7 rnecfin~,
pcit*rr. 1671. So much for the identification
between
the two.

146. The PRESIDENT:
I note the willingness of the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to yield. But I feel that, in the interest of due
order-since
I have not been asked to rule on a point
of order-if he wishes to yield his place at the moment.
I shall then be obliged to call on the next speaker
whose name is on the list, the representative of Jordan.
147. Therefore, if it is the wish of the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
in these
circumstances to yield, I shall then call on the representative of Jordan.
148. Mr. TERZI
tion): I do, Sir.

14 1. I should like now to say a few brief words to
my distinguished and esteemed colleague from Spain.
I am profoundly grateful to him for having drawn my
attention to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
As he no doubt knows, we are not totally
ignorant
of the Charter provisions. After all, our
country became a Member of the United Nations a
few years before his country did. He has tried in two
or three sentences to rewrite the history of the ArabIsrael conflict. I would invite him to refrain from doing
that. It does not befit him; it does not befit his great
country.
The question I asked him, though, still
stands: where were you, Mr. de Pinils, over the past
eight years, when the agony and tragedy of the people
of Lebanon was being played out in front of a callous
and indifferent world? I should hate to think that you
were on a continuous siesta all those years.

(Palestine

Liberation

Organiza-

149. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I know that what the
representative
of the United Kingdom has referred
to is the overriding problem facing us today, namely,
whether Israel is launching an all-out attack against
Beirut or not. Still, I feel that I must clarify a few
points.
150. Now, the representative
of Israel says that
Jordan is the Palestinian Arab State and that I know
that this is true, but I must tell him very firmly that
he is very, very badly mistaken. Jordan has been in
existence, with its own people, for 3,000 years. The
reason why I said “we” was that after Israel had
devoured four fifths of Palestine, the inhabitants of
the West Bank and the East Bank entered into a unity
on totally equal terms, and that law of unity of 1950,
adopted unanimously
by Parliament,
said that this
unity was there pending a solution to the question of
Palestine in accordance with United Nations resolutions, international
law and the redemption of Palestinian rights. So that when I talk about the West Bank
I am talking within the context of that unity, before it
was occupied in 1967.

142. The PRESIDENT:
I was clearly optimistic
a
little while ago when I spoke of two remaining speakers. At this stage I now have three further names.
But, before calling on them in order, I have had a
request from a member of the Council to speak on a
point of order. I therefore call on the representative
of the United Kingdom on a point of order.
143.
Mr. WHYTE
(United Kingdom): Forgive me,
Mr. President; I am not sure whether this is really
a point of order. But what my delegation has been
listening
for in this debate is what we thought was
originally
requested, and that was some sort of clarification
or some sort of elaboration of the statement
that was made to us in the Council in the early hours
of this morning by the representative of Israel that the
Israel Defence Forces has not been moving into west
Beirut,
But that is what we have not heard-no clarification
and no elaboration.

151, This same statement is contained in the General Armistice Agreement.’ It says that nothing in the
General Armistice Agreement of 1949 should in any
way prejudice the ultimate solution of the Palestinian
problem.
152. The representative
of Israel has said that it
was the Arabs who torpedoed the 1947 resolution
[Gr~ze~~crlAss~~nhly rrsolution IS/ (II)]. It is true that
Arab representatives
here at the United Nations
made statements in which they objected to the dismemberment
of Palestine, as any representative
of
any unified country would. But those who torpedoed
the implementation
of that resolution were the Haganah, the Irgun and the Stern gangs, which started
launching
savage attacks against the Palestinian
people and forced almost a million to leave their
homeland after barbaric massacres with which members are all too familiar.

144.
The PRESIDENT:
I note the point of the representative
of the United Kingdom. He has not asked
for a ruling by me on a direct point of order. Therefore,
1 now return to the list of speakers and call on
the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
145.
Mr. TEkZI:
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization):
Mr, President, with your permission, I shall
yield
in order for us to get a reply to the question
raised by the representative of the United Kingdom.

153. The representative of Israel has spoken of the
PLO, saying that it was not established by the Palestinian people. He is wrong. It was established by the
13

representatives of the Palestinian people in 1964, and
it was established in Jerusalem, at the Intercontinental
Hotel, on Mount Scopus. Its purpose was to pursue
the Palestinian question and to redeem Palestinian
rights in accordance with United Nations resolutions,
international
law and the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian
people. Half the Jordanian Parliament
then, people of the West Bank, were members of the
Palestine National
Congress. I attended that Congress. Everybody there was Palestinian, and it was
started by the widest spectrum of Palestinian society
and people.

161. The representative of Israel talked about Jordan. Regardless of its name, Jordan, as he well knows.
established a great State, the Nabataean State. In
Arabic it was always known as A.jnad al-Urdun. In
other words, it was a province. All of us were provinces of larger conglomerates. The entire area-Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon or Syria-was
called Syria.
In other words, whatever conglomerations
we established-as
the rest of the world has, as the United
States has-the land belongs to the people of Jordan.
It has been there in various forms, whether or not in
unity-and
we are always for unity; we all aspire to
Arab unity. It was always there, and its people are its
people. And the Palestinian people are the people of
mandated Palestine. The representative
of Israel
knows exactly where it lies.

154. Mr. de PINT&
(Spain) (irrterp~etatioiz frnrn
Sptr/zish): I should like to answer the representative
of Israel: I ask him to submit a complaint to the Council one day about an act of aggression committed
against Israel.

162. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

155. As a result of the violations and the acts of
aggression perpetrated by Israel against neighbouring
States, there have been continual meetings of the
Council. Recently, indeed, I have not had time for a
siesta.
156. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

163. Mr. TERZI
(Palestirie Liberation
Organization): At least the Council has been reminded of the
raison d’2tre of one of the Members of the United
Nations. That same raison d’ttre applies also to the
independent, sovereign Palestinian State.

I call on the representative

164. It was not necessary to send 120,000 Israeli
troops to commit an act of aggression against the
sovereign State of Lebanon, The Palestinians are not
there by choice, and they are willing to go. I will
only quote what the representative of Lebanon told
the Council on 29 July:

157. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The representative of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan referred to the Intercontinental Hotel. I should like to correct him: it is
on the Mount of Olives, not Mount Scopus. As he
knows, the Intercontinental
Hotel was established
on the site of Jewish tombs in the ancient Jewish
cemetery of the Mount of Olives during the Jordanian
occupation of the eastern part of Jerusalem between
1948 and 1967.

“If asked where the Palestinians should therefore
go, we and the Palestinians have and can only have
one answer: back to Palestine.”
[23851/r ~‘~~1iW~
ponr. 12.1

158. I was startled to hear that the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been in existence for 2,000 years.
To the best of my recollection,
Transjordan
was
established as an independent State in 1946. It subsequently changed its name to Jordan. It was established on 77 per cent of the territory of Palestine.

165. The PRESIDENT:
of Lebanon.

166. Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon):
point of order, Mr. President.

168. The PRESIDENT:
I am sure that the words of
the representative of Lebanon have been duly noted.

160. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The Intercontinental
Hotel, on the Mount of Olives, was not built on a
Jewish cemetery. It so happens that 110 years ago the
Islamic Foundation leased a piece of land just beneath
it. That lease lapsed 15 to 20 years ago, Therefore, the
spot on which the Intercontinental
Hotel is built was
never a Jewish cemetery.
New York

This is intended as fl

167. I am extremely grateful to all those who spoke
today. However, since this debate is going to be
resumed later this afternoon, I should like to remind
those who may take part in it that the item on our
agenda is Lebanon and the situation there, not Bessarabia, Nabataea or eastern Prussia. My country still
deserves to have attention focused on its plight and
problem.

359. I have very little to say in response to the query
of the representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, which he characterized
as a point of order. I think the answer to his query
is to be found in my first statement today, in which
I made it very clear that the allegations contained in
the statements of the representatives of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and Poland last night and
today are untrue.

Litho in United Nations,

I call on the reyjresentative

00400

14

88~60989-June

1989--2.050
