United Nations

A/RES/71/1

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 October 2016

Seventy-first session
Agenda items 13 and 117

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 September 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/71/L.1)]

71/1. New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting on
addressing large movements of refugees and migrants:

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants
We, the Heads of State and Government and High Representatives, meet ing at
United Nations Headquarters in New York on 19 September 2016 to address the
question of large movements of refugees and migrants, have adopted the following
political declaration.
I.

Introduction

1.
Since earliest times, humanity has been on the move. Some people move in
search of new economic opportunities and horizons. Others move to escape armed
conflict, poverty, food insecurity, persecution, terrorism, or human rights violations
and abuses. Still others do so in response to the adverse effects of climate change,
natural disasters (some of which may be linked to climate change), or other
environmental factors. Many move, indeed, for a combination of these reasons.
2.
We have considered today how the international community should best respond
to the growing global phenomenon of large movements of refugees and migrants.
3.
We are witnessing in today’s world an unprecedented level of human mobility.
More people than ever before live in a country other than the one in which they
were born. Migrants are present in all countries in the world. Most of them move
without incident. In 2015, their number surpassed 24 4 million, growing at a rate
faster than the world’s population. However, there are roughly 65 million forcibly
displaced persons, including over 21 million refugees, 3 million asylum seekers and
over 40 million internally displaced persons.
4.
In adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 1 one year ago, we
recognized clearly the positive contribution made by migrants for inclusive growth
_______________
1

Resolution 70/1.

16-16163 (E)

*1616163*

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

and sustainable development. Our world is a better place for that contribution. The
benefits and opportunities of safe, orderly and regular migration are substantial and
are often underestimated. Forced displacement and irregular migration in large
movements, on the other hand, often present complex challenges.
5.
We reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We reaffirm also the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and recall the core
international human rights treaties. We reaffirm and will fully protect the human
rights of all refugees and migrants, regardless of status; all are rights holders. Our
response will demonstrate full respect for international law and international human
rights law and, where applicable, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.
6.
Though their treatment is governed by separate legal frameworks, refugees and
migrants have the same universal human rights and fundamental freedoms. They
also face many common challenges and have similar vulnerabilities, including in the
context of large movements. “Large movements” may be understood to reflect a
number of considerations, including: the number of people arriving, the economic,
social and geographical context, the capacity of a receiving State to respond and the
impact of a movement that is sudden or prolonged. The term does not, for example,
cover regular flows of migrants from one country to another. “Large movements”
may involve mixed flows of people, whether refugees or migrants, who move for
different reasons but who may use similar routes.
7.
Large movements of refugees and migrants have political, economic, social,
developmental, humanitarian and human rights ramifications, which cross all
borders. These are global phenomena that call for global approaches and global
solutions. No one State can manage such movements on its own. Neighbouring or
transit countries, mostly developing countries, are disproportionately affected. Their
capacities have been severely stretched in many cases, affecting their own social
and economic cohesion and development. In addition, protracted refugee crises are
now commonplace, with long-term repercussions for those involved and for their
host countries and communities. Greater international cooperation is needed to
assist host countries and communities.
8.
We declare our profound solidarity with, and support for, the millions of
people in different parts of the world who, for reasons beyond their control, are
forced to uproot themselves and their families from their homes.
9.
Refugees and migrants in large movements often face a desperate ordeal.
Many take great risks, embarking on perilous journeys, which many may not
survive. Some feel compelled to employ the services of criminal groups, including
smugglers, and others may fall prey to such groups or become victims of trafficking.
Even if they reach their destination, they face an uncertain reception and a
precarious future.
10. We are determined to save lives. Our challenge is above all moral and
humanitarian. Equally, we are determined to find long -term and sustainable
solutions. We will combat with all the means at our disposal the abuses and
exploitation suffered by countless refugees and migrants in vulnerable situations.
11. We acknowledge a shared responsibility to manage large movements of
refugees and migrants in a humane, sensitive, compassionate and people -centred
_______________
2

2/24

Resolution 217 A (III).

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

manner. We will do so through international cooperation, while recognizing that
there are varying capacities and resources to respond to these movements.
International cooperation and, in particular, cooperation among countries of origin
or nationality, transit and destination, has never been mor e important; “win-win”
cooperation in this area has profound benefits for humanity. Large movements of
refugees and migrants must have comprehensive policy support, assistance and
protection, consistent with States’ obligations under international law. We also recall
our obligations to fully respect their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and
we stress their need to live their lives in safety and dignity. We pledge our support to
those affected today as well as to those who will be part of future large movements.
12. We are determined to address the root causes of large movements of refugees
and migrants, including through increased efforts aimed at early prevention of crisis
situations based on preventive diplomacy. We will address them also through th e
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflict, greater coordination of humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding efforts, the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and the protection of human rights. Equally, we
will address movements caused by poverty, instability, marginalization and
exclusion and the lack of development and economic opportunities, with particular
reference to the most vulnerable populations. We will work with countries of origin
to strengthen their capacities.
13. All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. Everyone has
the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law. We recall that our
obligations under international law prohibit discrimination of any kind on the bas is
of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status. Yet in many parts of the world we are
witnessing, with great concern, increasingly xenophobic and racist responses to
refugees and migrants.
14. We strongly condemn acts and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance against refugees and migrants, and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the basis of religion or belief.
Diversity enriches every society and contributes to social cohesion. Demonizing
refugees or migrants offends profoundly against the values of dignity and equality
for every human being, to which we have committed ourselves. Gathered today at
the United Nations, the birthplace and custodian of these universal values, we
deplore all manifestations of xenophobia, racial discrimination and intolerance. We
will take a range of steps to counter such attitudes and behaviour, in particular with
regard to hate crimes, hate speech and racial violence. We welcome the global
campaign proposed by the Secretary-General to counter xenophobia and we will
implement it in cooperation with the United Nations and all relevant stakeholders, in
accordance with international law. The campaign will emphasize, inter alia, direct
personal contact between host communities and refugees and migrants and will
highlight the positive contributions made by the latter, as well as our common
humanity.
15. We invite the private sector and civil society, including refugee and migrant
organizations, to participate in multi-stakeholder alliances to support efforts to
implement the commitments we are making today.
16. In the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we pledged that no one
would be left behind. We declared that we wished to see the Sustainable
Development Goals and their targets met for all nations and peoples and for all
segments of society. We said also that we would endeavour to reach the furthest
3/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

behind first. We reaffirm today our commitments that relate to the specific needs of
migrants or refugees. The 2030 Agenda makes clear, inter alia, that we will facilitate
orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including
through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies. The
needs of refugees, internally displaced persons and migrants are explicitly
recognized.
17. The implementation of all relevant provisions of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will enable the positive contribution that migrants are
making to sustainable development to be reinforced. At the same time, it will
address many of the root causes of forced displacement, helping to create more
favourable conditions in countries of origin. Meeting today, a year afte r our
adoption of the 2030 Agenda, we are determined to realize the full potential of that
Agenda for refugees and migrants.
18. We recall the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 3 and
its recommendations concerning measures to mitigate r isks associated with
disasters. States that have signed and ratified the Paris Agreement on climate
change 4 welcome that agreement and are committed to its implementation. We
reaffirm the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development, 5 including its provisions that are applicable to refugees
and migrants.
19. We take note of the report of the Secretary-General, entitled “In safety and
dignity: addressing large movements of refugees and migrants”, 6 prepared pursuant
to General Assembly decision 70/539 of 22 December 2015, in preparation for this
high-level meeting. While recognizing that the following conferences either did not
have an intergovernmentally agreed outcome or were regional in scope, we take note
of the World Humanitarian Summit, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 23 and 24 May
2016, the high-level meeting on global responsibility-sharing through pathways for
admission of Syrian refugees, convened by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on 30 March 2016, the conference on “Supporting Syria
and the Region”, held in London on 4 February 2016, and the pledging conference
on Somali refugees, held in Brussels on 21 October 2015. While recognizing that
the following initiatives are regional in nature and apply only to those countries
participating in them, we take note of regional initiatives such as the Bali Process on
People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, the
European Union-Horn of Africa Migration Route Initiative and the African Union Horn of Africa Initiative on Human Trafficking and Smuggling of Migrants (the
Khartoum Process), the Rabat Process, the Valletta Action Plan and the Brazil
Declaration and Plan of Action.
20. We recognize the very large number of people who are displaced within
national borders and the possibility that such persons might seek protection and
assistance in other countries as refugees or migrants. We note the need for reflection
on effective strategies to ensure adequate protection and assistance for internally
displaced persons and to prevent and reduce such displacement.

_______________
3

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
5
Resolution 69/313, annex.
6
A/70/59.
4

4/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

Commitments
21. We have endorsed today a set of commitments that apply to both refugees and
migrants, as well as separate sets of commitments for refugees and migrants. We do
so taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of
development and respecting national policies and priorities. We reaffirm our
commitment to international law and emphasize that the present declaration and its
annexes are to be implemented in a manner that is consistent with the rights and
obligations of States under international law. While some commitments are mainly
applicable to one group, they may also be applicable to the other. Furthermore,
while they are all framed in the context of the large movements we are considering
today, many may be applicable also to regular migration. Annex I to the present
declaration contains a comprehensive refugee response framework and outlines
steps towards the achievement of a global compact on refugees in 2018, while
annex II sets out steps towards the achievement of a global compact for safe, orderly
and regular migration in 2018.
II.

Commitments that apply to both refugees and migrants

22. Underlining the importance of a comprehensive approach to the issues
involved, we will ensure a people-centred, sensitive, humane, dignified, genderresponsive and prompt reception for all persons arriving in our countries, and
particularly those in large movements, whether refugees or migrants. We will also
ensure full respect and protection for their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
23. We recognize and will address, in accordance with our obligations under
international law, the special needs of all people in vulnerable situations who are
travelling within large movements of refugees and migrants, including women at
risk, children, especially those who are unaccompanied or separated from their
families, members of ethnic and religious minorities, victims of violence, older
persons, persons with disabilities, persons who are disc riminated against on any
basis, indigenous peoples, victims of human trafficking, and victims of exploitation
and abuse in the context of the smuggling of migrants.
24. Recognizing that States have rights and responsibilities to manage and control
their borders, we will implement border control procedures in conformity with
applicable obligations under international law, including international human rights
law and international refugee law. We will promote international cooperation on
border control and management as an important element of security for States,
including issues relating to battling transnational organized crime, terrorism and
illicit trade. We will ensure that public officials and law enforcement officers who
work in border areas are trained to uphold the human rights of all persons crossing,
or seeking to cross, international borders. We will strengthen international border
management cooperation, including in relation to training and the exchange of best
practices. We will intensify support in this area and help to build capacity as
appropriate. We reaffirm that, in line with the principle of non -refoulement,
individuals must not be returned at borders. We acknowledge also that, while
upholding these obligations and principles, States are e ntitled to take measures to
prevent irregular border crossings.
25. We will make efforts to collect accurate information regarding large
movements of refugees and migrants. We will also take measures to identify
correctly their nationalities, as well as their reasons for movement. We will take
measures to identify those who are seeking international protection as refugees.

5/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

26. We will continue to protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
persons, in transit and after arrival. We stress the importance of addressing the
immediate needs of persons who have been exposed to physical or psychological
abuse while in transit upon their arrival, without discrimination and without regard
to legal or migratory status or means of transportation. For this purpose, we will
consider appropriate support to strengthen, at their request, capacity -building for
countries that receive large movements of refugees and migrants.
27. We are determined to address unsafe movements of refugees and migrants,
with particular reference to irregular movements of refugees and migrants. We will
do so without prejudice to the right to seek asylum. We will combat the exploitation,
abuse and discrimination suffered by many refugees and migrants.
28. We express our profound concern at the large number of people who have lost
their lives in transit. We commend the efforts already made to rescue people in
distress at sea. We commit to intensifying international cooperation on the
strengthening of search and rescue mechanisms. We will also work to improve the
availability of accurate data on the whereabouts of people and vessels stranded at
sea. In addition, we will strengthen support for rescue efforts over land along
dangerous or isolated routes. We will draw attention to the risks inv olved in the use
of such routes in the first instance.
29. We recognize and will take steps to address the particular vulnerabilities of
women and children during the journey from country of origin to country of arrival.
This includes their potential exposure to discrimination and exploitation, as well as
to sexual, physical and psychological abuse, violence, human trafficking and
contemporary forms of slavery.
30. We encourage States to address the vulnerabilities to HIV and the specific
health-care needs experienced by migrant and mobile populations, as well as by
refugees and crisis-affected populations, and to take steps to reduce stigma,
discrimination and violence, as well as to review policies related to restrictions on
entry based on HIV status, with a view to eliminating such restrictions and the
return of people on the basis of their HIV status, and to support their access to HIV
prevention, treatment, care and support.
31. We will ensure that our responses to large movements of refugees and migrant s
mainstream a gender perspective, promote gender equality and the empowerment of
all women and girls and fully respect and protect the human rights of women and
girls. We will combat sexual and gender-based violence to the greatest extent
possible. We will provide access to sexual and reproductive health-care services. We
will tackle the multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination against refugee and
migrant women and girls. At the same time, recognizing the significant contribution
and leadership of women in refugee and migrant communities, we will work to
ensure their full, equal and meaningful participation in the development of local
solutions and opportunities. We will take into consideration the different needs,
vulnerabilities and capacities of women, girls, boys and men.
32. We will protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all refugee and
migrant children, regardless of their status, and giving primary consideration at all
times to the best interests of the child. This will apply pa rticularly to
unaccompanied children and those separated from their families; we will refer their
care to the relevant national child protection authorities and other relevant

6/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

authorities. We will comply with our obligations under the Convention on the Rig hts
of the Child. 7 We will work to provide for basic health, education and psychosocial
development and for the registration of all births on our territories. We are
determined to ensure that all children are receiving education within a few months
of arrival, and we will prioritize budgetary provision to facilitate this, including
support for host countries as required. We will strive to provide refugee and migrant
children with a nurturing environment for the full realization of their rights and
capabilities.
33. Reaffirming that all individuals who have crossed or are seeking to cross
international borders are entitled to due process in the assessment of their legal
status, entry and stay, we will consider reviewing policies that criminalize cross border movements. We will also pursue alternatives to detention while these
assessments are under way. Furthermore, recognizing that detention for the purposes
of determining migration status is seldom, if ever, in the best interest of the child,
we will use it only as a measure of last resort, in the least restrictive setting, for the
shortest possible period of time, under conditions that respect their human rights and
in a manner that takes into account, as a primary consideration, the best interest of
the child, and we will work towards the ending of this practice.
34. Reaffirming the importance of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the two relevant Protocols thereto, 8 we encourage
the ratification of, accession to and implementation of relevant international
instruments on preventing and combating trafficking in persons and the smuggling
of migrants.
35. We recognize that refugees and migrants in large movements are at greater risk
of being trafficked and of being subjected to forced labour. We will, with full
respect for our obligations under international law, vigorously combat human
trafficking and migrant smuggling with a view to their elimination, including
through targeted measures to identify victims of human trafficki ng or those at risk
of trafficking. We will provide support for the victims of human trafficking. We will
work to prevent human trafficking among those affected by displacement.
36. With a view to disrupting and eliminating the criminal networks involved, we
will review our national legislation to ensure conformity with our obligations under
international law on migrant smuggling, human trafficking and maritime safety. We
will implement the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. 9 We will establish or upgrade, as appropriate, national and regional
anti-human trafficking policies. We note regional initiatives such as the African
Union-Horn of Africa Initiative on Human Trafficking and Smuggling of Migrants,
the Plan of Action Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the European Union Strategy towards
the Eradication of Trafficking in Human Beings 2012–2016, and the Work Plans
against Trafficking in Persons in the Western Hemisphere. We welcome reinforced
technical cooperation, on a regional and bilateral basis, between countries of origin,
transit and destination on the prevention of human trafficking and migrant
smuggling and the prosecution of traffickers and smugglers.

_______________
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vols. 2225, 2237 and 2241, No. 39574.
9
Resolution 64/293.
8

7/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

37. We favour an approach to addressing the drivers and root causes of large
movements of refugees and migrants, including forced displacement and protracted
crises, which would, inter alia, reduce vulnerability, combat poverty, improve self reliance and resilience, ensure a strengthened humanitarian -development nexus, and
improve coordination with peacebuilding efforts. This will involve coordinated
prioritized responses based on joint and impartial needs assessments and facilitating
cooperation across institutional mandates.
38. We will take measures to provide, on the basis of bilateral, regional and
international cooperation, humanitarian financing that is adequate, flexible,
predictable and consistent, to enable host countries and communities to respond
both to the immediate humanitarian needs and to their longer -term development
needs. There is a need to address gaps in humanitarian funding, considering
additional resources as appropriate. We look forward to close cooperation in this
regard among Member States, United Nations entities and other actors and between
the United Nations and international financial institutions such as the World Bank,
where appropriate. We envisage innovative financing responses, risk financing for
affected communities and the implementation of other efficiencies such as reducing
management costs, improving transparency, increasing the use of national
responders, expanding the use of cash assistance, reducing duplication, increasing
engagement with beneficiaries, diminishing earmarked funding and harmonizing
reporting, so as to ensure a more effective use of existing resources.
39. We commit to combating xenophobia, racism and discrimination in our
societies against refugees and migrants. We will take measures to impr ove their
integration and inclusion, as appropriate, and with particular reference to access to
education, health care, justice and language training. We recognize that these
measures will reduce the risks of marginalization and radicalization. National
policies relating to integration and inclusion will be developed, as appropriate, in
conjunction with relevant civil society organizations, including faith -based
organizations, the private sector, employers’ and workers’ organizations and other
stakeholders. We also note the obligation for refugees and migrants to observe the
laws and regulations of their host countries.
40. We recognize the importance of improved data collection, particularly by
national authorities, and will enhance international cooperation to this end,
including through capacity-building, financial support and technical assistance.
Such data should be disaggregated by sex and age and include information on
regular and irregular flows, the economic impacts of migration and refugee
movements, human trafficking, the needs of refugees, migrants and host
communities and other issues. We will do so consistent with our national legislation
on data protection, if applicable, and our international obligations related to privacy,
as applicable.
III. Commitments for migrants
41. We are committed to protecting the safety, dignity and human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all migrants, regardless of their migratory status, at all
times. We will cooperate closely to facilitate and ensure safe, orderl y and regular
migration, including return and readmission, taking into account national
legislation.
42. We commit to safeguarding the rights of, protecting the interests of and
assisting our migrant communities abroad, including through consular protectio n,
assistance and cooperation, in accordance with relevant international law. We
8/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

reaffirm that everyone has the right to leave any country, including his or her own,
and to return to his or her country. We recall at the same time that each State has a
sovereign right to determine whom to admit to its territory, subject to that State’s
international obligations. We recall also that States must readmit their returning
nationals and ensure that they are duly received without undue delay, following
confirmation of their nationalities in accordance with national legislation. We will
take measures to inform migrants about the various processes relating to their
arrival and stay in countries of transit, destination and return.
43. We commit to addressing the drivers that create or exacerbate large
movements. We will analyse and respond to the factors, including in countries of
origin, which lead or contribute to large movements. We will cooperate to create
conditions that allow communities and individuals to live in peace and prosperity in
their homelands. Migration should be a choice, not a necessity. We will take
measures, inter alia, to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
whose objectives include eradicating extreme poverty and inequality, revit alizing
the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies based on international human rights and the rule of law, creating
conditions for balanced, sustainable and inclusive economic growth and
employment, combating environmental degradation and ensuring effective responses
to natural disasters and the adverse impacts of climate change.
44. Recognizing that the lack of educational opportunities is often a push factor
for migration, particularly for young people, we commit to strengthening capacities
in countries of origin, including in educational institutions. We commit also to
enhancing employment opportunities, particularly for young people, in countries of
origin. We acknowledge also the impact of migration o n human capital in countries
of origin.
45. We will consider reviewing our migration policies with a view to examining
their possible unintended negative consequences.
46. We also recognize that international migration is a multidimensional reality of
major relevance for the development of countries of origin, transit and destination,
which requires coherent and comprehensive responses. Migrants can make positive
and profound contributions to economic and social development in their host
societies and to global wealth creation. They can help to respond to demographic
trends, labour shortages and other challenges in host societies, and add fresh skills
and dynamism to the latter’s economies. We recognize the development benefits of
migration to countries of origin, including through the involvement of diasporas in
economic development and reconstruction. We will commit to reducing the costs of
labour migration and promote ethical recruitment policies and practices between
sending and receiving countries. We will promote faster, cheaper and safer transfers
of migrant remittances in both source and recipient countries, including through a
reduction in transaction costs, as well as the facilitation of interaction between
diasporas and their countries of origin. We would like these contributions to be more
widely recognized and indeed, strengthened in the context of implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
47. We will ensure that all aspects of migration are integrated into global, regional
and national sustainable development plans and into humanitarian, peacebuilding
and human rights policies and programmes.

9/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

48. We call upon States that have not done so to consider ratifying, or acceding to,
the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families. 10 We call also upon States that have not done so to
consider acceding to relevant International Labour Organization conventions, as
appropriate. We note, in addition, that migrants enjoy rights and protection under
various provisions of international law.
49. We commit to strengthening global governance of migration. We therefore
warmly support and welcome the agreement to bring the International Organization
for Migration, an organization regarded by its Member States as the global lead
agency on migration, into a closer legal and working relationship with the United
Nations as a related organization. 11 We look forward to the implementation of this
agreement, which will assist and protect migrants more comprehensively, help
States to address migration issues and promote better coherence between migration
and related policy domains.
50. We will assist, impartially and on the basis of needs, migrants in countries that
are experiencing conflicts or natural disasters, working, as applicable, in
coordination with the relevant national authorities. While recognizing that not all
States are participating in them, we note in this regard the Migrants in Countries in
Crisis initiative and the Agenda for the Protection of Cross-Border Displaced
Persons in the Context of Disasters and Climate Change resulting from the Nansen
Initiative.
51. We take note of the work done by the Global Migration Group to develop
principles and practical guidance on the protection of the human rights of migrants
in vulnerable situations.
52. We will consider developing non-binding guiding principles and voluntary
guidelines, consistent with international law, on the treatment of migrants in
vulnerable situations, especially unaccompanied and separated children who do not
qualify for international protection as refugees and who may need assistance. The
guiding principles and guidelines will be developed using a State -led process with
the involvement of all relevant stakeholders and with input from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on International Migration and
Development, the International Organization for Migration, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the Unite d Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant United Nations system entities.
They would complement national efforts to protect and assist migrants.
53. We welcome the willingness of some States to provide temporary protection
against return to migrants who do not qualify for refugee status and who are unable
to return home owing to conditions in their countries.
54. We will build on existing bilateral, regional and global cooperation and
partnership mechanisms, in accordance with internationa l law, for facilitating
migration in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We will
strengthen cooperation to this end among countries of origin, transit and destination,
including through regional consultative processes, international orga nizations, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, regional economic
organizations and local government authorities, as well as with relevant private
_______________
10
11

10/24

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
Resolution 70/296, annex.

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

sector recruiters and employers, labour unions, civil society and migrant and
diaspora groups. We recognize the particular needs of local authorities, who are the
first receivers of migrants.
55. We recognize the progress made on international migration and development
issues within the United Nations system, including the first and second High -level
Dialogues on International Migration and Development. We will support enhanced
global and regional dialogue and deepened collaboration on migration, particularly
through exchanges of best practice and mutual learning and the development of
national or regional initiatives. We note in this regard the valuable contribution of
the Global Forum on Migration and Development and acknowledge the importance
of multi-stakeholder dialogues on migration and development.
56. We affirm that children should not be criminalized or subject to punitive
measures because of their migration status or that of their parents.
57. We will consider facilitating opportunities for safe, orderly and regular
migration, including, as appropriate, employment creation, labour mobilit y at all
skills levels, circular migration, family reunification and education -related
opportunities. We will pay particular attention to the application of minimum labour
standards for migrant workers regardless of their status, as well as to recruitment
and other migration-related costs, remittance flows, transfers of skills and
knowledge and the creation of employment opportunities for young people.
58. We strongly encourage cooperation among countries of origin or nationality,
countries of transit, countries of destination and other relevant countries in ensuring
that migrants who do not have permission to stay in the country of destination can
return, in accordance with international obligations of all States, to their country of
origin or nationality in a safe, orderly and dignified manner, preferably on a
voluntary basis, taking into account national legislation in line with international
law. We note that cooperation on return and readmission forms an important element
of international cooperation on migration. Such cooperation would include ensuring
proper identification and the provision of relevant travel documents. Any type of
return, whether voluntary or otherwise, must be consistent with our obligations
under international human rights law and in compliance with the principle of
non-refoulement. It should also respect the rules of international law and must in
addition be conducted in keeping with the best interests of children and with due
process. While recognizing that they apply only to States that have entered into
them, we acknowledge that existing readmission agreements should be fully
implemented. We support enhanced reception and reintegration assistance for those
who are returned. Particular attention should be paid to the needs of migran ts in
vulnerable situations who return, such as children, older persons, persons with
disabilities and victims of trafficking.
59. We reaffirm our commitment to protect the human rights of migrant children,
given their vulnerability, particularly unaccompanied migrant children, and to
provide access to basic health, education and psychosocial services, ensuring that
the best interests of the child is a primary consideration in all relevant policies.
60. We recognize the need to address the special situation and vulnerability of
migrant women and girls by, inter alia, incorporating a gender perspective into
migration policies and strengthening national laws, institutions and programmes to
combat gender-based violence, including trafficking in persons and discrimination
against women and girls.

11/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

61. While recognizing the contribution of civil society, including non -governmental
organizations, to promoting the well-being of migrants and their integration into
societies, especially at times of extremely vulnerable conditions, and the support of
the international community to the efforts of such organizations, we encourage
deeper interaction between Governments and civil society to find responses to the
challenges and the opportunities posed by international migrati on.
62. We note that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
International Migration and Development, Mr. Peter Sutherland, will be providing,
before the end of 2016, a report that will propose ways of strengthening
international cooperation and the engagement of the United Nations on migration.
63. We commit to launching, in 2016, a process of intergovernmental negotiations
leading to the adoption of a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
at an intergovernmental conference to be held in 2018. We invite the President of
the General Assembly to make arrangements for the determination of the modalities,
timeline and other practicalities relating to the negotiation process. Further details
regarding the process are set out in annex II to the present declaration.
IV.

Commitments for refugees

64. Recognizing that armed conflict, persecution and violence, including
terrorism, are among the factors which give rise to large refugee movements, we
will work to address the root causes of such crisis situations and to prevent or
resolve conflict by peaceful means. We will work in every way possible for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the prevention of conflict and the achievement of
the long-term political solutions required. Preventive diplomacy and early response
to conflict on the part of States and the United Nations are critical. The promotion
of human rights is also critical. In addition, we will promote good governance, the
rule of law, effective, accountable and inclusive institutions, and sustainable
development at the international, regional, national and local levels. Recognizing
that displacement could be reduced if international humanitarian law were respected
by all parties to armed conflict, we renew our commitment to up hold humanitarian
principles and international humanitarian law. We confirm also our respect for the
rules that safeguard civilians in conflict.
65. We reaffirm the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 12 and the
1967 Protocol thereto 13 as the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime. We recognize the importance of their full and effective application by States
parties and the values they embody. We note with satisfaction that 148 States are
now parties to one or both instruments. We encourage States not parties to consider
acceding to those instruments and States parties with reservations to give
consideration to withdrawing them. We recognize also that a number of States not
parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a generous approach to
hosting refugees.
66. We reaffirm that international refugee law, international human rights law and
international humanitarian law provide the legal framework to strengthen the
protection of refugees. We will ensure, in this context, protection for all who need it.
We take note of regional refugee instruments, such as the Organization of African

_______________
12
13

12/24

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

Unity Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa 14 and
the Cartagena Declaration on Refugees.
67. We reaffirm respect for the institution of asylum and the right to seek asylum.
We reaffirm also respect for and adherence to the fundamental principle of
non-refoulement in accordance with international refugee law.
68. We underline the centrality of international cooperation to the refugee
protection regime. We recognize the burdens that large movements of refugees place
on national resources, especially in the case of developing countries. To address the
needs of refugees and receiving States, we commit to a mo re equitable sharing of
the burden and responsibility for hosting and supporting the world’s refugees, while
taking account of existing contributions and the differing capacities and resources
among States.
69. We believe that a comprehensive refugee response should be developed and
initiated by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in
close coordination with relevant States, including host countries, and involving
other relevant United Nations entities, for each situation involvi ng large movements
of refugees. This should involve a multi-stakeholder approach that includes national
and local authorities, international organizations, international financial institutions,
civil society partners (including faith-based organizations, diaspora organizations
and academia), the private sector, the media and refugees themselves.
A comprehensive framework of this kind is annexed to the present declaration.
70. We will ensure that refugee admission policies or arrangements are in line with
our obligations under international law. We wish to see administrative barriers
eased, with a view to accelerating refugee admission procedures to the extent
possible. We will, where appropriate, assist States to conduct early and effective
registration and documentation of refugees. We will also promote access for
children to child-appropriate procedures. At the same time, we recognize that the
ability of refugees to lodge asylum claims in the country of their choice may be
regulated, subject to the safeguard that they will have access to, and enjoyment of,
protection elsewhere.
71. We encourage the adoption of measures to facilitate access to civil registration
and documentation for refugees. We recognize in this regard the importance of early
and effective registration and documentation, as a protection tool and to facilitate
the provision of humanitarian assistance.
72. We recognize that statelessness can be a root cause of forced displacement and
that forced displacement, in turn, can lead to statelessness. We take note of the
campaign of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
end statelessness within a decade and we encourage States to consider actions they
could take to reduce the incidence of statelessness. We encourage those States that
have not yet acceded to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons 15 and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness 16 to consider
doing so.
73. We recognize that refugee camps should be the exception and, to the e xtent
possible, a temporary measure in response to an emergency. We note that 6 0 per cent
_______________
14

Ibid., vol. 1001, No. 14691.
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
16
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
15

13/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

of refugees worldwide are in urban settings and only a minority are in camps. We
will ensure that the delivery of assistance to refugees and host communities is
adapted to the relevant context. We underline that host States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps
and settlements. We will work to ensure that this character is not compromised by
the presence or activities of armed elements and to ensure that camps are not used
for purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character. We will work to
strengthen security in refugee camps and surrounding local communities, at the
request and with the consent of the host country.
74. We welcome the extraordinarily generous contribution made to date by
countries that host large refugee populations and will work to increase the support
for those countries. We call for pledges made at relevant conferences to be di sbursed
promptly.
75. We commit to working towards solutions from the outset of a refugee
situation. We will actively promote durable solutions, particularly in protracted
refugee situations, with a focus on sustainable and timely return in safety and
dignity. This will encompass repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction activities. We encourage States and other relevant actors to provide
support through, inter alia, the allocation of funds.
76. We reaffirm that voluntary repatriation should not necessarily be conditioned
on the accomplishment of political solutions in the country of origin.
77. We intend to expand the number and range of legal pathways available for
refugees to be admitted to or resettled in third countries. In additi on to easing the
plight of refugees, this has benefits for countries that host large refugee populations
and for third countries that receive refugees.
78. We urge States that have not yet established resettlement programmes to
consider doing so at the earliest opportunity. Those which have already done so are
encouraged to consider increasing the size of their programmes. It is our aim to
provide resettlement places and other legal pathways for admission on a scale that
would enable the annual resettlement needs identified by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to be met.
79. We will consider the expansion of existing humanitarian admission
programmes, possible temporary evacuation programmes, including evacuation for
medical reasons, flexible arrangements to assist family reunification, private
sponsorship for individual refugees and opportunities for labour mobility for
refugees, including through private sector partnerships, and for education, such as
scholarships and student visas.
80. We are committed to providing humanitarian assistance to refugees so as to
ensure essential support in key life-saving sectors, such as health care, shelter, food,
water and sanitation. We commit to supporting host countries and communities in
this regard, including by using locally available knowledge and capacities. We will
support community-based development programmes that benefit both refugees and
host communities.
81. We are determined to provide quality primary and secondary education in s afe
learning environments for all refugee children, and to do so within a few months of
the initial displacement. We commit to providing host countries with support in this
regard. Access to quality education, including for host communities, gives
fundamental protection to children and youth in displacement contexts, particularly
in situations of conflict and crisis.
14/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

82. We will support early childhood education for refugee children. We will also
promote tertiary education, skills training and vocational ed ucation. In conflict and
crisis situations, higher education serves as a powerful driver for change, shelters
and protects a critical group of young men and women by maintaining their hopes
for the future, fosters inclusion and non-discrimination and acts as a catalyst for the
recovery and rebuilding of post-conflict countries.
83. We will work to ensure that the basic health needs of refugee communities are
met and that women and girls have access to essential health -care services. We
commit to providing host countries with support in this regard. We will also develop
national strategies for the protection of refugees within the framework of national
social protection systems, as appropriate.
84. Welcoming the positive steps taken by individual States, we e ncourage host
Governments to consider opening their labour markets to refugees. We will work to
strengthen host countries’ and communities’ resilience, assisting them, for example,
with employment creation and income generation schemes. In this regard, we
recognize the potential of young people and will work to create the conditions for
growth, employment and education that will allow them to be the drivers of
development.
85. In order to meet the challenges posed by large movements of refugees, close
coordination will be required among a range of humanitarian and development
actors. We commit to putting those most affected at the centre of planning and
action. Host Governments and communities may need support from relevant United
Nations entities, local authorities, international financial institutions, regional
development banks, bilateral donors, the private sector and civil society. We
strongly encourage joint responses involving all such actors in order to strengthen
the nexus between humanitarian and development actors, facilitate cooperation
across institutional mandates and, by helping to build self-reliance and resilience,
lay a basis for sustainable solutions. In addition to meeting direct humanitarian and
development needs, we will work to support environmental, social and
infrastructural rehabilitation in areas affected by large movements of refugees.
86. We note with concern a significant gap between the needs of refugees and the
available resources. We encourage support from a broader range of d onors and will
take measures to make humanitarian financing more flexible and predictable, with
diminished earmarking and increased multi-year funding, in order to close this gap.
United Nations entities such as the Office of the United Nations High Commis sioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other relevant organizations require sufficient
funding to be able to carry out their activities effectively and in a predictable
manner. We welcome the increasing engagement of the World Bank and multilateral
development banks and improvements in access to concessional development
financing for affected communities. It is clear, furthermore, that private sector
investment in support of refugee communities and host countries will be of critical
importance over the coming years. Civil society is also a key partner in every region
of the world in responding to the needs of refugees.
87. We note that the United States of America, Canada, Ethiopia, Germany,
Jordan, Mexico, Sweden and the Secretary-General will host a high-level meeting
on refugees on 20 September 2016.

15/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

V.

Follow-up to and review of our commitments

88. We recognize that arrangements are needed to ensure systematic follow -up to
and review of all of the commitments we are making today. Accordingly, we request
the Secretary-General to ensure that the progress made by Member States and the
United Nations in implementing the commitments made at today’s high -level
meeting will be the subject of periodic assessments provided to the General
Assembly with reference, as appropriate, to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
89. In addition, a role in reviewing relevant aspects of the present declaration
should be envisaged for the periodic High-level Dialogues on International
Migration and Development and for the annual report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to the General Assembly.
90. In recognition of the need for significant financial and programme support to
host countries and communities affected by large movements of refugees and
migrants, we request the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session on ways of achieving greater efficiency, operational
effectiveness and system-wide coherence, as well as ways of strengthening the
engagement of the United Nations with international financial institutions and the
private sector, with a view to fully implementing the commitments outlined in the
present declaration.
3rd plenary meeting
19 September 2016

Annex I
Comprehensive refugee response framework
1.
The scale and nature of refugee displacement today requires us to act in a
comprehensive and predictable manner in large-scale refugee movements. Through
a comprehensive refugee response based on the principles of international
cooperation and on burden- and responsibility-sharing, we are better able to protect
and assist refugees and to support the host States and communities involved.
2.
The comprehensive refugee response framework will be developed and
initiated by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in
close coordination with relevant States, including host countries, and involving
other relevant United Nations entities, for each situation involving large movements
of refugees. A comprehensive refugee response should involve a multi -stakeholder
approach, including national and local authorities, international organizations,
international financial institutions, regional organizations, regional coordi nation and
partnership mechanisms, civil society partners, including faith -based organizations
and academia, the private sector, media and the refugees themselves.
3.
While each large movement of refugees will differ in nature, the elements
noted below provide a framework for a comprehensive and people-centred refugee
response, which is in accordance with international law and best international
practice and adapted to the specific context.
4.
We envisage a comprehensive refugee response framework for each situation
involving large movements of refugees, including in protracted situations, as an
integral and distinct part of an overall humanitarian response, where it exists, and
which would normally contain the elements set out below.

16/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

Reception and admission
5.
At the outset of a large movement of refugees, receiving States, bearing in
mind their national capacities and international legal obligations, in cooperation, as
appropriate, with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, international organizations and other partners and with the support of
other States as requested, in conformity with international obligations, would:
(a) Ensure, to the extent possible, that measures are in place to identify
persons in need of international protection as refugees, provide for adequate, safe
and dignified reception conditions, with a particular emphasis on persons with
specific needs, victims of human trafficking, child protection, family unity, and
prevention of and response to sexual and gender-based violence, and support the
critical contribution of receiving communities and societies in this regard;
(b) Take account of the rights, specific needs, contributions and voices of
women and girl refugees;
(c) Assess and meet the essential needs of refugees, including by providing
access to adequate safe drinking water, sanitation, food, nutrition, shelter,
psychosocial support and health care, including sexual and reproductive health, and
providing assistance to host countries and communities in this regard, as required;
(d) Register individually and document those seeking protection as refugees,
including in the first country where they seek asylum, as quickly as possible upon
their arrival. To achieve this, assistance may be needed, in areas su ch as biometric
technology and other technical and financial support, to be coordinated by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with relevant actors
and partners, where necessary;
(e) Use the registration process to identify specific assistance needs and
protection arrangements, where possible, including but not exclusively for refugees
with special protection concerns, such as women at risk, children, especially
unaccompanied children and children separated from their families, child-headed
and single-parent households, victims of trafficking, victims of trauma and survivors
of sexual violence, as well as refugees with disabilities and older persons;
(f) Work to ensure the immediate birth registration for all refugee children
born on their territory and provide adequate assistance at the earliest opportunity
with obtaining other necessary documents, as appropriate, relating to civil status,
such as marriage, divorce and death certificates;
(g) Put in place measures, with appropriate legal safeguards, which uphold
refugees’ human rights, with a view to ensuring the security of refugees, as well as
measures to respond to host countries’ legitimate security concerns;
(h) Take measures to maintain the civilian and humanitarian nature of
refugee camps and settlements;
(i) Take steps to ensure the credibility of asylum systems, including through
collaboration among the countries of origin, transit and destina tion and to facilitate
the return and readmission of those who do not qualify for refugee status.
Support for immediate and ongoing needs
6.
States, in cooperation with multilateral donors and private sector partners, as
appropriate, would, in coordination with receiving States:
(a) Mobilize adequate financial and other resources to cover the humanitarian
needs identified within the comprehensive refugee response framework;
17/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

(b) Provide resources in a prompt, predictable, consistent and flexible
manner, including through wider partnerships involving State, civil society, faith based and private sector partners;
(c) Take measures to extend the finance lending schemes that exist for
developing countries to middle-income countries hosting large numbers of refugees,
bearing in mind the economic and social costs to those countries;
(d) Consider establishing development funding mechanisms for such
countries;
(e) Provide assistance to host countries to protect the environment and
strengthen infrastructure affected by large movements of refugees;
(f) Increase support for cash-based delivery mechanisms and other
innovative means for the efficient provision of humanitarian assistance, where
appropriate, while increasing accountability to ensure that humanitaria n assistance
reaches its beneficiaries.
7.
Host States, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other United Nations entities, financial institutions
and other relevant partners, would, as appropriate:
(a) Provide prompt, safe and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance
for refugees in accordance with existing humanitarian principles;
(b) Deliver assistance, to the extent possible, through appropriate national
and local service providers, such as public authorities for health, education, social
services and child protection;
(c) Encourage and empower refugees, at the outset of an emergency phase, to
establish supportive systems and networks that involve refugees and host communities
and are age- and gender-sensitive, with a particular emphasis on the protection and
empowerment of women and children and other persons with specific needs;
(d) Support local civil society partners that contribute to humanitarian
responses, in recognition of their complementary contribution;
(e) Ensure close cooperation and encourage joint planning, as appropriate,
between humanitarian and development actors and other relevant actors.
Support for host countries and communities
8.
States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
relevant partners would:
(a) Implement a joint, impartial and rapid risk and/or impact assessment, in
anticipation or after the onset of a large refugee movement, in order to identify and
prioritize the assistance required for refugees, national and local authorities, and
communities affected by a refugee presence;
(b) Incorporate, where appropriate, the comprehensive refugee response
framework in national development planning, in order to strengthen the delivery o f
essential services and infrastructure for the benefit of host communities and
refugees;
(c) Work to provide adequate resources, without prejudice to official
development assistance, for national and local government authorities and other
service providers in view of the increased needs and pressures on social services.
Programmes should benefit refugees and the host country and communities.

18/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

Durable solutions
9.
We recognize that millions of refugees around the world at present have no
access to timely and durable solutions, the securing of which is one of the principal
goals of international protection. The success of the search for solutions depends in
large measure on resolute and sustained international cooperation and support.
10. We believe that actions should be taken in pursuit of the following durable
solutions: voluntary repatriation, local solutions and resettlement and complementary
pathways for admission. These actions should include the elements set out below.
11. We reaffirm the primary goal of bringing about conditions that would help
refugees return in safety and dignity to their countries and emphasize the need to
tackle the root causes of violence and armed conflict and to achieve necessary
political solutions and the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as to assist in
reconstruction efforts. In this context, States of origin/nationality would:
(a) Acknowledge that everyone has the right to leave any country, including
his or her own, and to return to his or her country;
(b) Respect this right and also respect the obligation to receive back their
nationals, which should occur in a safe, dignified and humane manner and with full
respect for human rights in accordance with obligations under international law;
(c)

Provide necessary identification and travel documents;

(d)

Facilitate the socioeconomic reintegration of returnees;

(e)

Consider measures to enable the restitution of property.

12. To ensure sustainable return and reintegration, States, United Nations
organizations and relevant partners would:
(a) Recognize that the voluntary nature of repatriation is necessary as long
as refugees continue to require international protection, that is, as long as they
cannot regain fully the protection of their own country;
(b) Plan for and support measures to encourage voluntary and informed
repatriation, reintegration and reconciliation;
(c) Support countries of origin/nationality, where appropriate, including
through funding for rehabilitation, reconstruction and development, an d with the
necessary legal safeguards to enable refugees to access legal, physical and other
support mechanisms needed for the restoration of national protection and their
reintegration;
(d) Support efforts to foster reconciliation and dialogue, particula rly with
refugee communities and with the equal participation of women and youth, and to
ensure respect for the rule of law at the national and local levels;
(e) Facilitate the participation of refugees, including women, in peace and
reconciliation processes, and ensure that the outcomes of such processes duly
support their return in safety and dignity;
(f) Ensure that national development planning incorporates the specific
needs of returnees and promotes sustainable and inclusive reintegration, as a
measure to prevent future displacement.
13. Host States, bearing in mind their capacities and international legal
obligations, in cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
19/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

Palestine Refugees in the Near East, where appropriate, and other United Nations
entities, financial institutions and other relevant partners, would:
(a) Provide legal stay to those seeking and in need of international protection
as refugees, recognizing that any decision regarding permanent settlement in any
form, including possible naturalization, rests with the host country;
(b) Take measures to foster self-reliance by pledging to expand opportunities
for refugees to access, as appropriate, education, health care and services, livelihood
opportunities and labour markets, without discriminating among refugees and in a
manner which also supports host communities;
(c) Take measures to enable refugees, including in particular women and
youth, to make the best use of their skills and capacities, recognizing that
empowered refugees are better able to contribute to their own and their
communities’ well-being;
(d) Invest in building human capital, self-reliance and transferable skills as
an essential step towards enabling long-term solutions.
14.

Third countries would:

(a) Consider making available or expanding, including by encouraging
private sector engagement and action as a supplementary measure, resettlement
opportunities and complementary pathways for admission of refugees through such
means as medical evacuation and humanitarian admission programmes, family
reunification and opportunities for skilled migration, labour mobility and education;
(b) Commit to sharing best practices, providing refugees wit h sufficient
information to make informed decisions and safeguarding protection standards;
(c) Consider broadening the criteria for resettlement and humanitarian
admission programmes in mass displacement and protracted situations, coupled
with, as appropriate, temporary humanitarian evacuation programmes and other
forms of admission.
15. States that have not yet established resettlement programmes are encouraged
to do so at the earliest opportunity. Those that have already done so are encouraged
to consider increasing the size of their programmes. Such programmes should
incorporate a non-discriminatory approach and a gender perspective throughout.
16. States aim to provide resettlement places and other legal pathways on a scale
that would enable the annual resettlement needs identified by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to be met.
The way forward
17.

We commit to implementing this comprehensive refugee response framework.

18. We invite the Office of the United Nations High Co mmissioner for Refugees to
engage with States and consult with all relevant stakeholders over the coming two
years, with a view to evaluating the detailed practical application of the
comprehensive refugee response framework and assessing the scope for ref inement
and further development. This process should be informed by practical experience
with the implementation of the framework in a range of specific situations. The
objective would be to ease pressures on the host countries involved, to enhance
refugee self-reliance, to expand access to third-country solutions and to support
conditions in countries of origin for return in safety and dignity.

20/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

A/RES/71/1

19. We will work towards the adoption in 2018 of a global compact on refugees,
based on the comprehensive refugee response framework and on the outcomes of
the process described above. We invite the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to include such a proposed global compact on refugees in his annual report
to the General Assembly in 2018, for consideration by the Assembly at its seventythird session in conjunction with its annual resolution on the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Annex II
Towards a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration
I.

Introduction

1.
This year, we will launch a process of intergovernmental negotiations leading
to the adoption of a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration.
2.
The global compact would set out a range of principles, commitments and
understandings among Member States regarding international migration in all its
dimensions. It would make an important contribution to global governance and
enhance coordination on international migration. It would present a framework for
comprehensive international cooperation on mi grants and human mobility. It would
deal with all aspects of international migration, including the humanitarian,
developmental, human rights-related and other aspects of migration. It would be
guided by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 17 and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, 18 and informed by the Declaration of the High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development adopted in October 2013. 19
II.

Context

3.
We acknowledge the important contribution made by migrants and migration
to development in countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as the complex
interrelationship between migration and development.
4.
We recognize the positive contribution of migrants to sustainable and inclusive
development. We also recognize that international migration is a multidimensional
reality of major relevance for the development of countries of origin, transit and
destination, which requires coherent and comprehensive responses.
5.
We will cooperate internationally to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration
involving full respect for human rights and the humane treatment of migrants,
regardless of migration status. We underline the need to ensure respect for the
dignity of migrants and the protection of their rights under applicable international
law, including the principle of non-discrimination under international law.
6.
We emphasize the multidimensional character of international migration, the
importance of international, regional and bilateral cooperation and dialogue in this
regard, and the need to protect the human rights of all migrants, regardless of status,
particularly at a time when migration flows have increased.

_______________
17

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
19
Resolution 68/4.
18

21/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

7.
We bear in mind that policies and initiatives on the issue of migration should
promote holistic approaches that take into account the causes and consequences of
the phenomenon. We acknowledge that poverty, underdevelopment, lack of
opportunities, poor governance and environmental factors are among the drivers of
migration. In turn, pro-poor policies relating to trade, employment and productive
investments can stimulate growth and create enormous development potential. We
note that international economic imbalances, poverty and environmental degradation,
combined with the absence of peace and security and lack of respect for human rights,
are all factors affecting international migration.
III. Content
8.
The global compact could include, but would not be limited to, the following
elements:
(a) International migration as a multidimensional reality of major relevance
for the development of countries of origin, transit and destination, as recognized in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
(b)
families;

International migration as a potential opportunity for migrants and their

(c) The need to address the drivers of migration, including through
strengthened efforts in development, poverty eradication and conflict prevention and
resolution;
(d) The contribution made by migrants to sustainable development and the
complex interrelationship between migration and development;
(e) The facilitation of safe, orderly, regular and responsible migration and
mobility of people, including through the implementatio n of planned and wellmanaged migration policies; this may include the creation and expansion of safe,
regular pathways for migration;
(f) The scope for greater international cooperation, with a view to improving
migration governance;
(g)

The impact of migration on human capital in countries of origin;

(h) Remittances as an important source of private capital and their
contribution to development and promotion of faster, cheaper and safer transfers of
remittances through legal channels, in both source and recipient countries, including
through a reduction in transaction costs;
(i) Effective protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
migrants, including women and children, regardless of their migratory status, and
the specific needs of migrants in vulnerable situations;
(j) International cooperation for border control, with full respect for the
human rights of migrants;
(k) Combating trafficking
contemporary forms of slavery;

in

persons,

smuggling

of

migrants

and

(l) Identifying those who have been trafficked and considering providing
assistance, including temporary or permanent residency, and work permits, as
appropriate;
(m) Reduction of the incidence and impact of irregular migration;

22/24

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

(n)

A/RES/71/1

Addressing the situations of migrants in countries in crisis;

(o) Promotion, as appropriate, of the inclusion of migrants in host societies,
access to basic services for migrants and gender-responsive services;
(p)

Consideration of policies to regularize the status of migrants;

(q) Protection of labour rights and a safe environment for migrant workers
and those in precarious employment, protection of women migrant workers in all
sectors and promotion of labour mobility, including circular migration;
(r)

The responsibilities and obligations of migrants towards host countries;

(s) Return and readmission, and improving cooperation in this regard
between countries of origin and destination;
(t) Harnessing the contribution of diasporas and strengthening links with
countries of origin;
(u) Combating racism, xenophobia, discrimination and intolerance towards all
migrants;
(v)

Disaggregated data on international migration;

(w) Recognition of foreign qualifications, education
cooperation in access to and portability of earned benefits;

and

skills

and

(x) Cooperation at the national, regional and international levels on all
aspects of migration.
IV.

The way forward

9.
The global compact would be elaborated through a process of
intergovernmental negotiations, for which preparations will begin immediately. The
negotiations, which will begin in early 2017, are to culminate in an
intergovernmental conference on international migration in 2018 at which the global
compact will be presented for adoption.
10. As the Third High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development
is to be held in New York no later than 2019, 20 a role should be envisaged for the
High-level Dialogue in the process.
11. The President of the General Assembly is invited to make early arrangements
for the appointment of two co-facilitators to lead open, transparent and inclusive
consultations with States, with a view to the determination of modalities, a timeline,
the possible holding of preparatory conferences and other practicalities relating to
the intergovernmental negotiations, including the integration of Geneva -based
migration expertise.
12. The Secretary-General is requested to provide appropriate support for the
negotiations. We envisage that the Secretariat of the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration would jointly service the negotiations, the
former providing capacity and support and the latter extending the technical and
policy expertise required.
13. We envisage also that the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
International Migration and Development, Mr. Peter Sutherland, would coordinate
_______________
20

See resolution 69/229, para. 32.

23/24

A/RES/71/1

New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants

the contributions to be made to the negotiation process by the Global Forum on
Migration and Development and the Global Migration Group. We envisage that the
International Labour Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other entities with significant mandates and
expertise related to migration would contribute to the process.
14. Regional consultations in support of the negotiations would be desirable,
including through existing consultative processes and mechanisms, where
appropriate.
15. Civil society, the private sector, diaspora communities and migrant
organizations would be invited to contribute to the process for the preparation of the
global compact.

24/24
