S/PV.7658

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7658th meeting

Monday, 28 March 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Delgado/Mr. Gaspar Martins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Women and peace and security
The role of women in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa
Note verbale dated 7 March 2016 from the Permanent Mission of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/219)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-08519 (E)
*1608519*

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
The role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa
Note verbale dated 7 March 2016 from
the Permanent Mission of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/219)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Ethiopia, Georgia, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, Slovakia, South Africa,
Sweden, Thailand and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women; Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
His Excellency Mr. Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; His Excellency Mr. Téte António,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Ms. Paleki Ayang, Executive Director of
the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the European Union Delegation
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
2/57

28/03/2016

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/219, which contains a note verbale
dated 7 March 2016 from the Permanent Representative
of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Last year, the SecretaryGeneral identified four priority themes common to all
three reviews on peace and security that were undertaken
in 2014. This Council debate addresses the relationship
between two of the four themes, specifically the need to
focus on the prevention of violence and to pay attention
to the critical importance of gender equality.
The critical role of women in conflict prevention is
increasingly being acknowledged even though it is still
rarely visible. It is often missing from discussions about
peace and security that take place at the highest levels,
which is why this briefing is most appreciated. Today,
I am pleased to share specific examples of conflict
prevention led by women from across the African
continent. These examples are about the deliberate
prevention of violence while ensuring gender equality,
and are not unique to Africa. Women in the Middle East,
Central and Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin America
have made similar contributions.
I will start with women’s situation rooms, which
monitor and prevent election-related violence. In the
past five years, women’s situation rooms have been
established in Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Mali,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Uganda. The model is being
replicated in a growing list of countries across the
African continent, with our support. These mechanisms
are established during the electoral period to train
and deploy female observers and monitors, receive
and analyse hundreds of complaints and reports of
violence or intimidation, and refer those to the relevant
authorities for follow-up. Often, nationally renowned
women are mobilized to engage with heads of political
parties, security sector institutions, and leaders of faithbased entities to respond to situations as they arise.
They save lives, diffuse and de-escalate dangerous
situations. They support women candidates and fight
discrimination against women in the electoral process
and gender-based election violence and harassment.
Our research also shows that women play a key role
in de-escalating tensions and preventing radicalization
in their families. In Mali, the most important influence
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

for the successful reintegration of many ex-combatants
has been the women in their families and communities.
In the broader Sahel region, the income status and
resilience of women have been boosted by programmes
that address the gender gap in access to land and other
productive assets. It is that status and resilience that
have provided a safeguard against radicalization and
economic, political and climate shocks.
In poor areas in Kenya, women’s organizations are
dedicated to working to identify and prevent the spread
of radicalization. Mothers are using their influence to
help their sons and their peers to resist recruitment by
armed groups. Their success saves lives. In Burundi,
hundreds of women mediators are working tirelessly
to address local conflicts, and they prevent and stop
the escalation of tensions. Women’s empowerment
contributes to our defence against militarism and
violent extremism, and requires our greater support
and investment.
In 2015, we learned from the global study on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, which highlighted that countries
with lower levels of gender inequality are less likely to
resort to the use of force, and that the security of women
is one of the most reliable indicators of the peacefulness
of a State. We also learned that the spending patterns
of women contribute directly to post-conflict social
recovery. Women are the first to notice attacks on
their rights and freedoms and the militarization and
radicalization of individuals in their families and
communities. They possess important insights and
intelligence that are key to decision-making.
Revamping and strengthening the prevention work
of the United Nations must include more frequent
deliberations of the Council that are informed by the
perspectives and analysis of women on the ground.
That is why I am pleased today to brief the Council
alongside Ms. Anyang today, who is one of our civilsociety partners in resilience and conflict prevention
among women in South Sudan. The practice of hearing
from civil society representatives is now common in the
thematic debates of the Council, and that is important.
However, it should be extended to consultations on
country-specific situations, the work of the Council’s
subsidiary bodies, and during Council visiting missions.
For example, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
should regularly consult with women’s organizations
to ensure that our efforts to counter violent extremism

S/PV.7658

are not shutting down space and funds for the civil
society actors who are key to prevention and saving
lives. Council members should demand a robust gender
analysis in the reports they receive and in all atrocityprevention efforts. The new Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security, which held its first
meeting last month, is an important step in ensuring
consistent and quality information flows to the Council.
UN-Women is proud to serve as the secretariat for that
new Group.
Existing early warning systems should find
ways of linking directly with women-led monitoring
and prevention initiatives at the local level, which
are are happy to facilitate. Women are critical to
intelligence-gathering. Women need to be resourced
so that they do more. The commitment to allocating
at least 15 per cent of peacebuilding funds to gender
equality and women’s empowerment must become a
reality, and extended to all efforts at preventing and
countering violent extremism. Women’s organizations
must receive the political and financial support needed
to engage in violence prevention, mediation, and
diplomacy. Investing in gender equality as part of
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) is the best recipe for
structural, long-term prevention.
The work of women peacemakers takes many
forms in Africa and elsewhere, but their commitment is
consistent, dependable and universal. It is also directly
linked to strengthening efforts in conflict prevention,
which is so needed in the face of today’s complex peace
and security environment.
The President: I thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Madam, for this
opportunity to address this open debate on the role of
women in conflict prevention and mediation in Africa,
on behalf of the Department of Political Affairs.
The Secretary-General has made the advancement
of women a top priority since he assumed office and
has instructed the senior management of the Secretariat
to place the issue at the centre of what they do. This
system-wide focus signalled the beginning of an
important reorientation, informed by the basic fact that
women living with conflict have strategic knowledge
and networks that can contribute to its resolution.

16-085193/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Recent research has also established that women’s
participation in peace talks facilitates not only the
conclusion of agreements and their implementation
but — crucially — also the sustainability of peace.
For the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
promoting women’s effective participation in conflict
mediation and addressing their specific needs in
peacemaking efforts has been a priority since the
Department undertook 15 women, peace and security
commitments in 2010. As many Council members are
aware, the Department monitors and reports annually to
the Security Council on progress made in implementing
these commitments.
As a result of senior leadership and institutional
buy-in, combined with a systematic effort to mainstream
these commitments in its work, the Department’s
conflict prevention work has become increasingly
inclusive. Since 2012, all United Nations mediation
support teams have included women. United Nations
co-led mediation processes consult with women’s
representatives on the delegations of negotiating
parties. These positive developments have improved
the inclusion of stronger gender-relevant provisions in
ceasefires and peace agreements.
To advance these efforts, the Department of Political
Affairs has developed a high-level mediation-skills
training. Half of the participants are women and
the training aims to enhance gender parity and the
future character and configuration of international
peacemaking. To build institutional capacity, the
Department conducts semi-annual training on gender/
women, peace and security. As a result, some 164 envoys
and senior mediation actors have taken part in the highlevel seminar series on gender and inclusive mediation.
The Department also continues to implement
its Joint Strategy with UN-Women on Gender and
Mediation. It helps build mediation capacity for envoys
and mediation teams by providing gender expertise and
training, while UN-Women strengthens the capacity
of regional, national and local women leaders and
peace coalitions, and supports access opportunities
for women in peace negotiations. We also document
relevant lessons learned and develop practical guidance
materials for mediators. The United Nations Guidance
on Effective Mediation and the Guidance for Mediators
on Addressing Conflict-related Sexual Violence in
Ceasefire and Peace Agreements are yielding concrete
results on the ground, where it matters the most.
4/57

28/03/2016

We must, however, not forget that despite the
concerted efforts of international and regional
organizations, as well as of national Governments, to
eliminate discrimination and promote the empowerment
of women, unequal access and opportunities for women’s
participation in political decision-making processes
persist worldwide. As highlighted by all three peace
and security reviews that were undertaken last year,
prioritizing prevention and inclusive political solutions
has never been more urgent. It is only by uniting our
efforts that we will be able to advance the principles
underpinning the Charter of the United Nations.
Peace processes afford unique opportunities for
promoting women’s effective participation. The United
Nations therefore supports regional and subregional
organizations by promoting and strengthening regional
capacities for inclusive mediation to enable the more
effective participation of women at all levels of
peacemaking. This cooperation is built on the knowledge
that women’s effective participation in transformative
decision-making processes will address underlying
inequalities and social divisions. It also addresses
the specific needs of women and helps to incorporate
a stronger gender perspective in reconstruction,
reconciliation and post-conflict peacebuilding.
During the past decade, we have sharpened our
preventive tools and achieved some progress. The good
offices of the Secretary-General, our regional offices
and our cooperation with regional organizations have
yielded positive results. Today, about 85 per cent of
United Nations mediation involves working closely
with regional and subregional organizations. To cite
but one example, the Department of Political Affairs
has been working very closely with the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) following
the signing of a framework for cooperation between
the two organizations in September 2010, focusing
on the need to strengthen partnership in prevention,
peacemaking and mediation. In close coordination with
UN-Women, DPA continues to complement SADC
efforts to advance the promotion of the women, peace
and security agenda in the region. Additional policy
initiatives include the development of a framework for
mainstreaming gender into SADC’s peace and security
architecture and a strategy for combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Regionally, we welcomed the appointment
by the African Union, in 2014, of its first Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security.
16-08519

Women and peace and security

28/03/2016

Our work on elections also underscores the
centrality of women’s participation in decision-making
processes. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel actively enhances the role of women in
conflict prevention and political participation. In 2011,
the Office started training and building the mediation
and negotiation capacities of women and set up a
network of 32 women mediators. Those mediators have
moved on to build the capacity of other women in the
region, and have since contributed to national dialogue
processes in Mali and Guinea. The Office also helped
advance women’s participation in electoral processes in
Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria
and Togo by supporting the adoption of legislation
on gender parity and quotas to help women assume
political office.
Noticeable efforts have also been made by the
African Union and other partners in the region to
ensure that gender is more systematically integrated in
electoral processes, including in election observation.
It is encouraging to note that currently the average rate
of women members of parliament in Africa is slightly
above the global average.
To promote women’s political participation in
Central Africa, the United Nations Office for Central
Africa, in cooperation with its regional partner — the
Economic Community of Central African States — in
2014 organized a gender workshop on the role of women
in electoral processes in the region. That effort has
helped the Central Africa region to establish a platform
for the promotion of women’s participation in politics.
Ahead of elections in Chad next month, the Office is
taking steps to facilitate a national political dialogue.
A workshop on the participation of women was
organized to feed into the broader dialogue with civil
society organizations.
The case for inclusive preventive diplomacy is
compelling. Experience has shown that, if we are
present, with early diplomatic initiatives and by
actively engaging civil society — notably women’s
organizations — with the support of the international
community and the necessary resources, we stand
a better chance of helping prevent and resolve
conflicts and in making political stability and peace
more sustainable.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kamau.

Zerihoun

for

S/PV.7658

Mr. Kamau: I wish to thank you, Madam, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council today in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
during this important and timely open debate on the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa. I also thank you, Madam, for providing us with
a comprehensive concept paper (S/2016/219, annex) to
guide the debate.
Since its establishment, the Peacebuilding
Commission has supported the idea that women must
participate in peacebuilding processes and contribute
to decision-making in the reconstruction of their
countries. The Peacebuilding Commission strongly
believes that women’s participation is crucial to
inclusive, participatory and sustainable peacebuilding
processes. The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the review of peacebuilding architecture strongly
reaffirms that ensuring women’s full participation
in peacebuilding processes is “crucial to the success
of economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion” (S/2015/490, annex, para. 56).
That understanding of women’s role in
peacebuilding is widely shared. The Security Council,
in its landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and in subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
by the present Council, has given us a broad normative
framework that I believe is universally supported by
Member States. Yet as the report from the Advisory
Group of Experts and as the global study on resolution
1325 (2000) reminded us last year, much remains to
be done in practice to turn global commitments into
reality on the ground.
That is also true of the work of Peacebuilding
Commission. During its entire lifetime, the Commission
has demonstrated a keen interest in gender equality and
women’s empowerment. Mirroring international policy
developments, particularly the presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/466) on women and
peacebuilding, and including his Seven-Point Action
Plan, in 2010, the Commission developed its own
declaration on women’s economic empowerment for
peacebuilding in 2013. Equally, the Security Council
has adopted various resolutions on women and peace
and security since the late 2000s.
While the Peacebuilding Commission’s countryspecific instruments of engagement recognize the
role of women in peacebuilding, translating formal
commitments into concrete action on the ground has

16-085195/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

not been as systematic and efficient as we would like
it to be. The high expectations for the transformative
change and strengthening of women’s participation in
peace and security anticipated in resolution 1325 (2000)
has not been fully delivered.
Yet despite the persistent exclusion of women from
the loci of power and influence in many societies across
the world, women have continued to make a significant
contribution to developing inclusive approaches to
security, peacebuilding and conflict prevention in their
own unique ways. As such, women remain a resource
that has not been effectively utilized or enabled to build
sustainable peace.
Hindrances to women’s participation in peace and
security include cynical cultural practices that maintain
patriarchal attitudes and norms; insufficient political
will across the board to fully implement resolution
1325 (2000) and associated resolutions; militarized
interventions and approaches to conflict resolution
that tend to crowd out other organic initiatives within
society that help build resilience, particularly during
peacekeeping and countering violent extremism,
which put women at a disadvantage; and the absence of
gender-sensitive economic recovery following conflict,
which poses a barrier to women empowerment during
transitions. Similarly, top-down bureaucratic processes
in implementing the women and peace and security
agenda have neglected the local ownership aspects
that a complementary bottom-up approach would help
bring about.
Those manifest bottlenecks have compelled
the Peacebuilding Commission to embark upon the
development of its first gender strategy, with the
support of the Peacebuilding Support Office and UNWomen. The strategy, which we expect to adopt before
July, spells out specific recommendations to strengthen
the substantive, cross-cutting integration of gender
perspectives in all Peacebuilding Commission countryspecific thematic and strategic engagement. It identifies
thematic priority areas such as women’s participation in
peacebuilding/mediation processes and prevention. It
also identifies post-conflict governance and leadership,
the rule of law, economic empowerment and access to
basic social infrastructure — while emphasizing that
men and boys need to be engaged as partners.
The Peacebuilding Commission will continue
to use its unique leverage to advocate actively for
dedicated technical expertise on gender equality and
6/57

28/03/2016

peacebuilding, as well as dedicated funding within
the United Nations, and also among its national and
international partners. The combination of senior
leadership commitment, specialized expertise and
dedicated financial resources is what can make a
real difference. Her Excellency Ms. Julia DuncanCassel, Minister for Gender, Children and Social
Protection of Liberia, reminded us just last week, in her
address to the Commission on the Status of Women,
that Liberia has been able to make great strides towards
sustaining peace and empowering women economically
thanks to the commitment of the national authorities,
the in-country expertise from the UN-Women country
office and catalytic funding from the Peacebuilding
Fund. We should also not forget that Liberia is a country
governed by a woman, and it was that woman who led
the country out of a very difficult transition from war
to peace, and the same woman who steered the country
through another transition, a very difficult one, from a
horrific epidemic to normalcy.
In Burundi, as stated by the Executive Diretor of
UN-Women this morning, the same combination of
leadership, strategic funding from the Peacebuilding
Fund and in-country expertise allowed UN-Women to
support a network of 534 women mediators working
across all municipalities. By their count, women
mediators addressed over 5,000 conflicts at the local level
in 2015 alone. They have been tackling familial, social
and land-related conflicts at the community level, which
can easily become politicized and risk destabilizing
communities. The mediators promote non-violence and
dialogue, and work to counter rumours and exaggerated
fears with verifiable information. Clearly, the inclusion
of women is essential for achieving lasting peace in
Burundi, and the experiences of the women mediators
could be instructive for all stakeholders involved in
ongoing dialogue processes.
Peace will be sustainable only with the participation
of all the relevant national stakeholders, including civil
society. The recent adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
was an important step towards greater inclusivity in
peacebuilding. The role of young women and men in
conflict prevention and resolution and in peacebuilding
is finally getting the recognition that it deserves. The
Peacebuilding Commission also firmly believes that
young women are central actors, not just for the future
of their countries but also for the present — starting
right now.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the
Peacebuilding Commission is committed to advocating
on behalf of women and young people and to using its
intergovernmental approach and its convening power
and leverage to engage national partners, to open up
space for their participation and to help ensure that they
receive the acknowledgment and dedicated support
that they deserve. The Peacebuilding Commission
gender strategy is an important step in the process of
operationalizing a transformative women and peace
and security agenda.
If I may, Madam President, I would like to add a
special personal emphasis on the issue of gender. I have
just come from Kenya, and I have witnessed again the
ruin that 100 years of colonial and post-colonial policies
have caused to the place of women in our culture and
in our society. Women in Kenya, even today, 50 years
after independence, remain firmly at the bottom on
the rungs of social progress and empowerment. I
cannot emphasize enough how conscious I am of the
fact that gender is a central factor in the delivery of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and the better future that we
all want.
Realizing the ambition of a better more inclusive
future and a sustainable world that achieves sustainable
development — with sustainable peace and security for
all at its core — will require that we respond forcefully
and with determination to the issue and condition
of women and girls in our societies. The centrality
of gender issues within families and communities,
especially with regard to the protection and promotion
of girls and women, cannot be gainsaid. That is equally
true within, and among, nations. That is why we are
having this debate here today in the Security Council.
But words without actions are shameful and futile.
Global peace and harmony are intrinsically tied up with
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women and girls everywhere. We must act accordingly.
Let there be no doubt about that.
The President: I thank Mr. Kamau for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: On behalf of the Commission of
the African Union, allow me, Madam President, to
start by commending you for convening this timely
and very important debate, and also to thank you for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council and
share our views on a matter of great importance to

S/PV.7658

the African Union. Your presence here to preside over
today’s discussion highlights the critical importance
of this debate and bears witness to your personal
commitment and that of the Republic of Angola to the
fundamental purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. It also serves to highlight Angola’s
determination to make a substantial contribution to the
work of the Security Council. I also thank the previous
speakers for their insightful presentations.
Today’s debate provides an excellent opportunity
that we must seize in order to demonstrate our
commitment to take forward the ambitious
recommendations emerging from the recent United
Nations policy reviews on peace and security issues.
The role of women in preventing and resolving conflicts
must be made a reality, rather than allowed to remain
a mere statement that dates back several decades. Our
discourse on this issue must include no longer looking
at women merely as victims, but rather recognize and
encourage their demonstrated capacities to be part of
peace and development efforts.
The experiences of many countries have clearly
shown that lasting peace cannot be achieved, and
reconstruction will never succeed, with half the
population excluded and marginalized. To cite an
example, members may recall the decisive role played
by the women of Liberia in the signing of the 2003
Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement through the
efforts of the Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace.
Africa cannot afford to ignore the role of women if we
are to realize the vision of an integrated, prosperous
and peaceful continent. The Republic of Angola, which
you represent today, Madam, is another example.
Angolan women not only played a critical role in the
liberation of the country from colonialism, but they
also stood for peace and demonstrated pan-Africanism
in the early years of the country’s independence.
In fact, we all remember that the country that you
represent today, Madam, hosted the headquarters of the
Pan-African Women’s Organization in the early years
of independence.
The issue of women and peace and security
remains a priority, both on the agenda of the African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government as
well as on the agenda of the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Indeed, the African Union declared
2010-2020 to be the African Women’s Decade, with
the overarching theme of gender equality and women’s
empowerment. The year 2015 was the Year of Women’s

16-085197/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s
Agenda 2063, while 2016 is the Year of Human Rights,
with particular focus on the rights of women. By
choosing to put women at the centre of the continent’s
deliberations, the African Union sought to reinforce the
continent’s resolve to bring down all types of barriers
that impede the emancipation of women and girls in
Africa and to strengthen their agency and rights,
especially in priority areas such as education, health,
participation in decision-making at all levels, economic
empowerment and peace and security.
In January 2014, the African Union became the
first continental organization to appoint a Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, with the
specific mandate to ensure that the voices of women
and children, particularly those affected by conflict,
are heard and to advocate at the highest levels for the
rightful participation and contribution of women in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
To enhance the protection of women’s rights,
the AU seeks to promote international and regional
commitments on peace and security, as well as to
strengthen women’s participation in peace and security
efforts through the AU Peace and Security Department,
the Peace and Security Council and the Panel of
the Wise.
Starting with the leadership of its own paramount
continental institution, Africa adopted the principle of
parity and acted on it. Indeed, the AU Commission has
achieved parity in its leadership and is now moving
towards 50/50 workforce parity, in line with the AU
gender policy adopted in 2009.
Furthermore, to enhance the role of women in peace
and security, the African Union Commission launched
a five-year gender, peace and security programme. The
programme is designed to serve as a framework for the
development of effective strategies and mechanisms for
the increased participation of women in the promotion
of peace and security. It also aims to enhance the
protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
situations in Africa.
The African Union has also conducted training
with Member States on women peace mediators,
women election observers and gender advisers, and it
has succeeded in deploying female peacekeepers and
female police in peace-support operations such as the
African Union Mission in Somalia.
8/57

28/03/2016

Despite the progress made so far, a great
deal remains to be done to ensure women’s equal
participation in conflict prevention, management
and conflict resolution as well as in post-conflict
peacebuilding. Policies are plentiful; where we fall short
is in their implementation. It is from this perspective
that the African Union is developing a continental
results framework to strengthen the monitoring of the
implementation by Member States of their commitments
on the women and peace and security agenda.
In our view, more efforts are needed from both
the United Nations and the African Union in the
following areas.
First, the proportion of the women in the police
component of peace operations must be increased.
Secondly, we must ensure that the terms of reference
of mediation and peacebuilding processes have a clear
component of women’s participation as the basis of their
delivery and accountability towards the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda.
Thirdly, training programmes on women and peace
and security must be made mandatory. The AU has
already begun to integrate such training into its African
Standby Force programme.
And, fourthly, we must invest more in conflict
prevention and in women’s prevention initiatives.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Ayang.
Ms. Ayang: I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for the invitation to provide a voice for the thousands
of women across Africa who are risking their lives to
prevent conflict and bring peace to their communities
and countries. Although there have been repeated
commitments made in this Chamber, and the Security
Council, the African Union and the international
community have evidence that has demonstrated time
and again that the broad, meaningful and effective
inclusion of women increases the durability of peace,
we continue to be excluded from these efforts. The
world, and Africa in particular, needs to move beyond
the stereotypical images of women as victims in
conflict and instead take into account their complex
experiences as fighters, peacebuilders, protectors and
community leaders.
I have seen first-hand the power that women
have in preventing and resolving conflict in my own
country. On 15 December 2013, the hopes and dreams
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

of the South Sudanese people of living in a peaceful
and independent country vanished. I remember vividly
the night that conflict broke out: the sound of heavy
weapons and artillery enveloped us as bullet holes
riddled my home. War had returned to my country. But
I was one of the lucky ones, able to put my family of six
into a car and drive to the Ugandan border; but I knew I
had to return. Thankfully, I was not alone: women from
widely differing ideological and political perspectives
joined together to reject the conflict and the violence
and created a platform to suggest peaceful solutions
to the conflict. We mobilized across the country,
and in Nairobi, Kampala and Addis Ababa, pushing
that agenda.
Women’s efforts were deployed at all levels, from
grass-roots to international. Inside South Sudan, women
were crossing tribal lines to de-escalate tensions and
prevent further conflict. In a protection-of-civilians site
that was segregated between Dinka and Nuer tribes, a
Dinka woman joined with a Nuer to start a group in
which women from both tribes would meet and discuss
how to stop the violence. While the men wanted to fight
over their tribal differences, women bridged the divide
and reduced tensions within the community.
The scale of sexual violence in our country has
been shocking. As the most recent report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
documenting the crimes committed in South Sudan
noted, “Women are in a state of permanent insecurity,
and are compelled to take great risks” (A/HRC/31/49,
para. 36).
To help prevent and address these horrendous acts,
the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network, of
which I am the Executive Director, created community
networks that worked on preventing sexual and
gender-based violence through awareness activities,
sensitization training and advocacy. These networks
were led and run by men. Men must be meaningfully
engaged in these programmes to ensure that the
violence subsides and the stigma is diminished.
Women’s advocacy groups also began to form
to ensure that women’s voices and experiences were
considered by the largely male negotiators determining
the future of South Sudan. I am a member of one
such group called the Task Force on the Engagement
of Women, supported by the Institute for Inclusive
Security. We advocated to the warring parties and key
international stakeholders the signing of a cessation of

S/PV.7658

hostilities agreement and the promotion of inclusive
peace talks that address the underlying root causes
of the conflict. These women were some of the only
people whom both parties trusted, allowing them to
send messages back and forth on their behalf.
As the Security Council and the international
community’s attention turns to the 31 March deadline
for the parties to report on how they are implementing
the August 2015 peace agreement, accounting for the
role of women in monitoring and implementing this
accord is crucial. Women must serve as mediators,
community liaisons and monitors throughout this
process if the accord is to ultimately be successful, and
I urge the Security Council to do more to ensure that
this happens.
Evidence of women’s ability to prevent and resolve
conflict spans the African continent. With limited
resources, and in spite of threats from their own
communities and sometimes families, women organize
peace marches, advocate for enhanced peace and
security policies, and lead reconciliation efforts across
conflict lines.
In order to support these efforts, I urge the Security
Council to do the following.
First, it must invest in programmes aimed at
increasing women’s inclusion in conflict-prevention
and resolution strategies. These programmes should
be developed in consultation with diverse local
populations and designed to address the underlying
root causes of conflict and promote women-led earlywarning mechanisms.
I also urge the Security Council to promote
women’s meaningful inclusion in elections, so that
their needs and concerns are better reflected in peace
and security policymaking. Support should be provided
for constitutional reforms that require a quota in
parliaments as one mechanism to get more women into
decision-making roles.
I also urge the Security Council to increase support
for the inclusion of women in national security forces
and police, including in all United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Furthermore, the Council should require
United Nations consultations with women-led civilsociety organizations to advance gender-specific and
community priorities in peace and security processes.

16-085199/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

In addition to the promotion of gender equality
and women’s empowerment, I want the Council to take
away two things from my remarks today.
First, we can continue to discuss strategies of
conflict prevention and resolution, but they will
be ineffective unless immediate attention goes to
addressing and preventing the systematic, deliberate
and widespread sexual violence in South Sudan and
on the continent. The scale of sexual violence in my
country has destroyed the social fabric of communities
and threatens to dismantle the already fragile peace.
Therefore, I urge the Security Council to take action.
First, the Council must insist on accountability
for atrocities committed by all warring parties,
armed groups, security forces and peacekeepers.
Accountability for sexual violence must be prioritized,
and efforts must be made to ensure that transitional
justice
mechanisms,
including
community-led
programmes, such as truth-telling and reconciliation,
are gender sensitive and responsive to the unique needs
of women.
Secondly, little attention or support has gone
towards ensuring women’s participation in what can be
the most critical aspect of the peace process, that is,
implementation. Therefore, I urge the Security Council
to demand that the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission in South Sudan, and any monitoring
mechanisms established in the region for other conflicts,
ensure that women’s representation and participation
are integrated throughout the monitoring and
implementation of peace agreements, in coordination
with United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
The President: I thank Ms. Ayang for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as the Minister for Family and the Promotion
of Women of Angola.
It is a great honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Angola
and to offer some insights on the important issue
of women and peace and security, with particular
emphasis on the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa.
I would like to express my gratitude and
appreciation to the briefers for their significant
contributions to the subject matter under consideration.
I welcome the Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo10/57

28/03/2016

Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun; the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau; Ambassador Téte Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union; and Ms. Paleki Ayang
of the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network.
The African continent is still engulfed in conflict
situations, some of them dragging on for more than a
generation. Civil strife and fratricidal conflicts have
greatly affected the social, economic and human
development of the continent. Besides the colonial
legacy, policies of social and political exclusion,
coupled with widespread economic inequalities and
violations of human rights, are relevant root causes of
those conflicts. Such situations have exacted a heavy
burden, primarily on the civilian populations of the
countries affected, as well as on the international
community, which has been required to intervene in
order to contain the spillover effects of the conflicts.
It is universally understood that prevention is
the most effective way to avoid the human, social
and financial costs caused by conflicts. It is also
understood that the best means to prevent conflict is to
build societies based on principles of inclusivity, with
equal rights accorded to all citizens without exclusion
or discrimination and with the prevalence of the rule of
law. It is also understood that the resolution of conflicts
should take place through the channels of dialogue,
mediation and the compatibility of diverging interests,
which is possible only when dialogue and mediation
lead to meaningful compromise and everybody’s
interests are safeguarded.
The Security Council is currently dealing with a
large number of such conflicts — deploying military
means through peacekeeping operations, after the
signing of peace deals and managing post-conflict
situations. The Council has also established a number
of political special missions of a preventive nature, and
the Secretary-General or his envoys have exercised
good offices and mediation efforts to seek to avert the
outbreak of conflicts.
In the search for more effective means to deal
with conflict situations, in 2015 the Secretary-General
launched three major peace and security reviews. They
include the High-level Independent Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations, the Advisory Group of
Experts for the Review of Peacebuilding Architecture
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

and the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
The reviews agreed on the postulate that the
greatest responsibility of the international community
is the prevention of armed conflict and highlighted
the critical need for greater investment in prevention
strategies. The reviews furthermore stressed the value
added of the women and peace and security agenda
to conflict prevention and the potential for early
warning in gender-sensitive analysis by identifying
the drivers of conflict, such as changing dynamics,
namely, at family and community-level relations. It
also highlighted that conflict prevention could be
greatly improved by engaging with women, given their
grass-roots knowledge, especially in providing relevant
indicators for dealing with the threats of conflict and
for the implementation of preventive measures.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) recognizes the importance of enhancing
the role of women and of their participation at all
phases and levels of peace processes, given its potential
for accelerating the attainment of solutions to conflict
and the sustainability of peace. Women’s participation
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts can take
on different forms and dimensions, inter alia, direct
involvement in formal peace negotiations, consultative
commissions, public policies, decision-making,
national dialogues, peacebuilding and comprehensive
reforms, leading to democratization processes.
In addition, besides ensuring the inclusion of
gender-sensitive language in peace agreements,
women can bring more than gender issues to the
negotiating table by instilling the holistic approach
that a peace process entails. The global study refers
to paradigmatic cases in Liberia, Kenya and Burundi,
where women’s groups have achieved significant
results through the exercise of a strong influence in
the negotiating processes, by exerting pressure for
the start and conclusion of negotiations and, in some
cases, mobilizing for the signing of a peace agreement
or, alternatively, promoting measures to prevent a new
cycle of violence, addressing the root causes of conflict,
thereby contributing to changing power relations
in society.
Women and children are the main victims in today’s
armed conflicts. Therefore, their participation in those
processes becomes a crucial issue. Their voices must be
heard in the prevention of conflict, in the negotiation of

S/PV.7658

peace settlements and in ensuring that their interests are
taken into account in post-conflict reconstruction. It is
of pivotal importance that the institutional mechanisms
established in Africa promote an environment conducive
to the meaningful participation of women in peace and
security, while reasserting the full commitments of the
African States to that objective.
The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
African Union Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality
in Africa, the African Union’s five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme and the emphasis on women’s
leadership on issues related to peace and security are
achievements translating a renewed awareness of the
essential role played by women.
Women in Angola have participated decisively
in all efforts towards the attainment of peace. The
immediate post-conflict period included women’s
direct involvement in peacebuilding and national
reconstruction. Women were instrumental in providing
psychological support to the victims of the armed
conflict as counsellors of peace, national reconciliation
and social healing. The Government established
counselling centres to raise awareness on their
economic, social, political and civil rights and as a tool
for families’ participation in the country’s development.
Through
partnerships
with
civil
society
organizations, efforts have been deployed in order
to strengthen women’s participation in the country’s
political and economic life. The non-governmental
organization Roots of Peace was created with the aim
of bringing together women from all political parties
represented in Parliament to participate in the efforts
to consolidate peace and democracy. Angola joined
the campaign He for She, which is aimed at raising the
awareness of men and boys for the eradication of all
forms of gender-based violence.
Angola has been playing a role in the preservation
of peace and security in Africa, especially in the Great
Lakes region, in promoting a culture of peace based on
experience gained in conflict-prevention processes, in
the promotion of dialogue and national reconciliation.
Today, we have many women at all levels of the army and
the police. In my delegation, we have a woman brigadier.
Women also participate in electoral observer missions.
Finally, it is our expectation that the new awareness
on the key role women play in social, political and
economic life will lead to a world where women can

16-0851911/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

effectively carry out their responsibilities and fully
exercise of their rights. We are sure that if strong
political will and commitment are fully brought into
action towards the attainment of such goals, women
will make a tangible contribution to building a more
just and peaceful world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their insights and I welcome Ms. Paleki Ayang to the
Council. We should hear the voices of women activists
from civil society in the Chamber more often.
I would like to begin with the words of another
activist, Nobel Laureate Leymah Gbowee. In 2003,
her group Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace
successfully pressed Charles Taylor to attend peace
talks. Talking afterwards, she said,
“We are now taking this stand to secure the future
of our children, because we believe, as custodians
of society, tomorrow our children will ask us,
‘Mama, what was your role during the crisis?’”
“What was your role during the crisis?” The
answer to that question for so many women in Africa
is not negotiator; it is not envoy; it is not delegate even,
and that needs to change. It is not just about ending
gender inequality. It is not just a women’s issue; it is
a peace issue. When women’s voices are heard in
peace processes, in negotiations and in State-building,
the chances of a lasting peace increase. If we are
serious about truly resolving conflicts and preserving
peace — not just for hours, but for generations — we
must heed the words of Leymah Gbowee and our briefer
Paleki Ayang. They demonstrate just how powerful
community-based activism can be. Just think how
powerful those women’s voices could have been had
they actually been in the room at key times in peace
processes. So, whether in Africa or in any other part of
the world, we need to make sure that women are playing
the fullest role in conflict resolution. I am proud that all
future United Kingdom-hosted peacebuilding events
will ensure that women’s voices are heard. If the rest of
the Council were to follow suit, then we would send a
strong message to the rest of the world.
To support that effort, we have to increase women’s
participation in politics and society. That means
12/57

28/03/2016

delivering on the commitments we made in resolutions
1325 (2000), 1889 (2009), 2242 (2015) and so many
others because breaking down barriers facing women
in peace talks requires breaking down barriers facing
women across society. It means helping girls stay in
school, improving health care and, yes, tackling sexual
violence. At its heart, it is about ending discrimination
against women. We all have a part to play. In Somalia,
the United Kingdom is helping make health services
available to over 1 million Somali women and children,
but also providing legal assistance to thousands of
Somali women and will soon be supporting initiatives
that boost their participation in politics too.
But this issue will not be solved by one country
alone. That is why the United Kingdom is contributing
$1 million to the Global Acceleration Instrument
for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action (GAI). By funding the GAI, we can all offer
material support that can break down those barriers.
In Burundi, a network of women mediators was able
to deal with 5,200 local conflicts in 2015. That is over
14 a day. Thanks to the GAI, they are now scaling up
their activities. At a time when the Council has been so
frustrated by the crisis in Burundi, it is heartening to
see how powerful women’s civil society can be in their
local mediation efforts.
Ultimately, however, supporting this effort
requires more than just our money. When the Council
visited Mali, Guinea Bissau and Senegal earlier this
month, there was not a single female representative of
the Council on the trip. And even at Headquarters in
New York, only two of the 15 Security Council member
countries are represented by a woman at this debate.
Since we call upon Africa’s leaders to do more to bring
women into conflict prevention and resolution, let us
also heed the call ourselves. What signal does it send
when the primary body for preserving international
peace and security only has one woman among its 15
permanent representatives. What message does it send
to that young girl in Somalia who dreams of becoming
president, or to those who want to answer the question
“What was your role?” with something other than
“survivor”? If we want half of the world’s population
to have a say in conflict prevention and resolution, then
let us begin in this building. That is why the United
Kingdom has been clear that we need as many credible
women as possible to apply to be the next SecretaryGeneral. We have had three so far and I hope that there
are more to come.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

It is time to make history and bring about a historic
moment that is long overdue. All things being equal, we
hope that this will be the year that we appoint a woman
to be Secretary-General for the first time. When asked
“What was your role?”, she will be able to say that
she was at the forefront of the United Nations action
to prevent conflict and resolve crisis and represent the
entire world, not just half of it.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for chairing and organizing
this open debate and I thank Under-Secretary-General
Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing and her stewardship of
UN-Women. I would like to extend a special thanks also
to Ms. Paleki Ayang for her briefing on the perspective
of civil society. Indeed, I thank all five rule 39 briefers
for their very useful perspectives this morning.
Today’s debate provides us all with an excellent
opportunity to take stock of the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa. Quite
frankly, I hope today’s session will do much more than
that. This debate should also help more women gain
positions of leadership and seats at the negotiating
table where issues of peace and security are decided,
especially as women and girls face more complex and
emerging threats, including those posed by the harsh
reality of terrorism and violent extremism.
It is undeniable that some progress on the women
and peace and security agenda has been made across
Africa since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
in 2000. We appreciate the efforts of the 18 African
countries that have developed national action plans
that seek to institutionalize the greater participation of
women throughout government and society. But there
is still much work to be done. I would like to suggest
three areas where we should redouble our efforts: first,
in helping women overcome systemic obstacles to
political participation; secondly, in addressing genderbased violence; and, thirdly, in tranlating the women and
peace and security norms established by the Security
Council into concrete success in the real world.
When women actively participate at all levels of
political decision-making, we know that we are all
safer, that our efforts at peacebuilding are stronger
and that around the world Constitutions and peace
agreements are more inclusive, just and lasting. But
women in Africa continue to face, and to overcome,
systemic obstacles to their political participation at
all levels of decision-making. In February 2013, for

S/PV.7658

example, 11 countries in the Great Lakes region of
Africa signed a peace accord to address decades of
violence in eastern areas of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was a landmark document to be sure. But
it was also negotiated and adopted without any women
having participated in the negotiations. The technical
committees formed to oversee the implementation and
the monitoring of the agreement also did not include
any women. In March 2013, recognizing the absence
of women in the formal process, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
convened consultations with women leaders and civil
society groups across the region, seeking to link
their community-level effort in building peace to the
regional and the national implementation committees.
In January 2014, the Great Lakes Women’s Plaform for
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework was
launched by the Special Envoy, and it provides grants to
women’s organizations already working to implement
peace in the region. We applaud the dedicated leadership
by the United Nations and the countries of the Great
Lakes region for recognizing that women were missing
from the table and for taking the steps necessary to
change that.
A second area where we need to re-aim our focus
is in identifying and addressing gender-based violence
in a systemic way. The long-term success of peace
processes depends upon greater respect for human
rights and improved prospects for development. Where
gender-based violence is a major feature of conflict or
has escalated in the aftermath thereof, it poses a unique
challenge to peacebuilding efforts. In other words, it
bears repeating that gender equality is a security issue,
and thus a strategic imperative for the Council’s work.
More often than ever before, we are confronted with
the unspeakable: the egregious use by violent extremist
groups, such as Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, of gender-based violence, not to
mention kidnapping and slavery, which are strategically
employed to achieve their aims. The abduction of over
250 Chibok girls from a school in northern Nigeria by
Boko Haram militants in April 2014 and that militant
group’s ongoing use of women and girls as suicide
bombers remain tragic reminders of how extremist
groups are manipulating gender to achieve their ends.
As the international community responds to
violence extremist threats, including across Africa,

16-0851913/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

we must ensure that the needs and the perspectives of
women and girls most affected by extremist violence
are integrated into our larger approach to countering
violent extremism. Our efforts to support survivors of
gender-based violence across Africa will be incomplete
unless we also commit to fighting impunity. It is for
that reason that the United States has supported mobile
courts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
has led to 1,924 trials and 1,336 convictions of genderbased violence since 2009. United States assistance
has also supported the training of 5,505 providers
of services to survivors, strengthened 1,103 local
organizations serving gender-based violence-affected
populations and provided 20,125 gender-based violence
survivors with a holistic package of legal services.
The third point that I would like to stress today
is that the Security Council’s active engagement
remains absolutely vital in order to achieve real and
tangible gains for women yearning to be included
in peace processes, even as we recognize that we
still have much work to do. A study on assessing
women’s inclusion and influence on peace processes
by the Inclusive Peace and Transition Initiative of the
Graduate Institute of International and Development
Studies in Geneva revealed that when women have been
included in peace processes, as in Burundi, Somalia,
Darfur and Kenya in recent years, their inclusion
was mainly owing to normative pressure applied by
women’s groups and their international supporters.
Our words and resolutions and debates therefore
do have an effect on the ground, where it counts the
most. Let me give just one small example of where the
engagement of the international community has had a
strong impact — actually, not such a small example, but
an important example. In Sierra Leone a programme
sponsored by the United States to strengthen women’s
local political participation became a strong vehicle
for empowing women during the 2014 Ebola outbreak.
The women there leveraged their convening authority
to host outreach sessions with health-care providers
and local populations on the Ebola response. The effort
ultimately yielded important recommendations for
commmunity-led Ebola responses, standards that were
adapted by the Government of Sierra Leone.
Despite the significant progress we have made in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
in Africa, again, there is still that remains to be done.
As my Secretary of State, John Kerry said, our goal is
as simple as it is profound, namely, to empower half
14/57

28/03/2016

the world’s population as equal partners in preventing
and resolving conflict and building peace in countries
threatened and affected by war, violence and insecurity.
That is also the commitment that the Council has made,
and it is a commitmen that we must all strive even
harder to fulfil.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the Angolan presidency
for convening this open debate and for the concept
paper (S/2016/219, annex) it has circulated. I would also
like to express our gratitude to the Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of the UN-Women,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations and the Executive Director of the South Sudan
Women’s Empowerment Network for their respective
enlightening briefings and statements.
I wish to start my statement today by highlighting
the fact that today this organ of the United Nations
is presided over by a women at a time when we are
addressing the important issue of the role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. Morever,
the focus of this debate could not be more timely at
a time when, despite some favourable events, peace
and security on the African continent continue to be
seriously threatened by the existence of serious conflicts
that are devastating various of countries of the region.
The African continent has a number of armed conflicts,
and that is where the greatest number of peacekeeping
operations are deployed. It is also the poorest continent
in economic terms, but it is extremely rich in natural
resources. Throughout history, Africa has suffered
many conflicts and wars between Governments,
ethnic groups and rebel groups, and now because of
the presence of terrorist organizations that have used
violence as a weapon of war in order to control the
population through fear.
Men and women continue to suffer without
distinction the most serious violations of human rights.
However, it is women and children who suffer from that
extreme violence in a singular and disproportionate
manner. In that context, women are subjected to cruel
and inhuman treatment, causing them great suffering.
Gender-based violence, sexual exploitation, genital
mutilation, forced marriages and pregnancies and
child marriage are just some of the situations that girls
and women face daily. In that regard, the high level
of impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of the worst
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

crimes against humanity is a matter of great concern. I
emphasize the importance that Uruguay attaches to the
women and peace and security agenda. We continue to
play an active role with regard to the rights of women and
girls and have, on a number of occasions, reiterated the
imperative of women’s participation in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflicts.
The Council has repeatedly recognized the important
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding. In numerous resolutions,
it has called for increasing their participation and
equitable, full and authentic representation in conflict
prevention and mediation activities. Since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the international community
has made commitments with regard to the women and
peace and security agenda and has made significant
progress in that regard. Accordingly, resolution 1325
(2000) is of particular importance owing to the fact
that, for the first time in history, the specific effects
that war has on women were recognized and that the
inclusion of women in peace talks ensures that peace
will be sustainable over time. Uruguay therefore firmly
believes that women must be at the centre of efforts
aimed at resolving conflicts.
Similarly, the that resolution recognized the right of
women to participate actively in peacebuilding and the
prevention of violent conflicts, including in the areas
of decision-making and peacekeeping missions, and, at
the same time, stressed the specific needs involved in
the protection of women and girls in armed conflict.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), requested by the Secretary-General prior
to the high-level review undertaken by the Council on
the implementation of the resolution, has demonstrated
the favourable influence that women exercise in
negotiation processes, thus improving the chances of
reaching an agreement.
Uruguay welcomes the information provided in
the concept paper (S/2016/219, annex), which details
the various mechanisms, policies and structures
developed in Africa aimed at creating an environment
to enable women to play a more significant role in
peace and security. As the concept paper points out,
however, several obstacles continue to hinder the full
incorporation of those efforts within more formal
endeavours to prevent conflicts and achieve more
sustainable peace.

S/PV.7658

The number of women in special political missions
on the ground, especially in leadership positions,
remains very limited, and the need for the greater
participation of women persists, particularly in all
mechanisms related to peace processes and postconflict reconstruction. The primary responsibility
for involving women in those processes falls upon the
shoulders of the African States themselves. It is at the
national level that they must put in place good practices
and promote greater participation of women at all levels,
because that helps increase operational efficiency and
reduce conflicts. Experience on the continent shows us
numerous cases of women who have courageously been
able to boost recovery in their communities.
Uruguay appreciates the key role of civil society,
and especially that of local women’s groups that assist
victims in various aspects of recovery, from health
services to psychological services, social and economic
rehabilitation and access to justice. Yet in many cases
women remain excluded from the political, social
and economic spheres. In other regrettable situations,
women are the victims of sexual or gender-based
violence, or their fundamental rights are violated. But
women must not be seen as victims only, when they are
part of the solution, important actors with the potential
to influence the resolution of conflicts, agents of change
and ultimately peacemakers.
We note with particularly deep concern the violence
against specific groups of people and the violation of the
rights of women and girls stemming from terrorism and
violent extremism in Africa. Armed groups operating
within Africa seek the subjugation of women and the
suppression of human rights as a method of control
and subjugation. For our part, we understand that an
effective strategy to combat terrorism and violent
extremism must promote participation, leadership and
the empowerment of women in order to address the
factors that trigger violence by those armed groups.
Uruguay shares the idea that it is moreover
necessary for the Organization to appoint more women
to high-levels of decision-making, particularly in
positions such as those of Permanent Envoys and Special
Representatives, mediators and negotiators. Despite the
trend of an increased role of women in all processes,
including the appointment of women as mediators and
envoys, we believe that we are far from reaching the
desirable goal.

16-0851915/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

The participation of women continues to be
inadequate in peace negotiations in Africa and in other
regions of the world. It is uncontestable that women
are the most credible spokespeople for expressing the
needs of local communities. They inspire the greatest
degree of trust in situations that require the collection
of information and testimony from the victims of sexual
and gender-based violence. Women have much to say
on issues, such as those involving victims, reparations
and the conditions needed to ensure that conflict
does not reoccur. Women also bring new approaches
to negotiations, making constructive contributions to
ensure lasting peace. In that regard, they endow the
peace process with greater sensitivity with regard to
issues that are related to family, education, gender issues
and equity, and are called on to play a determining role
in verifying and implementing agreements.
Moreover, the contribution of women in the peace
talks is essential to building inclusive and peaceful
societies based on equality and respect for human
rights. Similarly, they play a significant role in postconflict situations, acting as a key foundation for the
social, political and economic reconstruction of local
communities. We encourage the participation of African
women in national electoral processes. We have seen a
number of successes in that regard in Liberia, Malawi
and the current leadership of the African Union itself.
Uruguay also believes that the presence of female
personnel in peacekeeping operations is necessary.
My country has been at the forefront with regard to
incorporating women in the armed forces and the
national police and within Uruguayan contingents of
peacekeeping missions. In doing so, we maintain a
percentage above the average for the number of women
troops deployed in peacekeeping missions. Currently,
9 per cent of the troops deployed in such missions are
made up of women. Always there as volunteers, women
have played a prominent role and chalked up high
numbers in terms of re-enlistment, which demonstrates
their commitment to peace.
Given Uruguay’s experience in Africa, including
participation in such missions as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we can testify to the effective
role played by the women members of our contingents.
In that regard, it has been observed that women’s
effective participation in peacekeeping operations
is of particular importance, as their response differs
from that of men. Similarly, women play a key role in
16/57

28/03/2016

confidence-building in local communities, especially
among women who have suffered violence. They serve
as a model for behaviour for other women and contribute
to bringing about an increased sense of security among
the people.
Currently, despite the aforementioned efforts, we
must acknowledge the existing gaps with respect to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Women
lead only 19 per cent of the United Nations field
missions; they account for only 3 per cent of military
peacekeeping personnel and 10 per cent of police
peacekeeping personnel. As such, Uruguay is concerned
about the opportunities and capabilities that are going
to waste because greater efforts have not been made to
include women in conflict-resolution processes. It has
been proven that increasing the percentage of women
in the police component of peacekeeping missions has
a positive effect on the population, as it reduces the
misuse of force or the inappropriate use of weapons
and authoritarian behaviour in relations with civilians.
Ultimately, the greater participation of women in all
aspects of the peace process is indispensable in efforts
to establish the foundation for sustainable peace in the
African continent.
Another key issue that we would like to highlight
is the matter of financing for the appropriate
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We cannot achieve greater results or positively
impact the lives of women and girls if we do not commit
to providing the required financial support. In that
regard, Uruguay wishes to highlight the commitment
that we must undertake to earmarking greater funding
for empowerment and gender-equality programmes.
Finally, we note last year’s adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). We welcome the inclusion
of its Goal 5 on gender equality, which we believe to
be essential in the light of existing gender inequality,
in particular in Africa. We believe that the issue of
gender equality does not exclusively concern women;
rather it is a struggle that affects us all, men and
women. In that context, Uruguay supports the full
implementation of Goal 5 in order to put an end to all
forms of discrimination against women and girls, and
ensure the full and effective participation of women,
with equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of
decision-making.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute and
convey our appreciation to all those women who work
every day — often at the risk of their lives — to promote
peace and security in Africa and all over the globe.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes Angola’s initiative to convene
this debate. China expresses its appreciation to you,
Minister Delgado, for presiding over this meeting. I
also wish to thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, Ambassador Kamau
and Ambassador António for their briefings. China
also listened attentively to the statement made by
the representative of the South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network.
The current international security situation is
complex and challenging. In particular, regions like
Africa and the Middle East have long been mired in
war and conflict. Many women are victims of violence
and the threat of terror. On the other hand, women
are increasingly important players in the prevention
and resolution of regional conflicts. The international
community should step up protection of the rights and
interests of women in conflict and give women a greater
role in conflict prevention and resolution.
First, we should enhance protection for women
in conflict, it is incumbent upon the international
community to adopt effective measures to maximize
security assurances for women affected by conflict.
In providing humanitarian assistance to conflict
areas, we should focus in particular on the needs of
women and other vulnerable groups. The provisions
of relevant Council resolutions on the protection of
women in conflict must be implemented to the letter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations should, within
the purview of their respective mandates, assist host
countries in safeguarding the security of women in
conflict and should effectively implement a zerotolerance policy toward sexual violence.
Secondly, greater efforts should be deployed to find
political solutions to critical regional issues, and greater
importance attached to the role of women in conflict
resolution. The international community should work
hard to help design political solutions to conflicts
and overcome differences through dialogue. Women
should be encouraged to become important players
in mediation and to fully leverage their advantages
in advocating a culture of peace. United Nations
peacekeeping operations may also steadily raise the

S/PV.7658

percentage of female staff so that communication with
local women and girls can be improved.
Thirdly, women should be given a greater role to
play in building a culture of harmony and inclusiveness.
The international community should encourage women
to play a greater role in social life, and it should educate
young people so that they can resist the ideological
influence of violent extremism and the demagogic
rhetoric of armed groups and terrorists. Women should
be empowered to fully participate in all phases of
post-conflict reconstruction, actively encourage the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
of combatants, and provide counselling and community
support for victims of violence.
Fourthly, women must be enabled to promote
economic and social development, thereby eliminating
the roots causes of conflict. The international community
should step up economic empowerment efforts for
African women, help African countries reduce poverty
and promote economic development. African women
should be provided with better occupational-skills
training and with greater funding support for
entrepreneurship in order to comprehensively improve
incomes and livelihoods, with a view to promoting
the industrialization and agricultural modernization
of the continent, thereby eradicating the root causes
of conflict.
Last September, the Global Summit of Women was
convened under a joint China-United Nations initiative.
The Summit was attended by Chinese President Xi
Jinping and representatives from over 140 countries,
including 85 Heads of State and Government. The
event had a significant and far-reaching impact on
the development of the global women’s cause. China
decided to contribute $10 million to the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women. Over the next five years, China will adopt
a series of initiatives to help developing countries
overcome the difficulties facing women and girls with
regard to their access to medical care and education,
strengthen training for local women and, through a
fund created in partnership with the United Nations,
roll out projects dedicated to capacity-building for
womin developing countries.
China attaches great importance to working with
Africa, promoting the cause of women and intensifying
support for African women in the political, economic,
cultural, educational and health domains. The 2015

16-0851917/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Johannesburg Action Plan of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation called for intensified pragmatic
cooperation between China and Africa in the area
of women’s affairs and for dialogue between female
leaders. The assistance provided by China in recent
years covers almost all African countries. China also
provided women and girls in Ebola-afflicted West
African countries, such as Sierra Leone and Liberia,
with a large amount of assistance in kind to support
Africa’s efforts to upgrade its public-health system and
emergency-response capacity on all fronts.
Going forward, China will implement 200 Happy
Life projects across Africa and 100 village-level
agricultural development projects, build industrial parks
and vocational training centres on a collaborative basis,
and provide training for 200,000 technical specialists.
These cooperative projects will benefit the people of
Africa, and in particular bring new opportunities and
new hope for the development of African women,
thereby creating new conditions for conflict resolution.
China stands ready to continue working with
the international community to jointly help women
achieve comprehensive development and fully engage
in political, economic and social life so that they
can contribute more positive energy to the peace,
development and prosperity of the African continent
and makes their own important contributions.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
Angola’s initiative to hold this open debate. At the
outset, I would like to state that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union on this subject.
I would like to thank all the briefers, whose presence
today proves the importance of the topic chosen by the
Angolan presidency.
Conflicts and crises in Africa have taken a more
complex turn in recent years. They tend to be followed
by devastating upsurges of violence against women
and girls. We all recall with deep shock the tragic case
of the abduction of 200 Chibok girls from a school in
northern Nigeria by Boko Haram militants in April
2014. In too many places, women and girls are being
wounded, mutilated and killed along with men and
boys. They also suffer gender-based violence. Sexual
violence is used as a weapon of war in conflicts all
around the continent.
18/57

28/03/2016

Ukraine condemns all acts of sexual violence,
as well as any form of sexual abuse of women and
children, which, in some conflict situations, surpass
the level of war crimes and reach the scale of crimes
against humanity or genocidal slaughter. Considering
the growing magnitude of such crimes, we express our
readiness and commitment to actively contributing to
consolidated international efforts aimed at elaborating
effective steps to address the issue of sexual violence. In
this context, we welcome the decision of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in the case of former Congolese
Vice-President Jean-Pierre Bemba — the first trial of
the ICC to focus on sexual violence as a weapon of war.
As a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
Ukraine strongly supports the Council’s efforts aimed
at addressing the full range of human rights violations
and abuses faced by women in armed conflict and postconflict situations.
In the face of the challenges of war and conflicts,
women are increasingly becoming critical agents of
change. According to the global study, there is growing
evidence that women’s empowerment contributes
to the success of peace talks and the achievement of
sustainable peace, accelerates economic recovery,
strengthens our peace operations, improves our
humanitarian assistance, and can help counter violent
extremism. Ukraine recognizes the importance of
the equal and full participation of women in all
activities for the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. It is also in this light
that we welcome the joint initiative of Spain and the
United Kingdom to set up the Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security.
Yet, while gender issues are increasingly integrated
into United Nations activities, the challenges in this
area remain grave and widespread around the globe.
Nowhere is that more evident than in Africa. Women
there play important roles as custodians of culture
and nurturers of families, yet in times of conflict they
are hardly represented at peace negotiating tables
or in community reconstruction efforts. Moreover,
according to UN-Women, women constitute fewer than
10 per cent of peace negotiators globally, and only 3 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements.
We commend the fact that a number of African
countries have embraced resolution 1325 (2000) and
already have relevant national action plans in place.
We take equally positive note of the fact that the
African Union has also made significant efforts to
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

integrate the women, peace and security agenda into
its own security, crisis-response, human rights and
peacebuilding efforts. It is of great importance that
both the African Union and the United Nations have
increased the number of female military and police
officers in peacekeeping missions and set up units that
provide protection to victims of gender-based violence
in Somalia and Darfur. In Rwanda, Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other places, the
United Nations provides important support to survivors
of such violence.
Noting the ever changing global context of peace
and security — in particular as related to the surge of
terrorism and violent extremism and the increasing
numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons — today we need more than ever to ensure
the participation of women in developing strategies
to prevent and respond to these challenges. That trend
was clearly demonstrated during the recent visit of the
Security Council delegation to Mali, where we had a
very useful meeting with a number of local women’s
organizations.
In closing, let me stress that, having been involved
with resolution 1325 (2000) from its origins, Ukraine is a
strong supporter of the Security Council’s women, peace
and security agenda. Recently, we adopted a national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), developed in close consultations with agencies
of the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, as well as civil society.
The action plan is aimed at promoting women’s greater
participation in military, political, economic and social
life, peace and recovery processes, the prevention of and
combating gender-based violence, and the reintegration
of persons affected by the consequences of the ongoing
foreign aggression against my own country. Ukraine
will remain actively engaged in promoting women’s
rights, women’s participation in peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction, and their protection from
sexual and gender-based violence.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I should like to
take this opportunity to thank Angola for organizing this
important debate, and Minister Delgado for presiding
over it. We also thank the briefers for their insights.
We have made significant progress in the 15 years
since the Security Council adopted its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. The fundamental importance of addressing

S/PV.7658

the impact of conflict on women and girls is now
widely acknowledged. We have agreed frameworks in
place. However, practical implementation lags behind,
particularly with women’s participation in conflict
prevention and resolution processes. Meaningful
participation is the exception rather than the rule. That
was evident at last week’s open debate on conflict
prevention in the Great Lakes region (see S/PV.7653).
Empirical evidence confirms that the meaningful
participation of women during all stages of conflict
resolution contributes strongly to preventing escalation
and sustaining peace.
Including women works. Failure to include women
in peace processes perpetuates inequality. It makes
breaking the cycle of conflict more difficult. We know
this, and yet we continue to hear arguments that women’s
participation is peripheral rather than essential. We
hear cultural justifications for the exclusion of women
from the negotiating table or mediation roles, and
we are asked to delay women’s involvement until the
reconciliation phase, often after an agreement has been
reached. These outdated attitudes and approaches must
be challenged.
Highlighting examples of how women have made
a difference in preventing and resolving conflict in
Africa demonstrates the practical benefits of women’s
participation. Take, for example, the role that women’s
groups continue to play in de-escalating and preventing
election-related violence. The establishment of women’s
situation rooms and the deployment of trained female
election monitors in Senegal, Kenya, Nigeria and, most
recently, in the Central African Republic have had a
measurable impact on preventing, monitoring and
mitigating incidents of violence and intimidation.
Women’s groups also play a key role in de-escalating
crises and advocating for an end to conflict. The critical
role played by the movement Women of Liberia Mass
Action for Peace in ending the conflict in that country
is well documented. Women have also mobilized to
support peace in Burundi by bringing parties together
to engage in dialogue. A nationwide network of women
mediators, established by the United Nations in close
partnership with the Ministry of the Interior and
civil society organizations, has effectively prevented
violence at the local level, dispelled false rumours and
mitigated the impact of the ongoing political crisis on
everyday people. As the mediation process in Burundi
moves forward, those gains must not be side-lined or
suppressed. The efforts of those women, undertaken

16-0851919/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

with minimal resources and at personal risk, deserve
more than our applause; they deserve support and
empowerment, because what they do works. We have
taken particular note of the steps called for by Ms. Paleki
Ayang to end sexual violence in South Sudan as a
necessary ingredient to rebuilding peace in her country.
We must facilitate the active contribution of
women in peace operations in Africa. We must ensure
that United Nations operations are appropriately
prepared and equipped to address the needs of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict settings. New
Zealand lies far from the African continent, however
we strive to make a modest, practical contribution to
those efforts. New Zealand has long reflected women
and peace and security considerations in its doctrine,
policy and training for uniformed personnel serving
internationally. Last November, an all-female New
Zealand Defence Force team provided training on the
the theme “Operationalization of gender” at the Kofi
Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre in
Ghana. The training incorporated conflict-prevention
techniques through the inclusion of women, increasing
the employment of women in conflict prevention and
resolution processes, and women’s experiences of
leadership in conflict.
Our experience in gender-sensitive approaches
to community policing in post-conflict settings has
proved the value of women’s participation. Female
police officers interact better with the local female
population. The presence of female personnel empowers
local women, thereby ensuring that they are not seen
only as victims but as actors and providers of safety
and security.
Regional leadership has played an important role in
African efforts to support the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution. We commend the African
Union’s Gender, Peace and Security Programme. It has
framed the integration and strengthening of the African
peace and security architecture’s responsiveness to
gender issues.
Finally, we urge the Security Council to incorporate
the perspectives of women in its work as a matter of
course. We should encourage greater participation by
women in all mediation efforts and conflict-prevention
processes. It is simple: when women are included as
active participants, there is a far greater chance of
ending conflict and sustaining peace.
20/57

28/03/2016

Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of the Malaysian
delegation, I join previous speakers in welcoming you
to the Security Council, Madam President. I wish to
thank you and the Angolan presidency for convening
today’s open debate focused on the role of women in
conflict resolution and prevention in Africa. Allow me
also to express my appreciation to the briefers, namely,
Under-Secretary-General Mlambo-Ngcuka, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador Kamau,
as well as Ambassador António, for their contributions
to this discusion. I also pay tribute to Ms. Paleki Ayang,
whose insights and personal experience in the conflict
situation in South Sudan lends greater persuasion and
legitimacy to the role of women.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
This open debate is timely and important followup to the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, which took place in
October of last year. On that occasion, Malaysia joined
members of the Security Council, States Members of
the United Nations and the Organizaiton in reaffirming
the importance of this agenda, as well as of renewing
our commitment to strengthening the role of women
in establishing and preserving peace and security with
greater inclusivity.
The important role and potential contribution of
women to conflict resolution and prevention can no
longer be sidelined or ignored. The situation in Africa
requires a wider aperture for us to assess what strategies
have worked and what challenges need to be overcome
to ensure that women are allowed to fulfil their potential
as agents of peace and security. In that connection,
the October 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) provides a rich empirical
resource for us to drawn upon on the value of women’s
contributions to peace and security. We would like
to highlight three areas in which we believe that the
involvement of women would greatly enhance conflictprevention and resolution efforts, namely, political
participation, early-warning mechanisms and building
long-term resilience against conflict.
Malaysia believes that increasing meaningful
political participation by women is crucial to ending
current conflicts and preventing future ones. The
Security Council has consistently emphasized that
achieving sustainable resolutions to armed conflicts
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

cannot be achieved through military means, but only
through peaceful political processes. However, such
processes have almost always been led exclusively
by men — women and their voices have for far too
long been excluded. Malaysia fully supports efforts
to increase the participation of women in political
processes, including placing women in decision-making
positions that can influence negotiation outcomes.
Apart from the necessary training and capacitybuilding to sharpen women’s political leadership, that
also requires political will on the part of negotiating
parties, mediators and organizers of peace processes
to actively include women at all stages of negotiations.
In addition, providing avenues for women’s civil
society organizations to contribute to, and monitor
the implementation of, peace processes will also help
ensure that women’s perspectives are reflected.
An important element of conflict prevention is the
ability to detect early warning signs and to act upon
them. In conflict situations, there is ample evidence
of women being able to provide insights into changing
dynamics, especially at the community and grass-roots
levels. We must encourage actors on the ground to tap
into such insights. Strong early-warning mechanisms
that take into account gender-sensitive indicators and
allow for the confidential channelling of information
would greatly aid conflict-prevention efforts. In that
regard, we welcome initiatives such as the setting up
of women’s situations rooms to monitor, prevent and
mitigate electoral-related violence, which warrant
continued support.
The long-term consolidation of peace and security
requires addressing the root causes of conflict and
placing women at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. In
our view, establishing national legal frameworks that
uphold gender equality and protect the rights of women
stands the best chance of staving off a relapse into
conflict. At the same time, socio-economic recovery
strategies that provide livelihoods and educational
opportunities for women and girls will go a long way
towards building community resilience.
More broadly, we believe that peacebuilding
activities should also emphasize women’s empowerment
so that they can become key contributors in the political,
economic and social spheres. In that regard, we welcome
the Peacebuilding Commission’s initiative in developing
a gender strategy to strengthen its engagement in and
support for gender equality in peacebuilding activities.
As a current member of the Commission, Malaysia is

S/PV.7658

committed to engaging proactively in developing the
strategy and looks forward to its adoption as soon
as June.
Efforts to build inclusive and resilient communities
are especially crucial as the whole world, including
Africa, continues to grapple with the rising threat of
violent extremism. Boko Haram is a continuing menace
in the region, terrorizing civilian populations across
national borders, including by targeting women and
girls. At the same time, we condemn the unacceptable
exploitation of women and children as suicide bombers.
We underscore the importance of ensuring that
measures aimed at countering violent extremism take
into account the protection of vulnerable groups that
have been coerced or manipulated.
The full realization of the potential of women
for conflict prevention and resolution requires the
cooperation of the entire international community,
including Member States, regional organizations, the
United Nations and civil society. A comprehensive
and coherent approach, led by the United Nations, that
promotes the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution efforts, is key to the effective implementation
of this agenda. In that context, Malaysia supports and
is encouraged by the various measures initiated by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system to
promote greater representation of women in the senior
leadership, mediating teams and peacekeeping missions
of the United Nations, as well as better coordination
among United Nations entities in mainstreaming the
issue of women and peace and security.
We also support a more in-depth consideration
of women’s perspectives throughout the work of the
Security Council, including through the Informal
Experts Group on Women, Peace and Security set up
under resolution 2242 (2015). Furthermore, we see
benefits in regular consultations between the Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union (AU), and between the United Nations and AU
counterparts on women and peace and security, aimed
at strengthening cooperation on our shared goals of
the protection and empowerment of women in order to
promote and security.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that we
will all come closer to achieving our shared goal of a
more peaceful and stable world when we encourage
women to play their rightful role in peace and security

16-0851921/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

efforts. Malaysia remains fully committed to doing its
part to realize that mission.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Madam
President, the Senegalese delegation is pleased to see
you presiding in person over today’s Security Council
open debate on the role of women in preventing and
resolving conflicts in Africa, an extremely important
subject that continues to be a priority for the Council
in its primary mission, the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. The variety and depth of the briefings
we have heard this morning is testament to the topic’s
relevance, and I would like to thank all the briefers for
the practical light they have shed on our discussions:
the Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ambassador Macharia Kamau, Permanent
Representative of Kenya and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Ambassador Tété Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Ms. Paleki Ayang, Executive Director of the South
Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network.
Senegal associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Senegal believes firmly that if the maintenance
of international peace and security is to be effective,
we cannot ignore the contribution of half the world’s
population — namely, women — particularly since it
is they who are the principal victims of every kind of
violence, including sexual and sexist violence. This
often forces them to flee their homes or countries — as
Ms. Ayang has just witnessed — when they are not simply
being used as a way to modify an ethnic component.
Fifteen years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), and in the spirit of resolution 2171
(2014), today’s debate gives us an opportunity to go
even further in taking a comprehensive approach to
preventing conflict and maintaining peace through
the integration of human rights, particularly women’s
rights, with gender equality. By doing so, the Council
can make a better contribution to the establishment of
inclusive peace processes that take into consideration
women’s equal, full and meaningful participation, as
well as their improved representation in prevention and
mediation efforts, in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000) and its successors.
Africa, the continent most affected by conflicts,
has a major role to play in that dynamic. We have
22/57

28/03/2016

established several political and institutional
mechanisms, including, on women’s rights, the Maputo
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’
Rights, and the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality
in Africa, which commits African Union member
States to promoting women’s full participation and
representation in peace processes. The appointment by
the President of the African Union Commission of a
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security is part of
that same effort. In West Africa, through their adoption
of the Dakar Declaration on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2015), the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) aim to
strengthen the role of women, particularly in mediation,
the promotion of a culture of peace and in the creation
of early warning systems.
It is in that spirit that Senegal has been recruiting
women into its security and armed forces since 2007,
after becoming the first African country to achieve
full parity in all national and local elective offices.
The gender-based sectoral strategy adopted by our
defence and security forces will, we hope, enable us
to institutionalize gender balance in our armed forces’
interventions, with more and more women already
participating in our peacekeeping missions. Such
provisions help to strengthen the role of African women
in preventing and resolving conflicts, combating
violence and working for development through
innovative mechanisms aimed at achieving more
peaceful societies.
However, many problems remain. A review of the
overall security situation in West Africa, for instance,
brings up new challenges that efforts to prevent and
resolve conflict must take into more systematic and
systemic consideration. We must therefore increase
our investment in early warning systems and national
rapid-response mechanisms if we are to ensure the full
participation of women and civil-society organizations
in peace processes. That is particularly important
for strategies aimed at preventing radicalization and
violent extremism and, consequently, terrorism. It will
also be necessary in parallel to ramp up the promotion
of education and a culture of peace in all Member States
and increase awareness of the content of resolution
1325 (2000), including by translating it into the main
languages of the African continent. Furthermore,
the mobilization of substantial resources is vital to
the success of national plans aimed at ensuring the
implementation of the resolution, so as to strengthen
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

the means available to them to fight terrorism. Along
those same lines, annual national budgets should
provide for activities as part of national action plans,
which would strengthen the political commitment of
States to the resolution.
Globally speaking, efforts aimed at ensuring the
effective participation of women in the settlement of
conflicts must be deployed in synergetic action among
the Security Council and the other members of the
United Nations, including the various entities that are
active on the ground. To that end, the new Informal
Expert Group of the Security Council on women and
peace and security created by resolution 2242 (2015),
as well as the Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, must work in
perfect coordination so as to contribute to a better
assessment of lessons learned and an effective sharing
of best practices in terms of the incorporation of the
women and peace and security aspect into conflictprevention policies in Africa.
By way of conclusion, the Senegalese delegation
would like to suggest that the various relevant proposals
shared by the briefers and delegations this morning
be collected and assessed and, to the extent possible,
implemented. Senegal sees in this a key contribution to
the achievement of peaceful and inclusive societies, as
provided for in one of the 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Suarez Borges (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to welcome
the presence of the Angolan Minister for Family
and the Promotion of Women, Ms. Maria Filomena
Delgado, and to thank the presidency for its initiative
of convening this important debate and for preparing
the concept paper (S/2016/219, annex). We would like
also to express our gratitude to Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka; Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun; Ambassadors
Macharia Kamau and Téte António; and Ms. Paleki
Ayang for their briefings.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement to be made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In the three global studies carried out last year
on the review of the peacebuilding architecture,
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and

S/PV.7658

peacekeeping operations, there is reference to the fact
that priority should be attached to the prevention of
conflicts. The Global Study on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) states:
“Conflict prevention and resolution, as practiced
today, continues to focus on neutralizing potential
spoilers and perpetrators of violence, rather than
investing in resources for peace”.
The study added that it was key to take into account
the fact that militarism sustains and perpetuates
structural inequalities, which disenfranchise women
and girls from public goods and entrench exclusion and
marginalization, which exacerbate inequality.
Venezuela fully agrees with what was said earlier.
That is why we stress the fact that prevention and
the peaceful resolution of disputes is always the best
and most appropriate mechanism for averting the
harmful and devastating effects of armed conflict on
the civilian population, especially on women, girls
and boys. For that reason, we are convinced of the
need to redouble our efforts and muster the necessary
will to find political solutions to situations that would
make it possible to create an environment conducive
to the empowerment and development of women, with
special emphasis on promoting national capacities
and increasing assistance, with a view to helping the
countries affected to overcome the difficulties and
underlying causes that lead to armed conflict, including
exclusion, poverty, social inequity and lack of access to
basic resources and services.
It is important to highlight here the fact that
women, including girls, suffer in a disproportionate
manner from the harmful consequences of war owing
to the violence perpetrated against them by various
armed groups, which is reflected in the very painful
statistics on victims. Women and girls represent half of
the population affected, and therefore all efforts made
to prevent their exposure to harm will be an investment
in a more humane future.
Thus peace processes provide us with an ideal
scenario for putting an end to violence and to the root
causes of conflict. Including women therefore represents
a strategic opportunity to address comprehensively and
from a gender-based perspective the shifts that will
that lead to lasting peace, development, justice and
social equality.

16-0851923/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Since resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted 15 years
ago, and following subsequent resolutions on the issue
of women and peace and security, significant progress
has been made in the normative area, in the United
Nations, regional organizations and Member States.
Notwithstanding this, there remain major challenges
before us, among which I would highlight the fact
that women in situations of armed conflict continue
to suffer in a repeated and systematic manner from
sexual violence used as a tactic of war and continue
to be underrepresented in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.
In this context, we condemn the violence unleashed
by terrorist groups, which impacts with unusual cruelty
the Middle East and Africa. The main victims of this
violence are women, boys and girls, as those groups
use sexual exploitation and abuse as a strategy for
their criminal action, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. In this context,
it is vital to fully respect, in keeping with international
law, the ban on third parties supplying weapons and
financial support to those groups. In this way it will
be possible to limit their operational capacity, thereby
reducing the harmful and irreparable consequences of
armed conflict on civilians, especially on women, girls
and boys.
The optimization of efforts geared to the effective
implementation of resolutions related to the issue
of women and peace and security requires effective
coordination among all States concerned; the various
United Nations bodies with competence in the area, in
keeping with their respective mandates; and with the
various regional and subregional mechanisms that deal
with this issue. These efforts and initiatives must take
into account how women can participate in each of the
different national contexts and consider the prevailing
political models as well as the social, cultural and
religious structures of each society, so as to respond in
the most appropriate manner to each of these specific
contexts. All of these actions must be based on respect
for national sovereignty.
A number of studies have shown that in the area of
peace and security, the percentage of aid earmarked for
promoting gender equality and equity is well below what
would be necessary in order to fulfil the commitments
made in this area. That is why it is very important to
provide sufficient resources for the empowerment
and training of women and for the preparation and
implementation of national action plans on women
24/57

28/03/2016

and peace and security. Moreover, it is imperative to
provide support for promoting the participation of
women in local initiatives for peacebuilding, addressing
not just their technical capacities and ability to have an
impact, but also their basic needs and security. In that
context, we urge political missions and peacekeeping
operations to continue to promote the participation
of gender advisers on the protection of women in the
various missions carried out by the United Nations,
which should recognize gender mainstreaming as a key
part of their responsibilities. Moreover, it should also
be borne in mind that the implementation of this policy
will have positive and practical impacts in the progress
on overcoming the various obstacles that women face
in peacebuilding and conflict-prevention activities, as
well as in the oversight of peace agreements.
We wish to conclude by affirming that, for
Venezuela, women play a leading role and are an essential
driving force in the struggle for the emancipation of
our peoples. To that end, we wish to reiterate that, at
the global level, women are called upon to assume
positions with equal opportunities and in conditions
leading development and peacebuilding processes
that are inclusive, equitable and transforming. In that
historic and crucial process, Venezuela reiterates its
commitment to continue to work resolutely towards
achieving these goals.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere gratitude for Angola’s initiative
in organizing this open debate on this very important
issue. I also appreciate the informative briefings
delivered by previous speakers.
I lived in Africa for three years, and I was able
to observe at first-hand that the mobilization of the
power of women was the key to addressing challenges
in Africa. In my statement, I would like to share my
experience about the power of women and the important
roles that African women are playing, and then to refer
to Japan’s efforts in unleashing the power of African
women in preventing and resolving conflicts. I am
talking about the power of women. What exactly is the
power of women in Africa?
First, women are managers. Japanese Embassies
finance many grass-roots projects and, as an
ambassador, I have found that the most successful
and best implemented projects have always been
those proposed by women. It is women who are
managers in daily lives. Many women engage in
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

household management. Rearing children requires
supervising. Cooking requires planning. Shopping
requires calculation. If there is money, women use it
for education and health care, instead of wasting it.
Therefore, women are managers.
Secondly, women are entrepreneurs. Japan once
provided financial support for a school canteen project
in a village in Côte d’Ivoire. The idea was to support
mothers who would cultivate a plot of land to produce
rice and corn for their children’s school lunches. Several
years later, I made a visit to that village. The project
was successfully realized. A school lunch was now
assured, and more children were attending school than
before. To my surprise, I also found a big chicken cage
beside the rice and corn field. I asked if the chickens
inside were also for lunch. But the answer was no. The
mothers became aware of their powers of production,
and they decided to start a chicken farm to earn more
money. The chickens sold quite well at the local market,
which allowed the mothers to buy pencils and notebooks
for their children. Therefore, women are entrepreneurs.
Lastly, women are brave. They stand up for peace.
I am very much impressed by the story of Ms. Paleki
Ayang in South Sudan, where women of both the Nuer
and Dinka tribes get together to bridge the antagonism of
the men. But I had the same experience in Côte d’Ivoire.
On the eve of the Côte d’Ivoire crisis in 2011, everyone
could feel the looming tension. Demonstrations of any
kind might lead to a terrible crackdown. Then one day,
the women of Abidjan started marching in the streets,
banging their pans with kitchen utensils, shouting
“no!” to violence. They demonstrated their courage by
demanding peace in spite of the danger. To my surprise,
the security forces did not touch the women who were
demonstrating. They did not shoot at each other, because
in Africa, I understand, attacking women might be seen
as an act of dishonour.
My point is that, when it comes to the role of
women in Africa, we talk about empowering and
protecting women. Yes, that is true. But it is not merely
a matter of empowering or protecting women; it is a
matter of mobilizing the power of women. It must
be acknowledged that African women themselves
have great potential, and they are active players who
contribute to peace and stability. Furthermore, when it
comes to peace and stability, we should think of how to
best mobilize women’s power.

S/PV.7658

Japan places great importance on the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa, and so we will
continue to cooperate in protecting the rights and
interests of women and girls during armed conflict.
That involves focusing our efforts to make the best
use of, which means to mobilize, the power of women,
particularly concerning the following aspects.
First, Japan underpins African efforts to establish
national action plans on women and peace and security.
Projects in Somalia and with the League of Arab States
are now taking place through our financial assistance.
Secondly, as a member of the Security Council,
Japan wishes to contribute to the work of the informal
expert group on women and peace and security. We are
pleased to see that the group made effective inputs before
the Council’s visit to Mali earlier this month. Also, as
an active member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), we welcome its efforts, led by Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, to introduce the PBC gender strategy
aligned with women and peace and security efforts.
Last but not least, this year we will make a
contribution of $14 million to UN-Women, as well
as to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
contribution is being made with the aim to mobilize the
inherent power of African women.
In conclusion, I would like to say once again that
Japan has traditionally stressed the great importance
of its relationship with Africa through the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD) process. TICAD will be held in Kenya this
year, for the first time on the African continent. The role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is one of the key elements to be discussed at this year’s
session. Japan wishes to build up its cooperation with
the international community to that end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Through
you, Madam President, France would like warmly to
thank the delegation of Angola for organizing this
open debate, which allows the Security Council, in the
context of its work on the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, to continue to add value to and to promote the
crucial role of women on these issues. I also thank all
the briefers for their precise and enlightening briefings
on the evolution of the role of women and, I would even
say, the real and potential power they possess in terms
of settling conflict in Africa.

16-0851925/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

I heard the statistics and the information presented
by the Executive Director of UN-Women, and the
message is clear: women’s involvement in these issues
is crucial for achieving lasting peace. The growing
recognition of this fact is an important trend for the
Organization, a deep-rooted movement in whose favour
France is firmly committed. Our efforts should therefore
focus on the ways in which to concretely implement that
principle. What tools not only to strengthen but also
ensure active participation by women in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts? How can we ensure that
all Council resolutions — from 1325 (2000) to 2242
(2015) — are fully and effectively implemented? I will
try to answer those questions by stressing three points
today.
First, the decision-making power of women in
peace processes must be enhanced by facilitating the
participation of civil society. I remind everyone in the
Chamber today that civil society is an indispensable
force essential to any democratic process, and therefore
to every post-conflict stabilization process. It is a simple
equation: without civil society there is no inclusivity
and, without that, there can be no lasting peace. It is
therefore necessary that Governments open the doors
to organizations representing women, if they want to
lay the foundation for sustainable development. We
are convinced that in our fight against climate change,
women will play a decisive role.
During the Council’s visit to Mali, we noted the
wealth and dynamism of Malian civil society. Let
us heed it, because it has something to say about the
peace process under way. Its expertise and analysis can
serve as a valuable guide to the implementation of the
second national action plan for women and peace and
security in Mali, which aims to involve women in the
peace process. The support provided by UN-Women
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali is essential.
On a regional level, France also encourages the
African Union to continue its efforts to give more
space to women through its Gender, Peace and Security
Programme, which the African Union Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security Ms. Bineta Diop,
spoke about compellingly. France also calls for the full
participation of women in all ongoing and future peace
processes and dialogues in Africa. What goes for Mali
also applies to Burundi, the Great Lakes region and the
Sahel region. It is a real priority.
26/57

28/03/2016

Finally, at the national level, France is working
closely with civil society. During the sixtieth session of
Commission on the Status of Women, which came to an
end a few days ago, Ms. Laurence Rossignol, France’s
Minister for Families, Children and Women’s Rights,
incorporated into her delegation nearly 20 organizations
representing women. In France, civil society is an
integral part of women’s rights diplomacy.
Secondly, the role of women in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts should be increased as part of
our strategies against violent extremism and terrorism.
The African continent was tragically and repeatedly
struck by the recent attacks in Mali, Côte d’Ivoire
and Burkina Faso, as well as by the constant deadly
attacks of Boko Haram in Nigeria and Al-Shabaab in
Somalia in particular. We know women are victims of
intolerable violence on a daily basis that is an affront
to the human conscience. Terrorist groups target them,
exploit them, reduce them to sexual objects and sell
them in public squares or online. Women are objects
of a parallel economy, victims of human trafficking
for sexual exploitation purposes and the trafficking
in them finances the activities of terrorist groups.
That is the very condition of women and their rights,
which are denied. Above all, we must give women the
means to reverse that logic of control, so they can make
decisions about their bodies, their lives and the society
in which they live. To do that, women must have access,
including in conflict situations in Africa, to sexual and
reproductive rights and health services, to education
and economic resources.
Women are not just victims of terrorist groups;
they have multiple roles to play. I am convinced that the
women and peace and security agenda must be fully
integrated into counter-terrorism strategies. The fight
against terrorism and violent extremism is a common
undertaking and, to be effective, no stakeholder should
be neglected. Women are an integral part of the fight
against terrorism and it is essential to provide them
with the necessary means to play their parts.
Finally, and thirdly, we must redouble our efforts
to reintegrate women associated with armed groups.
Women who have suffered the violence of conflict are
often marked by a considerable post-conflict stress:
they bear the stigma of sexual violence. We must
ensure that they are able to return to their societies
and their communities of origin. That return is often
violent. Husbands, families and the labour market all
reject them. Therefore, it is crucial that women who are
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

liberated from those armed groups should enjoy — just
like men or soldiers — disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes. Similarly, it is
necessary for security sector reform (SSR) programmes
implemented in post-crisis situations to take into
account women and gender issues. Without that proper
rehabilitation, women will remain marginalized and
represent a gap in the rebuilding of societies. It is time
for DDR and SSR to become more female-oriented.
That is why France, within the framework of its
national women and peace and security programme,
covering the period 2015-2018, has contributed to
several programs in Africa, devoted to, among other
things, social cohesion, education, access to justice for
women in post-conflict situations on the continent.
The future of Africa is in the hands of its people,
especially its women. Today they continue to be
victims of the conflicts ravaging the continent, and it
is therefore up to the United Nations to give them the
tools to serve as stakeholders in the peace of tomorrow.
The Council can count on the full support of France to
assist women in post-conflict situations in Africa.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Our delegation would like to start by
expressing its gratitude to the Angolan presidency for
its initiative in convening today’s meeting on the topic
of the role of women in preventing and settling conflicts
in Africa. We would also like to convey our gratitude
to all the invited briefers for their participation in
the meeting and their comprehensive contribution to
the debate.
One of the most important preconditions for the
stability, sustainable development of African countries
and security and well-being of the population, including
women, isthe prevention and settlement of conflicts.
Despite the overall decline over the past decade,
the African continent remains highly vulnerable to
crises. Therefore, a timely and effective response
by the international community to emerging threats
and security challenges in Africa is essential. In that
regard, we view as unacceptable attempts to dictate to
African Governments settlement recipes without their
consent or request. We welcome the increased activity
by Africans themselves with regard to emergency
response, as well as the growing participation by
African women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. We note the progress made in forging an African
peace and security architecture with the assistance of
the international community.

S/PV.7658

The Russian Federation is carrying out a
consistent policy of developing cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations. We call for further pooling of efforts
regarding the conflict situations in Darfur, Somalia,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea-Bissau,
as well as the intra-Sudanese track, in the fight against
international terrorism, transnational organized crime,
piracy, the illegal trafficking in arms and drugs, as well
as other important areas of cooperation, including the
issue of women and peace and security. Russia is ready
to step up its cooperation with African States aimed at
strengthening their crisis-response capacities, including
through the ongoing training of their peacekeepers
and law-enforcement agents in Russian educational
establishments. Our country is participating in a
number of United Nations peacekeeping operations
on the continent and plays a leading role among the
contributors of air-transport services to them.
The issue of women and peace and security is an
inalienable component of peace and conflict-resolution
processes and post-conflict peacebuilding. The
participation of women in such efforts has much positive
potential. We must also note the efforts of specialized
subregional and regional organizations in that regard.
A good example of cooperation is the African Union’s
five-year Gender, Peace and Security Programme for
the period 2015-2020. In order to achieve results in
implementing the agenda on women and peace and
security, there needs to be a balanced, system-wide
approach that provides for the full-fledged participation
of women in peace processes throughout the continent
and in post-conflict reconstruction. No less pressing is
the need to ensure the effectiveness of efforts to deal
with violence against women during armed conflicts in
Africa. There is also a need to ensure that the inclusion
of gender aspects in our work on the ground does not
become an end in itself and is not only declarative in
nature. We should aim at achieving real results. In that
context, it is important to bear in mind that national
plans of action for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) cannot be used as an instrument for assessing
the policy of States in terms of their gender-promotion
policies. We need to bear in mind that the protection of
women during the course of armed conflicts and steps
to afford them equal opportunities for participation in
efforts to achieve peace and security are the primary
responsibility of the States involved in such conflicts.
The international community and the United Nations

16-0851927/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

must provide them assistance in that regard. One of the
main objectives of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts should be the restoration of normal life and the
elimination of the consequences of conflicts, as well
as safeguarding the security of all strata and groups of
the population.
As we have noted earlier, greater effectivness of the
work of the Security Council is not always achieved
through the establishment of new structures. That is
the reason for our doubts with regard to the usefulness
of setting up the Informal Experts Group on Women,
Peace and Security. We stand ready to cooperate with
other members of the Council on this very important
topic in order to develop effective and tried methods.
The women of African States can make a
substantive and unique contribution to achieving the
objective of preventing and resolving conflicts on
the African continent through the joint efforts of all
interested parties, as there is a need to create the optimal
conditions for achieving that goal, while not forgetting
the central task of protecting African women and their
safety and security. The main guidelines in that regard
remain the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam Minister, for organizing this debate
and, above all, for presiding over our discussion.
Fifteen years ago or more, when the agenda item
on women and peace and security reached the Security
Council, the main purpose was to improve prevention
mechanisms in the Security Council and civil society,
which were, at the time and even now, considered,
and rightly so, to be about preventing the outbreak of
conflicts and not simply about ensuring that women and
children were dealt with in an adequate manner. Fifteen
years later, the work of the Security Council is focused
mainly on military aspects, but that is not why, in my
view, we can say that we have come a long way. Over
the years, we have made much progress in developing
a comprehensive, integrated agenda on woman and
peace and security. A significant indicator of the fact
that we are on the right path with that comprehensive
focus is the selection by the presidency of Angola of the
participants in today’s debate. I am particularly pleased
to see the Peacebuilding Commission represented. I
am also very pleased to see the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
and the African Union represented here as well, and
28/57

28/03/2016

especially our dear friend Paleki Ayang, who gave us a
brilliant and moving presentation.
In any event, I will never tire of repeating that
the best way to prevent the outbreak of conflict is to
ensure the appropriate participation of women. When
women do not participate sufficiently in peacebuilding
processes, imperfect peace results, peace that is
vulnerable and, above all, an unfair peace, in which a
part of the population imposes its way of seeing things
on the other part of the population that did not participate
in the peacebuilding process. It need not always be
that way, however, and I wish to highlight the fact that
there are very good initiatives that are working. I will
mention three. First, the regional platform for women
in the Sahel, which is coordinated by UN-Women and
is doing remarkable work; secondly, in the efforts in
South Sudan, where the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan is carrying out very important
support work in the area of prevention; and thirdly,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
which has a prevention mechanism that deserves our
full support.
Here in the world of the United Nations, I will not
go as far as to say that there has been a change in the
narrative with the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015),
but there has been an important change in the level of
awareness on the part of the various delegations. In
my view, resolution 2242 (2015) produced a “before”
and an “after”. What is most important and relevant
in its content and the decisions therein is, in my view,
the establishment of the Informal Experts Group
on Women, Peace and Security, which will be the
real mechanism for monitoring and oversight in the
Security Council. In other words, the Experts Group
will ensure that the Council rigorously implements all
of the existing resolutions with regard to women and
peace and security. I think there are seven resolutions
in that regard.. The Group meets on a monthly basis
and is co-chaired by the United Kingdom and Spain.
It deserves the Council’s full support. Moreover, it
will continously advise those of us who are heads of
mission and are involved in informal consultations on
the need to include in our statements the issue of the
implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) on the agenda
on women and peace and security.
That brings us to a very timely topic that is of
interest to all delegations, which is the appointment of
the next Secretary-General. We all know that there is
an open debate with regard to the appropriate gender
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

of the next Secretary-General. Members are aware
of Spain’s position, so I will not reiterate it. I would,
however, like to mention that, in my view, there are
two schools of thought on that issue. The first school
of thought supports the idea that the next SecretaryGeneral, ideally and all things being equal, should be a
woman. There are many portraits of men in the entrance
hall of the United Nations. Then there is another other
school of thought, which thinks it is rather irrelevant
whether it be a man or a woman. What is important
is that it be a person who is truly committed to the
agenda on women. In any event, I think that, in order
to bring about a significant change in the agenda on
women and peace and security, it is important that we
continue along the path that we started down some time
ago in a comprehensive manner and that we take a triple
perspective on the matter.
First, from a local point of view, I believe that
communities are truly important to the achievement
of individual progress with regard to the agenda on
women. Ms. Ayang can correct me. Secondly, I believe
an assessment of legislation at the national level is
fundamental and, to that end, we have a wonderful
toolbox for that purpose. Thirdly, we need to work at
the regional level. We have been doing so, but we need
to strengthen that level of implementation so that it can
be useful in promoting interaction between the whole
United Nations system and regional organizations.
I trust that, with that set of initiatives, we will, in a
short period, succeed in averting conflicts by having
improved prevention. For, unfortunately, conflicts
affect the weakest, in this case women and children.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to welcome Ms. Maria Filomena Lobão Telo
Delgado and to thank Angola for having convened
this extremely important debate on women and peace
and security in Africa. I would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Observer of the African Union and
the Executive Director of South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network.
Over the past 15 years, the Security Council has
managed to build a legal framework for the programme
of action for women and peace and security through the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and seven subsequent
resolutions. The Council accordingly established a
concrete political momentum thanks to which the
contribution of women to the prevention and resolution

S/PV.7658

of conflicts in Africa has significantly grown. That
momentum has also helped reinforce the contribution
of women through a number of mechanisms and legal
frameworks that have been adopted in Africa in order
to boost the participation of women in this area. As
examples, I may point to the Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa and the appointment of an
African Union Special Envoy on Women, peace and
security. And in West Africa there have been numerous
positive experiences.
While innovative methods have been found, they
remain on the sidelines and have not been fully exploited
within official frameworks. The conclusions that were
adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women this
past Friday affirmed the need for the participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution. They also
affirmed the importance of the implementation of the
Beijing Programme of Action and of achieving genuine,
comprehensive gender equality. Those frameworks and
mechanisms are very important, but to date they have
not ensured the required level of participation. On that
account, I would like to share the following remarks.
Mr. Gaspar Martins took the Chair.
First, Egypt supports the call of the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen the role of women in
peacekeeping activities, mediation and the prevention
of conflicts. That call was supported by the three
major reviews carried out recently in that area. We
have also seen tangible evidence of the importance
of the role of women in their countries, especially in
Liberia, Malawi and Central Africa, where women are
successfully governing.
Second, there are large gaps in terms of the
Council’s resolutions and their follow-up. We therefore
need to adopt a methodology that will enable us to
bridge those gaps so as to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of those resolutions. We also need to
step up the role of the Informal Experts Group set up in
resolution 2242 (2015).
Third, several questions continue to be absent
from our debate, such as the suffering of women who
are living under foreign occupation. I point out also
the exaggeration of the link with human rights and
international humanitarian law, because it weakens the
means for providing available protection in times of
peace as well as in times of war. I reiterate that there
is the problem of politicizing some of the issues linked
to the two regimes of international law that I have

16-0851929/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

mentioned. There are also problems with regard to the
infringement of national sovereignty, and sometimes
we rely on information that is unofficial and lacking
precision. That distracts our attention from the issues
that concern us, to their detriment, in particular
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution.
Fourth, problems and weaknesses persist with
regard to the appointment of women to senior level and
leadership posts in political missions.
Fifth, our programme of action completely
fails to take into account cultural particularities
in its implementation, which negatively affects
the participation of women in conflict prevention
and resolution.
Sixth, it is important that discussions continue
within the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, so that we can confront the challenges and
problems standing in the way of the full participation of
women in peacekeeping activities.
Seventh, Egypt is about to adopt a strategy on gender
equality, and we very much welcome the statement
made by Ambassador Macharia Kamau earlier, since
the strategy to be adopted by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations can be an excellent starting
point for bolstering the participation of women in
conflict prevention and resolution, particularly in terms
of action at the regional level.
Egypt attaches great importance to issues affecting
the role of women in conflict prevention and resolution.
We are devoting major efforts at the national level to
improve the status and empowerment of women. We
have supported the substance of resolution 1325 (2000)
since its adoption. That resolution is an important
milestone with regard to the status of women and
their participation in the resolution of conflicts. Egypt
was one of the first countries to adhere to resolution
2242 (2015) this past October. The national council
responsible for the status of women in Egypt has
fine-tuned a national plan of action based on resolution
1325 (2000). Egypt thus became one of 17 African
countries to have a national plan of action of that kind.
Egypt has also organized a number of events
concerning this issue since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) 15 years ago. We attribute great importance
to capacity-building. The regional centre in Cairo
responsible for specialized training in peacekeeping
30/57

28/03/2016

in Africa has held seven training workshops and two
training workshops for trainers. The main topic of those
workshops was the social dimension of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) between 2013 and 2015. Five other workshops
are due to be held in June. Egypt is fully committed
to this process and to implementating the plan of
action, and takes part in all relevant regional and
international forums.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber. I would like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at the normal speed so that
interpretation may be provided properly. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying on this
open debate through the lunch hour as we have a very
large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Ashykbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank the
presidency of Angola for focusing attention on the role
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict
in Africa. My delegation would also like to support
and commend the African Union’s laudable initiatives,
including the initiative to silence all guns in Africa by
2020 and the African Peace and Security Architecture
aimed at strengthening capacities for peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and response, post-conflict
rehabilitation and development, with a focus on women
and girls.
The recently concluded twenty-sixth African Union
Summit, at which 2016 was designated the African
Year of Human Rights, with its particular focus on
the rights of women, called for special attention to be
paid to the atrocities inflicted on women in times of
peace and conflict. The much-welcomed verdict of the
International Criminal Court on 22 March sends a clear
signal that the widespread and systematic use of sexual
and gender-based violence as a weapon of war must
be eradicated — hence, the need for enhancing gender
equality and empowerment by implementing resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. Capacitybuilding is also necessary to achieve peace and security
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

and a broad range of the Sustainable Development
Goals in Africa.
The conflicts in Africa engulf neighbouring
regions as well, with grave consequences. There is
therefore a need to have closer collaboration among
the African Union, the United Nations and African
subregional organizations, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence against Women, and for Children and Armed
Conflict, so that the new forms of hybrid peacekeeping
operations are comprehensive and have clear mandates
for the protection of civilians, especially women and
girls. All operations must have well-qualified gender
specialists in senior positions and adequately staffed
gender teams integrated within the military, police and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations. A
gender focus must be intrinsic to the human rights, rule
of law, transitional justice and security sector reform
units in multidimensional operations.
Troop- and police-contributing countries should
impart special gender-sensitive training and include
more women in their national deployments to field
agencies, especially in conflict zones. We call for the
full implementation of the Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations personnel. We are confident that those
important mechanisms will create the conditions
necessary to prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts
in Africa. At present, Kazakhstan is contributing by
fielding its highly qualified military observers with
gender competence to several peacekeeping missions
in Africa. We hope to expand this deployment in
the future.

S/PV.7658

in the number of women included in formal regional and
international peace negotiations and agreements, policy
and decision-making, and in planning service delivery
for their countries. These gaps in implementation
need to be bridged together with host Governments,
Department of Political Affairs missions, peacekeeping
operations, international organizations and development
agencies. In that regard, in 2015 Kazakhstan and the
United Nations Development Programme launched
a project to update professional skills to improve
productivity, employment and development in support
of the delivery of development assistance to countries in
Africa through capacity-building training. The project,
in which more than 70 specialists from African States
participated — most of them women — focused on oil
and gas exploration, public health and agriculture. The
women of Africa are ready to be involved and actively
implement national, regional and global programmes
as part of post-conflict recovery; however, they
need opportunity.
Kazakhstan supports the international community’s
implementation of comprehensive measures against
violent extremism. At the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, proposed the establishment
of a global anti-terrorism network under the auspices of
the United Nations, as well as the creation of universal
mechanisms to bring perpetrators to justice. He also
underlined that
“humankind needs to shift its focus from routine
conflict prevention and post-conflict rehabilitation
to a new development strategy that would make
such conflicts meaningless” (A/70/PV.13, p. 47).

The international community needs to provide
greater support to African countries to involve women
in grass-roots organizations working for a culture
of peace, organizing political awareness and peace
education, promoting community-based reconciliation,
and ending all forms of impunity. Training has to be
offered to women engaging in social reconstruction and
integration activities, such as education, health care
and social services. Women have a critical contribution
to make in the management and security of camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons, especially
vulnerable women and girls, and in the demilitarization,
demobilization and reintegration processes.

He proposed that the United Nations formulate a
2045 global development strategy as a vision for the
United Nations’ centenary. Another initiative is to
reserve 1 per cent of the defence budget of each United
Nations Member State, annually, for the Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.

While progress has been witnessed in many
countries at the grass-roots level, there is a stark deficit

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) Let me
congratulate Angola on having organized this debate

Kazakhstan believes that it is of vital importance
that the Security Council maintains as a high priority
the commitment to protect women and girls. My country
pledges to be a strong voice on their behalf.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.

16-0851931/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

under the guidance of its Minister for Family and the
Promotion of Women, Ms. Maria Filomena Delgado. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union and
Ms. Palegi Ayang for their presentations.
Today’s debate provides a timely opportunity to
reflect on the results of the high-level review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and to focus
on the needs and perspectives of Africa. Brazil took
note with satisfaction of the recommendations of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and, in particular, its emphasis on prevention
and the need to avoid the militarization of the women
and peace and security agenda. As highlighted by
the global study, increasing recognition of women’s
participation and empowerment is an end in itself
and should not be part of counterterrorism strategies
or efforts to prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism; rather, it should be a part of the civilian
peace agenda. That point is highly relevant for Africa,
where most peacekeeping operations are deployed
and where women’s organizations have been playing
and will continue to play a positive role in all peace
processes, from mediation and prevention initiatives
to reconciliation and reconstruction in the aftermath
of conflict.
Notwithstanding significant challenges, African
women have many success stories to tell. Women’s
organizations were at the forefront of the Liberian
peace process. Post-conflict recovery initiatives led to
the economic empowerment of thousands of women in
Burundi and Rwanda. The policies and instruments of
the African Union Gender Policy, as well as the Gender,
Peace and Security Programme of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, provide valuable tools to
support the empowerment of African women as agents
of peace. We also welcome the adoption last year of the
African Union Agenda 2063 and its pledge to empower
African women in all spheres of social life.
It is also heartening to note that three important
peacekeeping operations in Africa are now led by
women. We pay tribute to the commitment and
leadership of Ellen Margrethe Løj, the Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan; Aïchatou
Mindaoudou, the Head of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire; and Kim Bolduc, the Head of the
32/57

28/03/2016

United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara. Another woman, Hester Paneras, until
recently steered the world’s largest international police
component — that of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Yet this positive trend cannot offset the fact that
women constitute merely 4 per cent of the 88,000
troops and police personnel currently deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. In
that regard, we recall resolution 2242 (2015), which
calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States
to double the number of women in military and police
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping operations
over the next five years. Female peacekeepers
are uniquely well placed to build trust with local
communities and to address sexual and gender-based
violence. They also serve as role models to inspire
women and girls to seek more rights and participation
in our societies.
In recognizing and supporting women’s role as
agents of peace, the international community is also
contributing to address one of the direst aspects of war
that mostly affects women and girls. Sexual violence
in conflict remains a serious concern for vulnerable
populations impacted by war around the world,
predominantly women and girls. Despite the strong
African commitment to fighting sexual and genderbased violence, serious crimes against humanity,
involving rape and sexual slavery, continue to occur
in some regions of Africa. Brazil strongly condemns
these abhorrent violations. We have long upheld the
imperative to pursue accountability for serious crimes
and abuses against women and girls, including but not
limited to sexual and gender-based violence.
A milestone in this regard was the recent
International Criminal Court (ICC) trial, presided
over by Brazilian Judge Sylvia Steiner, leading to
the conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba for war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the Central African
Republic. This was the first ICC case to specifically
focus on the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war,
and should serve as a powerful deterrent to wouldbe perpetrators.
As the current Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women (CSW), I am deeply committed to
gender equality in all political and security processes.
A specific concern are the human rights of women of
African origin, who are often subject to discrimination
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

and prejudice outside Africa. In this spirit, Brazil
and the United States co-organized last week a CSW
side event on the racial identity of women of African
descent in the diaspora, in the context of the 2015-2024
International Decade for People of African Descent.
We believe that visibility and self-representation are
powerful strategies for tackling racism and injustice.
Our South-South cooperation with Africa, a key
priority of Brazilian foreign policy, is closely aligned
with the women and peace and security agenda. In
Guinea-Bissau, we helped enable health institutions
to assist women and girl victims of gender-based
violence. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have financed projects to assist victims of sexual and
gender-based violence. In this respect, I cannot fail to
refer to the inspiring work of Dr. Denis Mukwege, a
physician who has treated thousands of survivors of
rape in Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and a role model not just in Africa, but worldwide.
Through the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I have witnessed firsthand the essential role played by women in building
sustainable peace. The Brazilian Peace Operations
Joint Training Center in Rio de Janeiro regularly holds
workshops and courses to train peacekeepers on gender
issues and the protection of women, where rigorous
standards regarding the conduct and discipline of
personnel are upheld.
At the domestic level, let me highlight the drafting
process of our national action plan on women and
peace and security. We are striving to elaborate an
effective plan to address the four pillars of the agenda:
prevention, protection, participation, and peacebuilding
and recovery. This will include but will not be limited
to measures to increase the percentage of female
peacekeepers; to foster the participation of women in all
peace and security processes, including in our Foreign
and Defence Ministries; to further improve relations
between troops and civilians, particularly women
and girls, in peacekeeping operations; and to fortify
humanitarian assistance and technical cooperation
initiatives on gender issues in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Since the women and peace and security
agenda is not solely a Government matter, we have
established a broad-based working group comprising
representatives not only of relevant ministries and the
armed forces, but also of academia and civil society, to
debate and draft our national action plan.

S/PV.7658

In conclusion, let me reiterate Brazil’s firm
commitment to both the promotion of peace in Africa
and the crosscutting campaign on gender equality and
women’s empowerment. We will continue to advance
these inseparable agendas at all levels of the United
Nations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We appreciate Angola’s
initiative in convening of today’s debate on a subject of
widespread concern. We have also carefully noted the
issues raised in the concept paper before us (S/2016/219,
annex) and by all the briefers today.
While we take note that advances have been
made in Africa through several laudable regional
and State-level initiatives in gender empowerment,
including in the context of the prevention and resolution
of conflict, there is no denying the considerable
challenges ahead. Despite the increased focus on the
women and peace and security agenda, along with the
normative framework that has evolved during the past
decade and a half, women and children continue to be
major victims. According to various United Nations
reports, women globally constitute less than 4 per cent
of signatories to peace agreements and less than 10 per
cent of negotiators at peace tables. Moreover, women
constitute only 3 per cent of the military and 10pc of
the police personnel who are deployed by the United
Nations in peace missions. These numbers reflect the
enormity of the challenges that we are confronted with.
The concept paper speaks of several short-term
and long-term measures that may be needed to improve
the condition of women in the context of what we are
discussing today. We agree that, in the shorter term,
there is a need to increase and institutionalize the
involvement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution. This requires not only normative advice
but capacity-building and institution-building at the
ground level. Therefore, to us the issue of women
and peace and security cannot be seen in isolation
from the wider societal context involving gender and
development issues.
Over the years, the international community
has been addressing the issues of gender equality,
empowerment and development, now in an increasingly
holistic manner. The Commission on the Status of
Women, which had a high-profile and successful
ministerial segment in its 60th anniversary year, just

16-0851933/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

a few days ago here in New York, and the work done
by the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women continue to make
significant progress in pushing the gender empowerment
agenda, which in itself has a transformative impact on
societies, leading to more sustainable development
and prosperity.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), which builds
upon the earlier Millennium Development Goals, also
highlights the importance of sustainable development
for ensuring peace and security. India has been an
active participant in the comprehensive deliberations on
women-related issues in various United Nations bodies.
India has also been among the major contributors to
UN-Women since its inception.
In the specific context of United Nations
peacekeeping, India has been the lead troop contributor,
with participation in 48 of the 69 peacekeeping
missions, out of which 22 are in Africa. While there has
been only a marginal increase overall in the number of
women peacekeepers, the first-ever female police unit
formed for the United Nations was provided by India
for deployment in Liberia. The unit has been widely
appreciated for its work and for setting a pioneering
example. India has also contributed female officers
as military observers and staff officers, in addition to
their deployment with medical units.
In another significant capacity-building initiative,
the New Delhi-based Centre for United Nations
Peacekeeping, in partnership with UN-Women, is now
conducting the third United Nations female military
officers course for 40 women military officers from
26 countries. India remains ready to contribute further
internationally both to the normative and the practical
aspects relating to women’s empowerment, including in
matters of peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the Angolan presidency of the
Council for this month for organizing today’s debate on
an important subject. We would also like to thank this
34/57

28/03/2016

morning’s briefers — the Executive Director of UNWomen, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union and
the Executive Director of the South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network — for their valuable insights,
but also for their efforts in working to advance the
agenda for women and peace and security.
We live in turbulent times in which conflicts
around the world are on the rise, leading to appalling
death tolls and the forcing of millions of people to
leave their homes. Often, those conflicts take place in
countries that have already experienced armed conflict,
or in regions that have been war-torn for decades,
thus illustrating the difficulty of permanently ending
conflicts and sustaining peace.
Through the agenda on women and peace and
security, we have the possibility of doing things
differently and of increasing the likelihood of achieving
sustainable peace. The recommendations of the global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace, along with resolution 2242
(2015), have given us the momentum we need to move
away from an ad-hoc, add-on approach and to start
including women on an equal footing with men at all
stages of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. That must be a top priority for all of us.
Any international actor working for peace and security
who wants to be relevant and effective in the twentyfirst century has to embrace the agenda for women and
peace and security in a coherent and effective manner.
Preventing conflicts is the most lifesaving
and cost-efficient way to foster peace and avoid
suffering. It therefore merits much more attention
than it currently receives, not least in Africa. The
role of women in all of those efforts and the need for
women’s equal representation and active involvement
in all governmental, non-governmental and community
forums cannot be overstated. I would like to highlight
three particularly important aspects relating to the issue.
First, we need to focus on representation. It is
essential that we enhance women’s influence and
meaningful participation at all levels and stages of
peace processes. Peacebuilding must be inclusive. Only
through women’s active participation in peace processes,
such as those in Mali, South Sudan and Somalia, can
we ensure that the needs and interests of society are
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

being truly reflected and addressed. The global study
highlights the indisputable evidence that shows the
positive links between women’s active participation in
peace processes and the likelihood of peace agreements
being signed, implemented and sustained.
Secondly, we need to focus on women mediators.
The resolution of conflicts requires skilled, impartial
and respected mediators who can encourage settlements
that reflect the needs of the entire population. While
women’s participation increases the likelihood of
success, peace mediators are all too often exclusively
men, and we must therefore increase the number
and proportion of women mediators. That is a strong
priority for the Nordic countries and has resulted,
among other things, in the establishment of networks
of women peace mediators at the national, regional and
international levels.
Thirdly, we need to show leadership. Promoting
women’s participation in conflict resolution and
prevention is about promoting change. In order to
do that, we must be brave and persistent and show
committed, proactive leadership. Enhancing gender
equality and women’s contribution to peace and
security will require us to address a wide array of
issues, including the shortage of resources and the
uneven distribution of those resources, which are
often at the core of inequality. In order to achieve real
change, political commitment must be accompanied by
sustainable financing. We must allocate resources and
have the right expertise. That issue is one of leadership,
and we must do more to integrate that aspect into all of
the strategic analysis, planning and operational work of
the United Nations.
In conclusion, conflict analysis must include gender
aspects that reflect and address the specific needs of
women and men, girls and boys. We cannot ignore the
various roles that women play, nor the insights that
women bring to the table. Sustainable development,
peace and security can never be achieved if half of the
population is excluded. In order to take our common
commitment seriously, we need to make sure that
women’s voices are being heard and that our decisions
are influenced by the needs and realities of women
who live in countries enduring conflict and emerging
from it.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

S/PV.7658

Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
Today’s open debate on the topic “Women and
peace and security: the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa” is a timely and
welcome one, not least because 2016 marks the African
Year of Human Rights with Special Focus on the Rights
of Women. The concept paper (S/2016/219, annex)
prepared in order to facilitate todays’s debate provides
an excellent foundation for reflection and action.
The degree to which women are excluded from
playing their full role in conflict prevention and
resolution across the globe is illuminated by several
sobering statistics. One is that, in the period between
1992 and 2011, women made up less than 4 per cent
of the signatories to peace agreements and 10 per cent
of the negotiators at peace tables. Nor can women’s
involvement be seen as a mere nicety. The findings of
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming
Justice, Securing the Peace, show that when women
are included in peace processes, the probability of a
lasting peace settlement increases significantly. We
wholeheartedly support the goals of resolution 1325
(2000) and the Council’s subsequent resolutions on
women and peace and security, including resolution
2242 (2015), which reinforce awareness about the
agenda for women and peace and security and call for
the dedication of greater resources by the international
community for that agenda’s implementation
and monitoring.
The EU welcomes the efforts under way in Africa
to strengthen the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflict, both in the political and policy
contexts and on the ground. We also welcome the
progress being made under the African Gender, Peace
and Security Programme, with financial support from
several EU member States. We commend the fact that
the African Union Commission has created the position
of Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
and we appreciate Ms. Diop’s advocacy work. We
look forward to the further development of initiatives

16-0851935/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

aimed at implementing the African Peace and Security
Architecture, in which gender mainstreaming is
identified as a goal.
At the United Nations level, it is also important
to support the development of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s gender strategy, including engagement on
the issues of gender equality and women’s participation,
and the country and civil-society consultations that are
being pursued in that regard.
We commend the African Union’s firm zerotolerance stance with regard to the accusations of
sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict situations,
including by forces deployed to protect populations.
We must intensify the international community’s
efforts to address sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict and to tackle its root causes, as well as the
impunity that so often follows such violence and the
provision of support to survivors. Increasing women’s
political participation and leadership, including in the
fields of justice and security, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, is a key facet of such efforts.
Countering violent extremism is a growing
preoccupation and priority that must be treated as
an integral part of conflict prevention and resolution
strategies. Extremism is the lifeblood of numerous
conflicts, and it disproportionately affects women and
girls. Women and girls can, however, also be part of
the problem when they serve as foreign fighters or
recruiters, but they are nevertheless an indispensable
part of the solution. With that in mind, the human rights
of women and girls must be respected and safeguarded.
The importance of ensuring women’s participation
and leadership in countering terrorism and violent
extremism was underscored in resolution 2242 (2015).
The Secretary-General’s subsequent Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism incorporates
significant elements in that regard. States, regional
and international organizations and the United Nations
system must all work towards that shared goal. For its
part, between now and 2020, the European Union will
allocate more than €100 million to gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls, including
in Africa. That is one element of the EU’s broader
efforts to intensify its engagement on countering
violent extremism.
In conclusion, the EU looks forward to working
with African partners and others in the international
community to realize the imperative of involving
36/57

28/03/2016

women as peacemakers and conflict preventers. That
is important not only for its own sake but also as a vital
element in maximizing the nexus between peace and
security, human rights and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Conflicts are profoundly
gendered experiences. Australia therefore commends
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to secure the full and effective
participation of women at all stages of the prevention,
resolution and management of conflicts and postconflict reconstruction in Africa.
We also commend the work of the United Nations
Office in West Africa on advancing gender equality.
We welcome its commitment to adopting a new regional
action plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and to establishing an annual dialogue with leaders in
West Africa.
Last year’s global study demonstrated the critical
importance of women and women’s groups in bringing
peace to their communities. Where women exercise real
influence in the negotiation process, the prospects for
reaching agreement increase; the chances of agreements
being implemented grows; and the likelihood of
agreements failing diminishes.
The high-level review on women and peace and
security also left no doubt: women’s meaningful
participation is vital to enhancing conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. We must
also take heed of the 2015 peacebuilding architecture
review and expand women’s political participation
and leadership beyond the peace table. This is a
responsibility shared by us all. We must actively seek
out opportunities for women and women’s groups
to participate meaningfully to prevent conflict and
sustain peace.
The participation of women in peace and security
requires a significant cultural change, including across
the United Nations system, to ensure that human
rights and the protection of civilians are considered
to be a system-wide responsibility. We must respond
to possible violations of human rights at the earliest
possible signs. Australia is highly supportive of the
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front Initiative
in this regard.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

Australia has been active in implementing the
commitments we made at last year’s high-level review.
Australia is pleased to be the first and largest donor
to UN-Women’s Global Acceleration Instrument for
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action
(GAI). This is an important tool in strengthening the
capacity of women’s organizations to participate in
peace processes and respond to crises and emergencies.
Australia is pleased that the GAI has already
been implemented in Burundi, a nation where women
have historically played important roles in mediation
and reconciliation processes. With the support of the
GAI, and Australian funding, the network of women
mediators is scaling up its activities to support women’s
participation in formal and informal peace negotiations.
Australia urges other Member States to support the GAI.
In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate and for the opportunity
it presents for all Member States to reaffirm their
commitment to ensuring the effective engagement of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would first of all like to thank
the Angolan presidency for having organized this
important debate on the crucial role that women can
play in African peace processes, and, of course, the
briefers for their contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in a national capacity.
There is clear evidence that no sustainable and
lasting peace is possible without women’s active
involvement in peace processes. This is why Italy
has always been at the forefront in supporting the
women and peace and security agenda, welcoming
and co-sponsoring resolution 1325 (2000) and, more
recently, resolution 2242 (2015).
I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the
following four points.
First, concerning the inclusion of women in
prevention so as to combat radicalization, I would stress
that in Africa more than elsewhere, there is a strong
need not only for peacekeeping, but also for positive
engagement in mediation and peacebuilding to support
national reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction

S/PV.7658

and combat the rise of violent extremism. Women can
greatly help in these processes because they can give an
invaluable contribution to preventing the radicalization
of youth and young women. As an example, women
in Africa are often the first, and sometimes the only,
teachers of future generations, on whom we can rely for
building peace and stability. They are the first medical
assistants of family members. They often act as silent
CEOs in family governance.
Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000) can
mutually reinforce each other; that is why Italy
decided to co-sponsor the Commission on the Status of
Women side event on the complementarities between
women and peace and security, and youth and peace
and security a few days ago. Young women and girls
in Africa often take on crucial, burdensome roles, and
their leadership should be supported and encouraged.
Italy was proud to be a European Union facilitator
and to have co-sponsored resolution 70/138 on the girl
child, presented by the Southern African Development
Community and adopted at this session of the
General Assembly.
Secondly, gender-based issues and perspectives
should be included at all negotiating tables, including
when discussing strategies covering non-proliferation
and disarmament, and conventional arms and small
arms and light weapons, and, more evidently, in
United Nations peace operation mandates, including
pre-deployment training, an area of established
Italian expertise.
Since 2005, through the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units, in Vicenza, we have been training
more than 8,000 police personnel units, many of which
are deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa. In
this regard, the Centre introduced new modules such as
gender protection in peace-support operations in order
to improve and update its training programmes.
To that end, we are currently revising our second
2014-2016 national action plan on women and peace and
security for a third edition, which encourages women’s
employment in the national armed forces and State
police, as well as their participation in peace operations
in conflict areas.
Thirdly, women’s involvement in peace processes
must be seen through the prism of the Sustainable
Development Goals. On a long-term basis,
economically empowered women can contribute much
more effectively to sustainable development and to

16-0851937/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

sustainable peace and security. Working on this twopronged objective in our partnership with African
Union countries, also in the framework of the Addis
Ababa Action Plan and Africa’s Agenda 2063, is thus
one of our priorities. We have to bolster women’s access
to quality education and health, and work to end all
forms of gender-based violence and discrimination,
including harmful practices such as female genital
mutilation and child, early and forced marriage.
Lastly, concerning our future, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1) and the Sustainable Development Goals are our
most valuable tools for action. It is for this reason,
we believe, that issues pertaining to both Africa
and women are constantly referenced in most of the
recommendations. Africa and women have something
in common: they represent our hope for a better future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me first express
my appreciation to Angola, as President of the Security
Council, for having organized this important open
debate on the role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. My delegation also
wishes to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women
for her presentation.
South Africa reaffirms its commitment to the
full and effective implementation of resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2242
(2015) as the building blocks for advancing the women
and peace and security agenda.
It is important to acknowledge that resolution
1325 (2000) reaffirms the important role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding. It also stresses the importance of their
equal participation and full involvement in all efforts
aimed at maintaining and promoting peace and security,
and the need to increase their role in decision-making
with regard to conflict prevention and resolution.
The adoption of the resolution was a milestone, as
it constitutes a landmark international framework
that addresses the key role women play in conflict
management, conflict resolution and sustainable peace.
South Africa firmly supports the call for women
to be involved in decision-making processes and
conflict resolution. As key decision makers in society,
we believe that women in Africa and elsewhere have
38/57

28/03/2016

an important role to play in addressing the root causes
of conflicts, as well as playing an important role as
mediators in conflict situations. A society that takes on
board the interests of women in an inclusive approach
to governance and development is a more stable society
as it ensures the well-being of the entire population.
Regrettably, women continue to remain excluded
from the various mediation and conflict resolution
initiatives at the highest level. The obstacles that impede
women’s full participation in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding include the active, systematic cultural
exclusion that continues to exist in many parts of the
world, including Africa. We would like to emphasize the
need to enhance the inclusion of women as high-level
envoys and mediators and to increase women’s roles in
peacebuilding. That would require a systemic shift from
women’s participation and role in only certain areas,
such as advisers on issues of sexual exploitation and
abuse, to one that would allow the mainstreaming of
women’s voices throughout all aspects of governance,
development and peace and security-related matters.
It is against that backdrop that South Africa
launched the Dialogue Forum on Conflict Resolution
and Peacemaking. The aim of the Forum is to train and
mentor women in conflict resolution and to produce
a new pool of mediators. The participants came from
different countries all across the African continent
who would work in the fields of mediation, peace and
security. Participants included ambassadors, officials
from Ministries for Foreign Affairs, officers of
regional organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community and the African Union, as
well as women working in civil society. As our Foreign
Minister, Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, has argued,
“women are always peacemakers, and the ones who
are always exposed to situations where strong men
want to take over power”.
We will continue to call for increasing the equal
participation, representation and full involvement of
women in preventive diplomacy efforts in Africa and
around the world.
South Africa recognizes the importance for women
to have unfettered access to justice in conflict and postconflict settings, including through gender-responsive
legal, judicial and security-sector reform processes and
other mechanisms. Women’s legal status and rights must
be ensured in post-conflict situations. Strengthening
the legal framework to address issues of discrimination
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

against women with respect to land ownership, access
to economic opportunity and employment, education
and health care is an essential component of genderresponsive peacebuilding.
South Africa believes that Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute the perpetrators of sexual violence against
women and children. We condemn all violations of
international law committed against civilians, women
and children in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations. We believe the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund could play an important
role in supporting women’s participation in peace
processes in Africa.
In conclusion, we will continue to work with the
rest of Africa and the world to ensure that we protect all
women from violence and discrimination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: My delegation wishes to thank
the Angolan presidency for convening this particularly
important open debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.
Women are drivers of development and the
flourishing of human talent in multiple fields. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) cannot be achieved without
the contribution of women. Sustainable Development
Goal 16 aims to promote peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development. In many countries in
Africa, in particular in the Great Lakes region, peaceful
and inclusive societies are still a distant dream. Women
can greatly contribute to their realization.
In that regard, the Holy See expresses its appreciation
for the initiatives promoted by the Security Council and
by Governments to raise awareness and arrive at a fuller
recognition of the vital role of women in preventive
diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping missions and
peacebuilding processes. That recognition, however,
must be fully translated into action in order to unleash
skills and capacities that allow women to bring order
out of chaos, community out of division and peace out
of conflict. Their special gift in educating people to
be more receptive and sensitive to the needs of others
around them and beyond is crucial in conflict resolution
and in fostering post-conflict reconciliation.

S/PV.7658

My delegation wishes to pay special homage to the
women who have had profound and lasting effects on
the lives of millions of people and on the development
of nations through their selfless and long-term work
in education, health care and the formation of values
among the young. Those women, even in the most
difficult circumstances, distinguish themselves for
their bravery, constancy and dedication. Women and
girls who have become victims of rape and other
forms of violence during conflicts find security and
understanding in the institutions run by those women,
more often than not by religious women.
Their spirit of sacrifice for the good of others
brings death to some of them. My delegation feels
duty-bound at this moment to remember with gratitude
and sorrow the four sisters from the Missionaries of
Charity — Sister Anselm from India, Sister Marguerite
and Sister Reginette from Rwanda and Sister Judith
from Kenya — who were massacred by cowardly
fundamentalists on 4 March in Aden, Yemen. They
devoted their lives to the poor and elderly women, a
dozen of whom were also killed with them. The same
terrorists kidnapped an Indian priest from the same
institution, and they have claimed to have crucified
him on Good Friday. Pope Francis has prayed that this
pointless slaughter will awaken consciences, lead to
a change of heart and inspire all parties to lay down
their arms and take up the path of dialogue. No greater
sacrifice can be made for peace and reconciliation than
to lay down one’s life for it.
The Holy See has been very attentive to the inspiring
work of women in Africa in all fields. Education has
been key to that empowerment. If women are to become
prime drivers of sustainable development and peaceful
societies, ensuring that all girls and women have access
to education is indispensable. Improving access to
education for women will not only redound to the fuller
realization of their potential and greater professional
opportunities, it is also key to better educated future
generations that are capable of ushering in and
maintaining just and peaceful societies. I am proud to
say that the Catholic Church, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa, is the leading provider of quality education for
all, ensuring to the best of its abilities that no woman
or girl would be left unschooled and preparing them
to become dignified agents of their own personal
flourishing and active protagonists in building strong
families and peaceful communities.

16-0851939/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Sadly, for far too many women, there is still a steep
uphill battle and struggle to emancipate themselves from
situations of marginalization, violence, abandonment
and exclusion. The world today continues to be
confronted with various old and new forms of violence
directed against women and girls, in particular the use
of rape as a weapon of war during conflicts, abuses in
refugee camps, the trafficking of women and girls for
sexual exploitation, forced abortion, forced conversion
and forced marriage. Instead of being eradicated, some
of those acts of violence have emerged in even crueller
forms, constituting some of the most horrendous
violations of human rights.
The obligation to put an end to those barbaric acts
against women and girls is incumbent upon every one
of us, upon every Government and, in a particular way,
upon the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to join others
in expressing appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate on the role of
women in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
We commend Angola on that count. I also wish to thank
all the briefers for their briefings.
We fully subscribe to the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union. What
follows are some comments on a few points in our
national capacity.
There is no doubt that women are uniquely
positioned to nurture a culture of peace, and there is also
no doubt that enhancing their effective participation
will have a meaningful impact, whether it be in
preventing and resolving conflicts or in contributing
to peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding endeavours. What was said this morning
by the Executive Director of the South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network is instructive in that regard.
In that context, the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, 15 years ago was indeed significant, but the
question to ask is how much progress has been made
in implementing it. Obviously, it has been far from
satisfactory. We commend the Secretary-General for
initiating a study to review the implementation of that
seminal resolution, and hopefully the recommendations
from the review will help create far more opportunities
40/57

28/03/2016

for women’s effective participation in issues of peace
and security.
As far as Africa is concerned, women and girls
are indeed the most vulnerable groups in society, and
they are the ones who bear the brunt of violence in the
various conflict situations afflicting our continent.
That is why the women and peace and security agenda
is so critical for us. The African Union’s Gender, Peace
and Security Programme seeks to increase women’s
participation in the promotion of peace and security,
as well as enhance the protection of women in conflict
situations in Africa; it is indeed a step in the right
direction. Furthermore, the adoption of regional action
plans by the various regional economic communities
aimed at implementing resolution 1325 (2000) is also a
positive development.
Although the efforts at the regional, continental and
international levels provide a useful framework for the
women and peace and security agenda, what matters the
most in making a real difference in improving the plight
of women and enhancing their effective participation
is implementation at the national level. In that regard,
Ethiopia subscribes to all of the relevant regional and
international treaties and conventions on the rights of
women and is committed to the women and peace and
security agenda. Accordingly, it has been striving to
promote women’s participation in all spheres and at all
levels of Government, and a lot of progress has been
made over the past two decades.
In the area of peace and security in particular, it
is indeed a source of great satisfaction for us to note
that Ethiopia is the largest contributor of female
peacekeepers, with 558 of them deployed in various
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We are working
to further enhance our contribution of women to
peacekeeping efforts in terms of military and police
personnel in the coming years.
The growing number of allegations with regard
to sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United
Nations peacekeepers is indeed a matter of serious
concern. As one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Ethiopia takes the matter very seriously and subscribes
to the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy. Our
peacekeepers are given the necessary predeployment
training and, whenever we have encountered allegations
of misconduct, we have committed ourselves to
carrying out the necessary investigations and taking
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

the appropriate action. Nevertheless, we believe that,
in order to make real progress in this critical area,
there can be no selectivity. What will help us achieve
the desired objective is a comprehensive and holistic
approach that encompasses all the civilian, military and
police components, engaging all relevant stakeholders
in a constructive manner and addressing the root causes.
Finally, let me conclude by reiterating my country’s
firm commitment to improving the situation of women,
who constitute half of our societies and whose effective
participation is extremely critical to achieving the noble
objectives that we have set for ourselves in the peace
and security, governance and development spheres.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): As we are approaching the end
of the month, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and commend you, Sir, for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month.
All around the world, the lives and well-being of
millions of women and girls are threatened by conflict
and strife. They are often the first victims of war and
the last to share in the fruits of peace. Yet when it comes
to making the decisions that impact them most directly,
the voices of women are too often silenced.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) we
have witnessed greater determination to engage women
in conflict resolution. But in too many places around
the world, women are still denied a place in the halls
of power. They are kept out of critical discussions on
war and peace and excluded from decision-making
and negotiations.
Women are proven catalysts of change, and the time
has come to ensure that women everywhere have an
opportunity to become active agents of peace instead
of passive victims of war. Today, as we witness the
rise of new forms of conflicts and terrorism, women’s
participation is crucial to bringing about a safer, more
sustainable and more secure future.
Nowhere is the active role of women in waging
peace more critical than in Africa. For decades,
countries across the continent have been plagued by
civil war, ethnic conflict and sectarian strife. At the
same time, violent extremist terrorist groups, such as
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, are destabilizing States
across Africa. They are conducting vicious campaigns

S/PV.7658

of terror against innocents, including widespread
torture and the burning down of entire villages.
Women and girls face the nightmare of being
abducted, torn from their families and sold as sex
slaves — a truly horrific and cruel fate. From Libya
to Nigeria to Kenya, the ongoing violence has brought
devastation to millions. Women across Africa know the
cruel impact that war and terror have on their families
and their communities. After terror strikes, after the
militias have passed through, they are the ones fending
for themselves and struggling to feed their children.
They know the cost of conflict, and many are refusing
to stand by in silence while the violence rages on.
Today, women have started to take their fate into
their own hands and to take an active role in shaping
the future of their own societies. It is up to all of us to
ensure that women have an opportunity to play leading
roles in peace negotiation and conflict resolution. That
is the path to a sustainable peace for everyone.
In Africa, that process has already begun. From the
adoption of the Maputo Protocol, in 2003, to the African
Union’s Gender, Peace and Security Programme for
2015-2020, important steps have been taken. Such
mechanisms, structures and policies enable women to
take their rightful place at the decision-making table.
Ms. Delgado took the Chair.
Across Africa, women are taking the initiative to
develop innovative platforms for peaceful elections.
They have established strong networks of civil-society
groups to promote women’s strategic participation and
leadership in peace and security governance in Africa.
However, despite those important initiatives, the number
of women that participate in field-based political
missions or in peace talks in Africa is still limited. We
must remove all gender-based barriers so that women
in Africa can develop the skills and expertise needed to
take on leadership roles in their societies.
Women in Africa are shifting the balance of power,
and the State of Israel stands ready to assist them. We
know at first hand the destructive consequences of
terror and conflict, but we also know the constructive
role that women play in leading the way to peace. As
an ally and partner of many African countries, Israel
is committed to helping women in Africa to take an
active role in deciding the fateful questions of war
and peace. The partnership between Israel and Africa
is not new. For over 40 years, Israel’s Agency for

16-0851941/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

International Development Cooperation (MASHAV)
has been conducting programmes throughout Africa
to reduce gender disparities and to train women
to participate in decision-making processes. In
cooperation with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, every year
MASHAV organizes a workshop for African women
on the political empowerment of women. The goal is
to discuss the role of, and opportunities for, women
in peacebuilding, mediation and conflict resolution.
MASHAV encourages and supports women in their
efforts to acquire the skills and knowledge necessary to
become political leaders.
Let me recount the story of one of those women,
Ms. Dudziro Nhengu. Dudziro always wanted to
participate in political life in her home country,
Zimbabwe, but opportunities were limited owing to the
economic situation and the ongoing political violence.
She therefore decided to participate in MASHAV’s
training programmes, one in Kenya and another
one in Israel. Dudziro quickly put the business and
entrepreneurial skills that she had honed at MASHAV
into practice in Zimbabwe to design a programme
to empower women to initiate their own businesses
and transform former military bases into training
centres. Today, Dudziro is a blogger, an activist and a
Programme Associate of UN-Women. It is programmes
and partnerships like MASHAV that contribute to our
shared goal — ensuring that women everywhere can
achieve their full potential.
A famous Jewish proverb asks, “If I am not for
myself, who will be for me?” In Africa, women have
answered that question loudly and clearly. They are
proudly standing up for themselves and for everyone
else. The proverb concludes by asking, “If not now,
when?”. For the sake of peace and security in Africa
and around the world, the answer must be today; the
time for women to lead is now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Krzywosądzki (Poland): I would like to thank
the Angolan presidency for convening today’s debate
on this important topic relating to the maintenance of
peace and security in Africa.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would,
however, like to add a couple of remarks from our
national perspective.
42/57

28/03/2016

As underlined in the excellent concept paper
(S/2016/219, annex) prepared by the delegation of
Angola for this debate, the role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts in Africa simply
cannot be overestimated. As shown by various studies,
the participation of women in conflict prevention, as
well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts,
has a positive impact on the potential success of those
efforts. There is no doubt that the role of women in the
African continent is growing. They play a key role in
many economic and social activities. The increasing
number of women’s associations — the positive
example of Ethiopia can be cited — should also be
seen as an important sign of the growing position of
African women.
There are also positive developments in the political
area. Rwanda now leads the Inter-Parliamentary
Union’s Women in Parliaments ranking, with more
than 63 per cent of the members in the lower house of
the Parliament being women. Poland also welcomes
the increasing role of African women leaders, such as
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia and President
Ameenah Gurib-Fakim of Mauritius. It is no wonder
that the African Union has declared the current decade
as the African Women’s Decade.
While recognizing the progress in the situation of
African women, we have to bear in mind the challenges
ahead of us. As stated in resolution 2242 (2015), adopted
in October 2015, the relatively low number of women
in senior positions in political, peace and securityrelated institutions can have a detrimental impact on
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We need more women engaged in all United Nationsled activities, especially in peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding. We also need a predictable and
sustained funding mechanism for the women and peace
and security agenda. That is why Poland has decided to
earmark a minimum of 15 per cent of all of our future
funding for the Peacebuilding Fund to be dedicated
to women’s specific needs, in particular to advancing
gender equality in post-conflict situations.
Let us not forget, however, the fate of women as
victims of conflicts. That is why Poland recognizes the
importance of and plans to sign the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians. We also call for the
strict implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
for acts of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
by United Nations peacekeeping personnel. In that
regard, it is also important to achieve a high level of
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

coherence among all of the ongoing reviews of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Let me end by stressing that tapping into
the immense potential of women is essential for
sustaining peace. We hope that the entire international
community, including the United Nations, will support
and complement those efforts with the aim of achieving
success in ensuring peace and prosperity in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representaive of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I am honoured to speak on
behalf of Canada in this debate on the role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflict in Africa. We
see this debate as an important and logical initiative
aimed at giving meaning in the African context to the
international women and peace and security agenda in
the immediate aftermath of the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
(spoke in French)
In October, the United Nations marked that
anniversary with a high-level review on the
implementation of the resolution and the launch of the
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which provides us with a complete view of what
has been accomplished on the women and peace and
security agenda and outlines what work remains to
be done.
Canada believes that the case for the role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict has been
well made. Gender equality, the empowerment of
women and girls as agents of peace and development,
full respect for their human rights and protection from,
and responding to, sexual violence are now accepted
as prerequisites for sustainable peace and prosperity.
The work remaining is to apply those principles on the
ground, including with respect to conflicts in Africa,
which is our topic today.
(spoke in English)
Canada commends the work of the African Union in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda by
creating policies and mechanisms such as the African
Union Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and

S/PV.7658

the Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
Policy Framework. The African Union’s appointment
of the Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
in 2014 is another positive step towards increased and
equal participation by women in peace operations.
Canada also applauds the African Union’s continuing
commitment to women’s issues with a thematic focus
on “Women’s empowerment and development” in 2015
and “Human rights with special focus on the rights of
women” in 2016.
While it is important to include women and women’s
groups in high-level processes to prevent and resolve
major conflicts, it is equally important to empower
women at the local level. As just one example, I cite the
remarkable Jos Declaration of 2014 by the women of
the city of Jos in Plateau state, Nigeria. As part of the
broader Jos inter-communal dialogue process, inspired
women from across communities that had been in
conflict for some 20 years came together to address
the causes of conflict, commit to continuing action to
resolve the differences and make firm recommendations
to the Government and local councils of elders on the
way ahead. Canada is humbled by the courage of those
women and honoured to have been able to support
their journey.
Canada also supports projects in Africa to address
the specific needs of women and girls in conflict and
emergencies. We are mounting a strong response to
sexual violence in conflicts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the African Great Lakes region. Our
programming includes providing access to justice
for survivors and holding perpetrators to account,
including through the deployment of experts from
Justice Rapid Response.
(spoke in French)
Canada’s national action plan on women and peace
and security focuses and guides Canadian interventions
in conflict and post-conflict situations to ensure that
women and men are treated equally and with dignity and
that women are always afforded full participation. On
International Women’s Day this year, the Government
announced that our action plan will be renewed, which
is a sure sign of Canada’s continued commitment to
advancing the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution, including in Africa. Canada looks forward
to continuing to work with all those who are dedicated
to ending conflict in Africa and to including women in
those efforts.

16-0851943/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
First of all, I would like to praise Angola for having
taken the initiative of organizing this debate on the
role of women in conflict prevention and resolution
in Africa and for having prepared the concept paper
(S/2016/219, annex). I also thank the briefers.
Women’s call for peace has been unfailing and
widespread. They play an important role in conflict
prevention and resolution. Their participation is
generally crucial to the effectiveness of all peace and
security efforts when they are meaningfully involved.
As the concept paper suggests, in cases where women’s
groups are able to exercise a strong influence on
the negotiation process, the chances of reaching an
agreement are higher and sustainability increases
by at least 20 per cent and continues to grow over
time. Women have proven to be pertinent partners in
discussions on the prevention and resolution of conflict,
the maintenance of peace and security, and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Women’s participation in conflict
prevention in Africa has facilitated a more inclusive
appreciation of the causes of and alternative solutions
to conflict. Women’s inputs into conflict prevention
continue to bolster actions that address varying needs,
thereby creating broader buy-ins to peace accords and
ultimately producing sustainable peace.
In Africa, several mechanisms, policies and
structures have created an environment enabling
women to play a key role in peace and security. The
2003 Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and
the 2004 Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in
Africa committed African Union member States to the
full and effective participation and representation of
women in peace processes, including the prevention,
resolution and management of conflicts and postconflict reconstruction in Africa, as stipulated in
resolution 1325 (2000).
Women across Africa are also playing unparalleled
roles in early warning and the prevention of violence,
including election-related violence, and they have
developed innovative platforms for peaceful elections
in several countries preparing sensitive elections. At the
same time, there are various obstacles and challenges
44/57

28/03/2016

that prevent the full integration of those endeavours
into more formal approaches and policies. A limited
degree of gender analysis of conflict and peace factors,
the sparse inclusion of gender issues in early warning
initiatives and the recurrent challenge of providing
a timely response to indicators of conflict often lead
to ignoring information both from and about women
that can help devise comprehensive and sustainable
response strategies.
We welcome General Assembly resolution 66/255,
on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
in support of national capacities for post-conflict
peacebuilding and efforts to broaden and deepen
the pool of experts, giving particular attention to
mobilizing the capacities of developing countries, in
particular among women, as vital to successful United
Nations peacebuilding activities. In that regard, we
underline that the Secretariat’s effective outreach for
those purposes should be undertaken in accordance
with the existing rules and regulations and in close
consultation with Member States. NAM hopes that
this open debate will contribute to ongoing efforts to
integrate the women, peace and security agenda into
conflict prevention, with a focus on Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union, and in my national
capacity I would like to make the following observations.
My delegation would first like to thank the Angolan
presidency for having organized this debate and for the
opportunity for us to participate. My delegation also
thanks all the participants for their statements.
The participation of women in conflict resolution
is a priority for Belgium at both the national and
international levels, illustrated by the fact that one of
the six pillars of our own national action plan on women
and peace and security is dedicated to it. Women must
be able to decide their own fate and contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding.
Numerous studies show that women’s participation
increases the effectiveness of humanitarian aid, the
credibility and quality of peacekeeping operations, the
rate of economic recovery in post-conflict situations
and the durability of peace agreements.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

Belgium wishes to commend all the initiatives
taken in Africa to increase the participation of women
in the prevention of violence and early warning
systems. However, it is disappointing to note that
the participation of women in conflict prevention,
peace processes and post-conflict political transition
remains a great challenge. In our view, mixed-gender
representation remains the best way of ensuring a
balanced decision-making process that takes into
account the whole population and all other important
factors.
To contribute to that goal on the African continent,
Belgium contributes €2 million to the implementation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the UNWomen project there that supports the rights and
participation of Congolese women in the framework
of resolution 1325 (2000). That project invests in
supporting economic empowerment and training
within the area of women’s leadership. In Mali,
Belgium co-chairs with UN-Women the group of
donors on the issue of gender. Belgium welcomes the
increased number of women in the Malian Government
following the latest ministerial reshuffling and sees it
as a positive development in the acceptance of women’s
key role. Nevertheless, my country regrets that women
continue to be underrepresented at the decision-making
level from the outset of mediation processes, and poorly
represented in the implementation phase. Belgium hopes
that its 2015-2017 national action plan on women, peace
and security will help to address those shortcomings.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that Belgium
will continue to pursue the implementation of its own
plan of action and to give priority, both on the policy and
operational fronts, to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Belgium calls on all countries to take
into account the resolution’s provisions on protection,
participation and prevention. In the same vein, Belgium
encourages all African countries to ratify the Maputo
Protocol, also known as the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa. Women are a force for peace. It
is essential that they be able to play their role fully as
political actors in the service of peace, security and
post-conflict reconstruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Angolan presidency for

S/PV.7658

organizing this open debate on the role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. I also
thank all speakers for their contributions to this debate.
The international community unanimously recognizes
the positive contribution that can be made by women to
conflict prevention and resolution. History has shown
that peace and stability are more sustainable when
women are involved in the implementation of conflict
prevention and resolution measures. The reason for that
is simple — women are a fundamental part of society
and, as such, their involvement in these processes makes
it possible to fully and effectively take their needs and
concerns into consideration.
In its general recommendation No. 30 published
in October 2013, the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women noted
“the low participation of women in institutions
working on preventative diplomacy ... It is only by
including female stakeholders and using a gendered
analysis of conflict that States parties can design
appropriate responses.”
Moreover, the Committee recognized that women play a
leadership role during periods of conflict, and affirmed
that the inclusion of a critical mass of women in
international negotiations and peacekeeping activities
can make a difference.
On the normative front, the important role that
women play in conflict prevention and resolution and
their participation on an equal footing in all efforts to
maintain and promote peace and security have been
reaffirmed in a number of United Nations documents,
in particular Security Council resolutions, including
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution
enshrines the relevant provisions of international
instruments related to the rights of women.
With the support of its women, the African continent
has overcome many conflicts. Indeed, African women
have demonstrated a great capacity to contribute to
efforts for lasting peace and reconciliation. In several
of the conflicts that continue to beset our continent,
African women have made effective contributions,
including through non-confrontational means, to
resolve conflicts and focus more on collective wellbeing. African women have distinguished themselves
as talented negotiators in many situations, particularly
due to their non-involvement in fighting. Themselves
often targets or even victims of violence, in particular

16-0851945/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

of a sexual nature, African women have found
practical measures to prevent conflict and joined in
efforts intended to rebuild and achieve lasting peace.
African women have also played an important role
in inter-ethnic integration and the dissemination of a
culture of peace at all levels, from early childhood to
adulthood. That has helped in many instances to create
social cohesion and dispel sociocultural dissension,
and enabled different ethnic groups to live together
harmoniously in the same space or side by side.
Today’s world requires us to strengthen the
involvement of women in conflict prevention and
resolution processes. Women must participate at all
stages of negotiations on conflict prevention, peace,
transitional justice and reconstruction. We cannot simply
consider them as victims of conflicts or as observers of
the decision-making process. Strong political will and
firm commitment from the international community
are needed to promote women’s empowerment and to
ensure their full and systematic participation in all
aspects of social life and the various peace processes.
Finally, it is imperative to support the work
of civil society, including organizations of women
human rights activists, and to promote international
justice mechanisms. They are the eyes and ears of the
international community in the promotion of peace and
women’s rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavý (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Madam, for organizing this debate. I would also like to
thank the briefers for their comprehensive presentations.
Over the past few decades, gender equality and
women’s empowerment have become a positive and
forward-looking vision of Africa’s development. At the
continental level, African leaders have adopted strong
instruments, such as the Maputo Protocol, the Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa and the
African Women’s Decade. In January, the African Union
declared 2016 to be the African Year of Human Rights,
with particular focus on the rights of women. According
to United Nations statistics, African countries now
constitute a third of the countries with national action
plans designed to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
which brings an important African perspective to the
women and peace and security agenda.
46/57

28/03/2016

Despite the substantial efforts undertaken to
implement the women and peace and security agenda
and the progress that has been made in last 15 years,
numerous challenges remain. Women worldwide
continue to suffer disproportionately from conflict,
sexual and gender-based violence and violent
extremism, which threaten to overturn the fragile gains
that have been made in the past. Going forward, we all
must accelerate the implementation of the commitments
our Governments made to women 20 years ago in order
to achieve gender equality in the post-2015 period. The
United Nations must provide continued support and
assistance to women in their role as agents of peace
and, at the same time, more effectively prevent women
from becoming victims and protect them in situations
of conflict.
Slovakia strongly supports the equal and full
participation of women in international peace and
security and calls for the full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions. Women’s
strategic participation and leadership in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding, and more
generally in all aspects of society, enhance the chances
for sustainable peace. Without the equal and active
participation of women, we will not be able to address or
achieve the ambitious Sustainable Development Goals.
It is broadly agreed that security sector reform is
essential to post-conflict peacebuilding and the creation
of the conditions necessary for reconstruction and
development. Security and justice sector institutions
must be representative of and responsive to the needs
of both women and men. A United Nations approach
to security sector reform must be gender-sensitive
throughout its planning, design, implementation,
monitoring and evaluation phases. Resolution 2151
(2014) on security sector reform underscores the
importance of women’s equal and effective participation
and full involvement in all stages of the security sector
reform process. Gender-sensitive security sector reform
is key to developing security sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups. Security sector
reform must also include the reform of recruitment
processes and the improvement of the delivery of
security services to address and prevent sexual and
gender-based violence.
In conclusion, I should also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate our strong support for the
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

United Nations zero-tolerance policy against sexual
exploitation or abuse by United Nations peacekeeping
personnel. Also, I would like to recognize here the
important work of women’s human rights defenders
working in conflict-affected situations and the need for
their protection.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to thank Angola for convening this open
debate on the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.
Nowadays there are many African women who
are empowered, going to school, joining the workforce
and sustaining their families. It is very encouraging
to see that more women are being nominated and
appointed to leadership positions, such as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders. In various positions and among civilian
staff of the United Nations, the number of women has
increased substantially. If, in the near future, we are
also able to increase the number of women among the
ranks of the military and the police, we will make
more measurable steps towards sustainable conflict
prevention and resolution.
But we also see a backlash and fear that, as the global
study emphasized, women’s empowerment threatens
the social fabric. We see that in many conflict areas
across Africa women still are not involved in formal
conflict prevention and resolution. Women in those
areas daily face risks and violence, sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Violent extremism is on the increase. The
disturbing trend in the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terror and the mass-scale violence against women
are examples of the specific targeting of women by
extremist groups. As a consequence, women and
girls often face stigmatization from their families and
community members. We need to stop those disturbing
developments now. We can do so by increasing
women’s roles in conflict prevention and resolution and
by emphasizing that women are also leaders and agents
of change.
By integrating gender perspectives in conflict
prevention and resolution, we can build just, sustainable
and peaceful societies everywhere — societies where
women are safe and go to school, where women are

S/PV.7658

actively involved in the future of democratic societies
and where women actively participate in politics. Last
but not least, in such societies women have equal
economic opportunities to take care of their families
and communities.
We have seen the results of the efforts of powerful
African women, such as Nobel Price Winner Leymah
Gbowee, who demanded peace in Liberia during the
peace process in 2003 by starting a women’s peace
movement. There are many more agents of change
like her.
The topic of women and peace and security is
one of the priorities of the foreign and development
policy of the Netherlands. It is time to put words into
action. We believe that we can improve women’s roles
in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa through
three important pathways to change.
First we need to exchange knowledge and
good practices on conflict prevention and women’s
participation from the local to the international level.
We need to prevent conflicts by bringing together
diplomatic, development and economic actors
and perspectives. The Netherlands supports the
implementation of the national action plan of Mali and
has appointed gender experts to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We can also achieve change and peace by supporting
and working with civil society. Our new third national
action plan is an example of that. Together with our civil
society partners, we are contributing to an enabling
environment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan so that women can meaningfully
participate in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacebuilding, protection and relief and recovery. If
we want to improve women’s roles in prevention and
conflict resolution, we have to extensively engage
local communities.
While acknowledging that States are primarily
responsible for the prevention of conflicts, we also see
the shared responsibility of the international community
and civil society to build a more secure world. To give
an example, within the framework of our national
action plan, women’s organizations in the Sudan, at the
grass-roots level, have convinced conflicting groups
and tribes to put down the weapons and start a dialogue.

16-0851947/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

The third pathway to change is to increase the
protection of women. We cannot solely focus on
women’s participation without ensuring them protection
and safety. The prevention of, and protection from,
sexual violence is an issue that continues to need our
full attention.
In October 2015, we Member States attended the
open debate (see S/PV.7533) on women and peace and
security. We shared our dreams and hopes for women
in conflict environments. But we need to rise up and
translate those hopes to practical improvements. We
need to move beyond the rhetoric. We can do that
together by protecting women, working with civil
society and exchanging knowledge and good practices.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
continues to play its role as a partner for peace, justice
and development. The Netherlands continues to
strongly support the implementation of resolutions 2171
(2014), 1325 (2000), 2242 (2015) and the other followup resolutions on women and peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, and your delegation for organizing this
important debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution Africa and for the
comprehensive concept paper (S/2015/219, annex)
you circulated among Member States. The fact
that this is the second open debate on Africa during
Angola’s presidency of the Security Council shows
your country’s commitment to conflict prevention
and sustainable peace on our continent. I also thank
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo Ngcuka; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun; the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Macharia Kamu; as well as Ms. Paleki Ayang, for their
respective briefings earlier today.
As the 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) highlighted, and in line with
the recommendations of the just-concluded reviews
of peace operations, effective conflict prevention
requires a holistic approach that encompasses shortterm operational measures and longer-term structural
approaches. Such a holistic approach recognizes
the fact that women’s participation in the design
and implementation of conflict and post-conflict
resolution and peacebuilding activities is critical to
48/57

28/03/2016

the sustainability of peace and development in the
aftermath of a conflict.
Prior to the global study, during the past few years
there has been growing recognition by Governments,
international organizations and civil society
organizations of the importance of gender equality and
the empowerment of women in the continuing struggle
for equality, democracy and human rights, as well as
for poverty eradication and development — all of which
are structural measures that address the root causes
of conflict.
Today, in nearly every country and region of the
world, there has been progress on achieving gender
equality and women’s empowerment, although that
progress has been uneven and the gains remain fragile
in Africa, including a growing number of cases of
violence against women and girls in armed conflict in
several African countries. However, as much as women
remain the subject of violence in armed conflict, in
the past decade many post-conflict societies in Africa
have embarked upon the difficult transition from armed
conflict towards resolution and peace building, and have
recognized that building lasting peace that sustains
post-war economic, political, and social development
requires the full participation of all citizens, including
women and girls.
Speaking from experience, today there are many
avenues through which women’s inclusion in postconflict peacebuilding can bolster peacebuilding
initiatives, and thus contribute to a positive peace
outcome. For example, individual women, as well as
women’s organizations, adopt a variety of strategies for
reducing fear and uncertainty following conflict and
for fostering an environment of trust and collaboration.
Furthermore, women who adopt positions of political
leadership could provide a direct alternative to
traditional political actors, adding to the post-conflict
impetus of change and addressing the injustices of the
past. They often use their gender identity and common
social experiences to bridge divides, providing an
example for other politicians to work across party
lines, a condition that is often lacking in most postconflict situations.
As the Council is aware, come April we will be
commemorating the twenty-second anniversary of the
1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, which left
women as the majority of our population in the direct
aftermath of the genocide. Despite their victimization
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

and in a spirit of endurance, the women of Rwanda
immediately got up and started rebuilding their country
by assuming non-traditional social and economic roles
as heads of household, community leaders and financial
providers, meeting the needs of their communities
and families.
Following this, there was a concerted effort in the
Government and among women’s groups to address the
needs of Rwandan women and to engage them in the
all-important processes of national reconstruction and
reconciliation. Today, the Rwandan story in many ways
represents a process of collective social learning that
goes beyond our borders.
Besides going beyond the threshold of 30 per cent
of women in Government decision-making bodies, as
provided by the Constitution, and the overwhelming
majority of women in our Parliament, Rwanda’s
security organs, in collaboration with other Government
agencies, local communities and civil society, have
launched initiatives to protect and respond to violence
that targets women and girls; an example is the
operational one-stop centres that offer a wide range
of free services for gender-based-violence victims run
by the national police. We have also set up nationwide
gender desks in the police and army and in the national
prosecution agency to offer gender-sensitive services
to victims.
Currently, Rwanda is the leading African troopand police-contributing country providing female
police and correctional officers to United Nations peace
support and peacekeeping operations; we have 220
female officers serving in various missions, particularly
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Those officers actively contribute to combating and
raising awareness about violence against women in the
communities they serve. We are stepping up efforts to
increase this number.
They also serve as advisers on gender-based
violence and share best practices between other officers
and local authorities. For these reasons, we support the
full implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1960
(2010), which insist that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify steps
to address sexual violence. This should include the clear

S/PV.7658

identification of women protection advisers alongside
gender advisers and human rights protection units.
Despite improved practices in the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) 16 years after its adoption,
multilevel challenges persist and continue to hinder
women’s participation and their protection and
enjoyment of security in their homes and countries,
including a deficit of opportunities for women to exercise
leadership and the continued underrepresentation of
women in conflict-prevention, conflict-resolution,
protection and peacebuilding processes.
Both the international community and Member
States need to deploy greater efforts in order to maintain
previous gains, with a view to reducing the inequalities
observed at various levels in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Finally, we urge all post-conflict Member
States to do more in meeting these challenges. We
also look forward to the full implementation of the
recommendations of the independent review of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I wish first to thank
Angola for having organized this very timely open
debate and for giving Member States the opportunity to
express their views on such a pressing issue.
From the outset, Portugal has been a staunch
supporter of the women and peace and security agenda,
as we believe it is crucial to address the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and to
enhance their participation in peace processes.
Over the past 15 years, the Security Council, through
the adoption of several resolutions, has recognized the
important role of women and girls in the maintenance
of international peace and security. However, while
recognizing the significant progress achieved and the
establishment of a strong normative framework, we all
know that enormous challenges remain, also due to the
changing nature of conflicts.
Women and children are disproportionately
affected by conflicts all around the world, including
in Africa. Besides being the victims of conflicts and
of gender-based violence, African women and girls are
also actors performing different roles and contributing
to the shaping of existing gender relations. Women in

16-0851949/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

Africa account for over 50 per cent of the continent’s
population and workforce. It is simply unthinkable that
peace could ever be achieved and sustained without
their involvement and consistent engagement. Their
participation at all stages of conflict prevention and
resolution is key to ensure that their views are heard,
their rights protected and their needs addressed.
Beyond their numerical weight, girls and women in
Africa have their own perceptions, interests, priorities
and sensitivities, partially related to specific gender
roles and relations in the communities and societies.
Their voices must be heard, and their potential must
be fully developed and fully used, as their experiences
and resources are admittedly an essential contribution
to conflict prevention, resolution and reconciliation.
The women and peace and security agenda in
Africa is of particular concern during conflict and at
post-conflict stages, as several obstacles remain to the
effective integration of women in conflict prevention
in Africa. Among other constraints, there is a lack of
funding for that purpose, and women’s initiatives are
very often relegated to the informal spheres.
Women in different capacities, such as care
providers in families and communities, as community
leaders, as religious and traditional leaders and as
political representatives and citizens, can perform highly
critical roles in conflict prevention in the security and
political areas, and at the same time, as development
agents. We all know that all these things are related:
conflict prevention, peace, security and development.
The approval by States of national action plans
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security is, in this context, a
very important tool to effectively promote the role of
women and girls in conflict prevention and resolution.
Portugal adopted in 2009 its first national action plan
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and a
second edition of that action plan was adopted in 2014
for the period 2014-2018.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), of which six African countries are members,
also adopted a strategic plan to promote gender equality
and women’s empowerment. The plan includes specific
actions to be carried out in the field of conflict prevention
and the promotion of a culture of peace by its member
States, by the Executive Secretariat, the CPLP Female
MPs Network and civil-society organizations. Planned
activities to be carried out in partnership with other
50/57

28/03/2016

international organizations include the preparation and
implementation of national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000); training and capacitybuilding of resolution focal points; and technical and
military cooperation among CPLP member States to
implement the resolution. By mainstreaming gender
equality in diplomatic, military, security, justice and
development sectors, the implementation of those plans
seriously contributes to counting women as active
and constructive stakeholders and key players within
that framework.
Finally, I would like to welcome the fact that such
organizations as the African Union and NATO have
nominated special envoys on women and peace and
security, and that an increasing number of countries
have developed national action plans to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions later
adopted by the Council.
Further efforts are necessary to maintain and build
upon what has been achieved so far and to ensure
greater progress and new commitments to the agenda by
Member States, regional organizations and, certainly,
by the entire United Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our strongest condemnation for the heinous
and cowardly terrorist attack perpetrated in Lahore,
Pakistan, yesterday. We firmly stand in solidarity with
the Government and the people of Pakistan in their
fight against terrorism.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
Angolan presidency for organizing this timely debate
on the theme of women and peace and security, with a
special focus on the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa.
Last year was a landmark year for gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda. We not
only celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, but we also
marked the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). The high-level review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), along with the review
processes carried out by the High-level Panel on
Peace Operations and the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Architecture, yielded a sound foundation to reflect on
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7658

an international framework of cooperation concerning
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
with a strong emphasis on the empowerment of women.
The United Nations reaffirmed its firm commitment to
strengthening the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution with the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015).

24 February. The meeting included the participation
of international partners and women leaders from the
central and regional Governments of Somalia and civil
society representatives. The participation of the First
Ladies of Turkey and Somalia, who delivered closing
speeches at the event, added a strong voice to the cause
of African women.

The severe effects of conflicts on women and
girls in various locations across the globe continue
to constitute a significant challenge that needs to be
addressed. Furthermore, our world is now facing the
largest humanitarian crisis since the Second World
War, with an increasing influx of displaced populations
due to protracted conflicts and the lack of security and
stability, which gives rise to even further difficulties
to vulnerable groups, including women and girls.
Moreover, the horrific acts perpetrated against women
and girls by terrorist organizations, such as Boko Haram
and Da’esh, demonstrate the need for a comprehensive
strategy for countering violent extremism and terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Turkey will continue to work with African partners
and the international community to ensure women’s
active involvement in sustaining peace, stability and
prosperity in Africa.

African women and girls are not immune to the
difficulties and challenges I have just described. On the
contrary, during times of conflict and insecurity, there is
no doubt that African women suffer the most as victims
of widespread sexual and gender-based violence. Yet
during hard times, women also play a primary role in
building and supporting peace. We are cognizant of
the fact that women in Africa have been enablers of
economic development, peace and social solidarity.
It should be underlined that overall stabilization and
development efforts in Africa cannot succeed if women
lack security and access to political, economic, social
and judicial formal and informal settings.

Algeria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Iran as the Chair of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

In that context and within the framework of a
multifaceted African partnership policy, Turkey
encourages increased political and social participation,
as well as the economic empowerment of women on the
continent. To that end, Turkey implements joint projects
at the multilateral and bilateral levels with the African
Union and African countries for the capacity-building
of women in socioeconomic development. Turkey also
attaches importance to the efforts aimed at promoting
and advancing the women and peace and security
agenda in Africa. To mention one recent example,
Turkey co-hosted with the Somali federal Government
and the United Nations an event on women and peace
and security at the margins of the High-level Partnership
Forum: New Deal Somalia, held in Istanbul from 23 to

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, awakened the Security Council
to the vital role women play in conflict prevention
and resolution, peace negotiations, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict
reconstruction. Today’s legitimate question must be:
what have we done since then? Of course, we more
often stress the importance of equal participation and
women’s full involvement in all efforts towards the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security, as
stated in the resolution. But we again reaffirm the need
for the inclusion of women in the processes of conflict
prevention and resolution, as those processes are
directly linked to the sustainability of peace agreements
and to decreasing the levels of recurring violence.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank Angola for
its constant focus on our continent and for convening
this important debate on the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, as well as for the
concept paper (S/2016/219, annex) that you, Madam
President, circulated in preparation for this debate.

I wish to recognize the work of the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, as well as the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun;
Ambassador Macharia Kamu of Kenya, in his capacity
as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and, of
course, Ms. Paleki Ayang, the Executive Director of
the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment Network, for
their contributions.

16-0851951/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

We should never forget or ignore the fact that
women are often the primary victims of conflicts and
of terrorist acts and that even sexual violence and all
violence against women have become a weapon in
conflict situations. Let us not forget that we have another
resolution, resolution 2242 (2015), which underscores
and stresses the need to ensure the participation and
leadership of women in countering terrorism and violent
extremism. When working with Governments, we also
need to reach out to local communities, and women
in particular, to resolve disputes through inclusive
participation and dialogue. Lasting peace requires
that key actors, women specifically, have access to
institutions. As we have noted, and as was indicated
in the concept paper, inclusive peace processes result
in a 20 per cent increase in the likelihood of a peace
agreement lasting at least two years. Obviously, it is
necessary to repeat that women’s empowerment is not a
luxury; it is a necessity for the sake of peace.
Women’s participation in conflict prevention in
Africa facilitated a more inclusive appreciation of
the causes and alternative solutions to conflict. For
his briefing this morning, I thank Ambassador Téte
António of the African Union. He rightfully pointed out
to all what our African institution has been doing and
intends to do, thereby setting an example to be followed
and supported. In our continent, several mechanisms,
policies and structures were created to foster an
environment conducive to women playing a crucial role
in peace and security.
The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the
Maputo Protocol, and the 2004 Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa committed African Union
(AU) member States to the aforementioned resolution
1325 (2000). Moreover, 2016 is the African Year of
Human Rights, with particular emphasis on the rights
of women. Just a few days ago, my capital, Algiers,
hosted the fifth meeting of the General Assembly of
the Kigali International Conference Declaration on the
role of security reform in putting an end to violence
against women, which was marked by the presence of
the Secretary-General.
We emphasize the importance of better synergies
between regional, continental and international earlywarning structures. These structures have benefited
from women’s involvement, in particular in Africa.
Today, progress is being made in detecting and
monitoring early signs of conflict, and this is enhanced
52/57

28/03/2016

by local initiatives across Africa that facilitate
ownership. Conflict-prevention mechanisms have
been established at the regional and local levels that
provide useful insights into potential crises. However,
these mechanisms need to be strengthened so they can
produce timely and tangible outcomes.
In the African Union, the Continental Early Warning
System is being operationalized and collaboration
with the regional early-warning mechanisms is being
developed. Moreover, this mechanism could benefit
from strategies developed by the United Nations in its
national conflict-prevention work, specifically with
regard to building local actors’ capacity in this area and
addressing the root causes of conflict and not only its
symptoms, as such structures and the involvement of
women have proven critical to preventing and rapidly
addressing potential crises.
The experience of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes is that, at the
regional level in Africa, practical efforts are being
made to focus on gender in line with AU commitments
at the regional level, such as those pertaining to the
Southern African Development Community, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa.
As a demonstration of the importance that Algeria
attaches to the role played by women in the political
sphere, it has called for the implementation of the
gender-equality programme for an extended period
from 2015 to 2017, in association with UN-Women.
We will absolutely and firmly pursue our efforts with
our partners from the United Nations and regional
organizations to empower women at local, national and
regional levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Emvula (Namibia): Allow me to thank the
briefers for their insights. I wish to thank you, Madam
President, and your country, Angola, the President
of the Security Council for the month of March, for
organizing this open debate on the role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflict in Africa,
a subject that is close to our hearts in Africa. I wish
also to extend Namibia’s appreciation to you for
focusing your presidency on issues that are important
to the African continent, the Middle East and other
parts of the world — issues that need the Council’s
renewed attention.
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

Namibia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
As we focus on this subject matter, it is important
to recognize that more must be done to fully engage
women in conflict resolution and mediation. Women’s
full participation in peacemaking is fundamental
to building peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations not only committed its members to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
but also unequivocally reaffirmed fundamental human
rights and the equal rights of men and women. Despite
this strong commitment, the understanding of the
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and the
role of women in conflict resolution and peacebuilding
developed slowly within the United Nations.
Under the presidency of Namibia, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security on 31 October 2000. The adoption
of that resolution marked another milestone in the
process of elevating women’s role in peace and security
to a high political agenda and urged an enhanced role
for women in preventing conflict, promoting peace
and assisting in post-conflict reconstruction and the
incorporation of a gender perspective into United
Nations operations. Through resolution 1325 (2000),
the increased participation of women in peace processes
was recognized as a goal for the first time in the United
Nations history.
It is important to note that through the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the conventional impression
of women as helpless victims of war was replaced by
an understanding of the important role women play
in fostering peace and security. We believe that when
women are involved as agents of peace, sexual violence
against women and children in war and conflict
situations can be addressed. Resolution 1325 (2000)
is the first-ever resolution adopted by the Security
Council that specifically addresses the disproportionate
impact of war on women and stresses the significance
of women’s equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts to maintain and promote sustainable peace
and security.
Namibia attaches great importance to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In the region
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), Namibia was the first country to ratify the
SADC Protocol on Gender and Development in October

S/PV.7658

2009. The Protocol calls upon members States to put
in place measures to ensure that women have equal
representation and participation in key decision-making
positions and peacebuilding processes. This explains
why Namibia contributes one of the largest female
contingents to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Namibian women in
peacekeeping missions have demonstrated remarkable
commitment, high competencies and aptitudes for
innovation. Today, Namibian women are also steadily
rising through the ranks and expanding their influence
at an ever-increasing rate, serving bravely at national,
regional and global levels in many different ways. More
critically, they serve and sacrifice as courageously as
any man out there, as they did during our struggle
for liberation.
At the global level, it is high time that we establish
and implement an ambitious but achievable agenda
for action on women in armed conflict and allow
an increased role for women in the peace process.
The provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) must be
framed in State obligations to address structural and
systemic gender inequality and discrimination through
comprehensive legislation, policies and institutional
reforms. Our work and advocacy should now be aimed
at the everyday and we should never give up. We must
succeed, as we cannot afford to fail our next generation
of women.
History has clearly demonstrated that those women
who have been afforded the opportunity to participate
in peacekeeping missions have shown that courage
and leadership recognize no gender, as women who
participate in peacekeeping missions do so facing
the same risks and are prepared to die, live and lose
limbs just like their male counterparts. We must
constantly bear in mind that resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions, especially resolution 2242
(2015), require us to take robust action at the national
level to put policies in place that will pave the way
for international deployment of female peacekeepers.
Equal to the same task, it is our obligation to implement
the recommendations of the global study on resolution
1325 (2000).
We have just adopted the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution
70/1), which encompasses our collective targets that will
not only have a life-changing impact on hundreds of
millions of women, but will also help to create a better
world that is more equitable. However, its effective

16-0851953/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

implementation will depend on its simplicity and its
transformational power to sanction, within its life
span, an immense global response to the most pressing
issues of women empowerment and, more importantly,
the full participation of women in peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is for the benefit of the whole
human race, and has been intended to be so since its
adoption in October 2000. It should be regarded as
a global objective that reflects peace, equality and
development. Its effective implementation in good faith
should not be half-hearted.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank the presidency of Angola for organizing
this open debate. I also thank all the speakers for their
important perspectives. Today’s debate is timely in
that it allows us to take stock of progress achieved thus
far and to reflect on how best to support the role of
women in the prevention and settlement of conflicts
in Africa and elsewhere. In that regard, I should like
to share the Kingdom of Thailand’s views on how the
Security Council and the Member States can support
the effective participation of women in initiatives and
peace and security processes.
First, men and women must enjoy equal opportunities.
When women and girls enjoy social, economic and
political opportunities equal to those of men and boys,
their contributions to society are limitless. National
efforts should therefore focus on ways of ensuring
equality of access for women to education, jobs, finance,
social security, health-care services and justice. The
emancipation of women involves the non-exclusive
promotion of development and growth, which is crucial
to preventing conflict and maintaining peace.
Secondly, women’s rights must be promoted
and protected. In times of conflict, the suffering of
women and girls can be minimized if strong national
institutions exist to ensure the rule of law and the
effective monitoring of and response to human rights
violations. Post-conflict rehabilitation for those
affected should also be supported by a comprehensive
victim assistance programme.
Thirdly, women, who are too often seen exclusively
as victims, are also effective agents of change. Women
bring invaluable perspectives to the meaning of peace
and security. Sustainable conflict prevention and
resolution can be more easily ensured when women
participate actively and meaningfully in relevant
political decision-making and peace processes. In 2015,
54/57

28/03/2016

the Permanent Mission of Thailand commissioned the
International Peace Institute to conduct evidence-based
research on this very topic. The research confirms with
substantial empirical evidence that peace processes
involving women have a higher percentage of success
and sustainability. We therefore urge more action on
the part of the United Nations and the Member States
to enhance women’s capacity to play a more prominent
role in this regard.
Fourthly, recent initiatives in Africa to emancipate
women are already having a positive impact. We
welcome the African Union’s five-year Gender, Peace
and Security Programme (2015-2020), launched in 2014,
and the African Women’s Decade. They both provide
an excellent platform for implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and for supporting the role of women in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. We also see
benefits in the inclusion of women in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme within
the African Union’s five-year Programme. Clearly,
dynamic civil and women’s organizations have also
united women in Africa to address common threats,
such as the rise of extremism.
We support strengthened cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in conflict
prevention and resolution, particularly through
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we have made
a concrete contribution by participating as the first
non-African country in the joint African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. With this firsthand experience, we can safely conclude that female
peacekeepers can effectively engage with the local
population with a very high degree of cultural and
gender sensitivity. In conflict situations, that can help
build trust and confidence and create an environment
conducive to peace for women and girls in particular. We
strongly urge the United Nations to appoint more gender
advisers and to integrate a stronger gender perspective
into the United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
Let me conclude by reiterating that in Africa,
as in all parts of the world, women and men must be
recognized as equal partners in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as in other endeavours. That requires
strong common political will, which in our view is still
lacking despite recent progress in the promotion of the
role of women in peace processes in many parts of the
world. For our part, the Kingdom of Thailand is ready
and committed to joining the international community
16-08519

28/03/2016

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7658

in its efforts to promote women’s effective participation
in peace and security in Africa and beyond.

unwillingly made to be complicit with such misguided
agenda of violent extremists and other such actors.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Bangladesh.

In order to find resonance with the African
situation, we would wish to reinforce five key issues
in relation to the women, peace and security agenda, as
we see them from our national perspective.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Angolan
presidency for organizing this important open debate
in what has been dubbed as the “month of Africa” in
the Council.
Bangladesh takes this opportunity to recall our
pioneering role in contributing to the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) during our membership in
the Security Council in 2000 and 2001. The global
study that was conducted last year on the resolution’s
implementation has done a commendable job in
charting the progress achieved in terms of measurable
results and tangible objectives. It is encouraging to
see that women have assumed a central role in 67 per
cent of peace agreements that have been mediated or
facilitated by the United Nations in recent times. We
expect this to be replicated further at the regional and
national levels. As we heard this morning from the
briefers, the normative and standard-setting exercise
that has been undertaken by the African Union captures
the underlying principles and objectives of resolution
1325 (2000) and its successor resolutions.
The changing nature and dynamics of conflicts
and the diverse motivations of the actors involved
tend to escalate the situation for women during
armed conflicts. While the protection needs of women
remain a foremost concern, it is critically important to
empower women and to allow them the space to serve
as instrumental and effective buffers against conflicts.
This is not likely to happen in an extraneous manner,
and should ideally evolve in an organic fashion from
within the conflict-affected society.
In Bangladesh, our sustained investment in
women’s empowerment and gender equality has
allowed us to make the overall environment further
conducive to preventing the escalation and recurrence
of conflicts. It is perhaps no surprise, as manifest
in other contexts around the world, that violent
extremists and terrorists make it a point to reverse the
trend of women’s development and empowerment in
advancing their twisted narrative of social norms and
arrangements concerning women. It would be crucial
for women’s groups and organizations to scale up their
voice in protest of such trends, and to enhance their
engagements with those women who are forcibly or

First, the confluence of the reviews undertaken
last year around the United Nations peace and security
agenda needs to be translated into, among other things,
a further accent on developing national plans of action
corresponding to resolution 1325 (2000) and affiliated
resolutions. There are a number of best practices
available in diverse socioeconomic contexts that
may be built upon further through in-depth national
consultations. The critical role of men and boys,
particularly youth, needs to be factored into the plans
of action.
Secondly, women’s role in conflict prevention,
mediation, negotiations and peace agreements needs to
be bolstered in real terms beyond mere showcasing. It
would be critical to invest in women’s leadership in order
for them to effectively contribute to decision-making
and negotiations with a view to mainstreaming women’s
specific needs and concerns into the broader framework
of peace agreements or settlements.
Thirdly, the need to enhance women’s participation
United Nations United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including in senior leadership positions, has
been duly recongized as an enabling factor for ensuring
the protection of women and enhancing women’s role in
preparing the ground for sustainable peace. As a major
troop-contributing country, we remain convinced of
the qualitative difference that women can make as
peacekeepers on the ground. We are working with the
United Nations and other partners to further enhance
women’s participation among our troops and police
and to strengthen and mainstream the work of gender
advisers in missions.
Fourthly, women’s role in peacebuilding is widely
recognized, but remains constrained by a lack of
resources and, at times, expertise. Within the United
Nations, there is scope for reinvigorating a system-wide
approach to implementing the gender strategy of the
Peacebuilding Commission to use it as a possible guide
for a customized approach to specific contexts. In
Bangladesh, we are currently in the process of setting
up a peacebuilding centre, where we wish to undertake

16-0851955/57

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

specialized research and training on women’s role in
peacebuilding, among other issues.
Lastly, the overriding importance of prevention
and eliminating sexual and gender-based violence
during armed conflicts cannot be overemphasized.
The political momentum that has been galvanized
to this cause must be sustained.The importance of
ensuring justice for such crimes and promoting healing
and reintegration for the victims should constitute an
essential element in halting and reversing such crimes
anywhere in the world. Bangladesh stands ready to
share its experience in this regard, especially with
regard to promoting justice and recognition for the
victims of sexual and gender-based violence committed
during our Liberation War in 1971.
The African continent is setting examples on
a range of norm-setting issues, and also with their
implementation. With the exemplary leadership shown
by the women of Africa, we are confident that further
new dimensions to strengthening women’s role in peace
and security will emerge in the days ahead, including to
enrich the work of this Council.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): I thank the UnderSecretary General and Executive Director of UNWomen and the other briefers for for their constructive
insights on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has called for women’s
participation in conflict management, conflict
resolution and sustainable peace. My delegation
underlines the 2015 global study of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), which emphasizes that the
meaningful participation of women is crucial to the
effectiveness of all peace and security interventions.
My delegation is of the view that enhancing the
participation and meaningful involvement of women
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and postconflict peacebuilding in Africa is an imperative that
the United Nations needs to continue to support.
My delegation sees the need to prioritize and
institutionalize women’s leadership in peace and
security in the continent. This could be done through
the enhancement and promotion of women’s leadership
in peace, security and sustainable development. The
strengthening of a platform for women across all
56/57

28/03/2016

levels of African societies to exchange, share and
harmonize strategies for women’s leadership and to
build coalitions in the promotion of peace and security
is therefore essential in the efforts to address women,
peace and security. Other steps that may be taken are
the strengthening of women’s leadership capacities
and skills to engage in peace and security process
and negotiations, as well as the promotion of gender
mainstreaming in security sector institutions and
policies, all with the aim of establishing the meaningful
participation of women in peace, security and mediation
in Africa.
At the United Nations, an important next step
that can support the momentum reached thus far is to
continue promoting an integrated approach to the women
and peace and security agenda across all areas of work
of the United Nations system. Avenues to strengthen
interaction and information flows across the entire
system should be pursued to eliminate the fragmentation
and silo approach that can hamper effective responses.
Implementation requires significant work on the part of
the broader United Nations system and Member States,
with civil society organizations at all levels.
My delegation considers that not only do gender
perspectives need to be mainstreamed in deliberating
peace and security matters before the Council, but that
a similar method and approach are also needed when
Member countries address the root causes of conflict in
other United Nations organs, such as the Economic and
Social Council and the Human Rights Council.
In the context of peacekeeping operations, my
delegation firmly believes that women peacekeepers
are far better equipped to protect women and girls
before, during and after conflicts and war. It is in this
understanding that Indonesia stands committed to
increasing the number of its women peacekeepers under
United Nations mandates aimed at providing protection
for women and girls, two of the most vulnerable victims
of conflict in the continent. Henceforth, Indonesia will
also register its full support for Council requests to
increase women peacekeepers in Africa and beyond.
A strong United Nations mandate aimed at
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
is made even more robust when supported by local and
regional organizations that are very well-suited to and
familiar with geographic and cultural characteristics.
We commend the African Union for having developed
the mechanisms, policies and structures necessary to
16-08519

28/03/2016

S/PV.7658

Women and peace and security

create an enabling environment for women to play a key
role in peace and security. These mechanisms include
the African Union five-year Gender, Peace and Security
Program 2015-2020 and the evolving African Peace and
Security Architecture.
Indonesia stands ready to engage and collaborate
with Africa within the context of peace and security.
Indonesia’s commitment and readiness is well founded
in the leaders’ declaration issued at the sixth AsiaAfrica Commemorative Summit, held in Bandung in
2015, which among other things reiterates the principle
and benefits of multilateralism in strengthening peace
and prosperity in Asia and Africa, as well as in further
contributing to the maintenance of international

peace and security through
peacekeeping operations.

United

Nations

Let me conclude by reiterating Indonesia’s support
and steadfast commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda through the United Nations, as well as
through cross-regional cooperation and collaboration.
We will continue to be engaged in existing deliberations
and processes aimed at enhancing the international
framework to strengthen the protection of women in
conflict and the role of women in peace and security, as
well as to participate in every United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operation involving women peacekeepers.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

16-0851957/57
