Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

the laws of the said Community at present in force within
the Gebiet and in conformity with the provisions" of the
Agreement of 17 August 1923,
Noting further that, in the application of laws to the
Gebiet subsequent to the issuance of Proclamation No.
31 of 1924, the Administrator in each instance cited the
1923 Agreement and referred to his power thereunder
to apply laws to the Gebiet after consultation with the
Raad, to the transfer of the functions and powers of the
Raad to the Magistrate and, consequently, to his consultation with the Magistrate with respect to the application of the law in question,
1. Decides to inform the petitioners that the Territory of South West Africa remains a Territory under
the international Mandate assumed by the Union of
South Africa on 17 December 1920, and that the provisions of the Mandate and of Article 22 of the Covenant
of the League of Nations accordingly apply to the Rehoboth Community, which constitutes a part of the Mandated Territory;

2. Considers that, subject to the terms of the Mandate, the administration by the Union of South Africa
of the territory known as the Rehoboth Gebiet continues
to be regulated by the Agreement of 17 August 1923
concluded between the Administrator of the Mandated
Territory as representing the Government of the Union
of South Africa on the one part and the Kapitein and
members of the Raad of the Rehoboth Community for
themselves and their lawful successors as representing
the Rehoboth Community on the other part ;
3. Considers that the permanent transfer of powers,
functions and duties from representatives of the Rehoboth Community duly elected under the laws of that
Community to an official appointed as Magistrate of the
Rehoboth District would not be in accordance with the
terms of the Agreement of 17 August 1923; ·
4. Further considers that consultation by the Administrator with the Magistrate of the Rehoboth District for the purpose of applying laws to the Rehoboth
Gebiet subsequent to 1924 does not fulfil the condition
of the Agreement of 17 August 1923 for consultation
with the Raad of the Rehoboth Community;
5. Recommends therefore that the Union of South
Africa, as the Mandatory Power, take the necessary
steps to correct this situation ;

II. With respect to the boundaries of the Rehoboth
Gebiet:
Noting that the boundaries of the Rehoboth Gebiet
were defined in the schedule to the Agreement of 17
August 1923 and appear to have been accepted by the
Kapitein and members of the Raad of the Rehoboth
Community for themselves and their lawful successors
as representing the Rehoboth Community,
Is of the opinion that any claims which the Rehoboth
Community may have regarding the alleged boundaries
of the Gebiet prior to the Agreement of 17 August 1923
appear to have been resolved by that Agreement ;

. III. With respect to the claims of the Rehoboth Com. munity to certain lands within the Gebiet:
Noting that these claims have been investigated by
successive commissions of inquiry, the first of which
was appointed in 1922,

21

Recommends that the Union of South Africa, as the
Mandatory Power, make every effort toward an early
and equitable settlement of these claims.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
936 (X). Petitions and related communications
from Mr. Hosea Kutako, Mr. David Roos and
Mr. Erastus Amgabeb concerning South West
Africa
·
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion10 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, including the opinion that
petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa
are to be transmitted by the Government of the Union
of South Africa "to the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which is legally qualified to deal with them",
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by General Assembly resolution 749· A (VIII)
of 28 November 1953, to examine petitions in accordance
with the Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition, dated 2
September 1954, from Mr. Hosea Kutako, Mr. David
Roos and Mr. Erastus Amgabeb, and a related petition,
dated 14 January 1955 from Mr. Hosea Kutako, 11
Noting that the petitioners request that the United
Nations submit the question of the status of South West
Africa to the International Court of Justice for its compulsory jurisdiction,
Noting further that the petitioners raise questions relatin~ to the participation of the African people of the
Territory in the political development of the Territory,
the application of pass laws and racially discriminatory
laws, educational facilities, and the alleged refusal on
the part of the Administration to permit common meetings for all tribes,
1. Decides to inform the petitioners that, according
to the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950 of the International Court of Justice :
(a) "South West Africa is a territory under the international Mandate assumed by the Union of South
Africa on December 17th, 1920";
(b) " ... the Union of South Africa continues to have
the international obligations stated in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Mandate
for South West Africa";
( c) ". . · . competence to determine and modify the
international status of the Territory [of South West
Africa] rests with the Union of South Africa acting
with the consent of the United Nations";

and that the General Assembly, by its resolution 449 A
(V) of 13 December 1950, accepted the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa;
Noting the observations of the Committee on South
West Africa with respect to questions raised by the
petitioners relating to conditions in the Territory of
South West Africa,
10 International status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: J.C.!. Reports 1950, p. 128.
1 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Seslio",
Supplement No. 12 (A/2913), chap. VIII and annex VII.

General A11embl7 - Tenth Seuion

22

2. Decides to transmit to the petitioners the report
and observations12 made by the Committee on South
West Africa at its second session regarding conditions
in the Territory of South West Africa.

2. Decides to transmit to the petitioner the report
and observations 15 made by the Committee on South
West Africa at its second session regarding conditions
in the Territory of South West Africa.
550th plenary meelffl~,
3 December 1955.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.

937 (X). Petition and related communication
from the Reverend T. H. Hamtumbangela
concerning South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion18 of 11 July

1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, including the opinion that
petitions concerning the Territory of South West Africa
are to be transmitted by the Government of the Union
of South Africa "to the General Assembly of the United
Nations, which is legally qualified to deal with them",
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII)
of 28 November 1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of
Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition, dated 5
October 1954, and a related communication, dated 19
February 1955, from the Reverend T. H. Hamtumbangela,16
Noting that the petitioner requests that the question
of the future status of the Territory of South West
Africa be submitted to the International Court of Justice
for decision,
Noting further that the petitioner raises questions
concerning the racially discriminatory measures applied
against the non-European population of the Territory,

1. Decides to inform the petitioner that, according to
the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950 of the International Court of Justice :
(a) "South West Africa is a territory under the international Mandate assumed by the Union of South
Africa on December 17th, 1920";
tb) " ... the Union of South Africa continues to have
the international obligations stated in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations and in the Mandate
for South West Africa";
(c) " ... competence to determine and modify the
international status of the Territory [of South West
Africa] rests with the Union of South Africa acting
with the consent of the United Nations";

and that the General Assembly, by its resolution 449 A
(V) of 13 December 1950, accepted the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa;
Noting the observations of the Committee on South
West Africa with respect to discriminatory measures
applied in the Territory against the non-European population,
12 Jbid., annex II.
18 International status of South-W'est Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.CJ. Reports 1950, p. 128.
16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth Session,
Suf'Plement No. 12 (A/29! 1 ), i:!Jap. VIII and annex VIII.

938 (X). Petition from Ml11 Mar1ery F. Perham
concerning South Weat Africa
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion18 of 11 July

1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII)
of 28 November 1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of
Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee on
South West Africa dealing with a petition dated November 1953 from Miss Margery F. Perham,1'
Noting the petitioner's statement that Mr. Himumuine,
a Native school principal of South West Africa, has
been unable to avail himself of a scholarship at Oxford
University because the Government of the Union of
South Africa has refused to grant him a passport and
has given no reason for its action,
Ncting that education forms the foundation of all
development in the Territory and that educational facilities for Natives are still inadequate,
1. Is of the opjnion that the withholding of a passport from a quahfied student for the purpose of studying abroad is not only a direct interference in the educational and general advancement of an individual but
a hindrance to the educational development of the Territory of South West Africa which was entrusted under
the Covenant of the League of Nations to the administration of the Union of South Africa;
2. Regrets that the Government of the Union of
South Africa did not respond to the appeal addressed
to it b:y the representatives of such an eminent educational institution as Oxford University;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to use his good
offices with the Government of the Union of South
Africa in order to assist Mr. Himumuine to obtain a
passport and all other administrative facilities so that
he may avail himself of the scholarship granted to him
by Oxford University.
550th plenary meelin~,
3 December 1955.

939 (X). Petition from Mr. Jariretundu
Kozongulzl concerning South Weat Africa
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion1 • of 11 July

1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
II.
lnttrt1atiot1al'status of South-West Africa, Atlwory
ton: J.C.!. R,ports 1950, p. 128.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth S11mm,
Supplement No. 14 (A/2666 and Corr.1), chap. VII and annex
11 Ibid., annex

• 19

VI.

.

o,.,._

• 1 • Jntemalional status of South-W111 Africa, Atlwory 01w-

t0n: J.C.!. Reports 1950, p. 128.
