83

Resolutions adoptefl on the reports of thc Third Committcc

Expressing concern that sorne countries, notably
Portugal, with the support of their North Atlantic
Treaty Organization allies, are waging war against the
national liberation movement of the colonies and against
certain independent States of Africa and Asia and the
developing countries,
Confirming that colonialism in ali its forros and
manifestations, including the methods of neo-colonialism, constitutes a gross encroachment on the rights
of peoples and on the basic human rights and freedoms,
Convinced that effective application of the principie
of self-determination of peoples is of paramount importance for the promotion of friendly relations between
countries and peoples, the guarantee of human rights
and the maintenance of peace in the world,
Affirming that the future of Zimbabwe cannot be
negotiated with an illegal régime and that any settlement must be made on the basis of "no independence
before majority rule",
Reaffirming the inalienable rights of ali peoples, and
in particular those of Zimbabwe, Namibia, Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and the Palestinian
people, to freedom, equality and self-determination, and
the legitimacy of their struggles to restore those rights,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, which elaborated the principie
of self-determination of peoples,
. Considering that the establishment of a sovereign and
mdependent State freely determined by all the people
belonging to the territory constitutes a mode of implementing the right of self-determination,
Further considering that any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and
territorial integrity of a State established in accordance
with the right of self-determination of its people
is incompatible with the purposes and principies of
the Charter,
Mindful that interference in the interna} affairs of
States is a violation of the Charter and can pose a
serious threat to the maintenance of peace,
l. Confirms the legality of the peoples' struggle for
self-determination and liberation from colonial and
foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably in
southern Africa and in particular that of the peoples
of Zimbabwe, Namibia, Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau), as well as of the Palestinian people,
by all available means consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations;
2. Affirms man's basic human right to fight for the
self-determination of bis people under colonial and
foreign domination;
3. Calls upan all States dedicated to the ideals of
freedom and peace to give all their political, moral and
material assistance to peoples struggling for liberation,
self-determination and independence against colonial
and alien domination;
4. Relieves that the main objectives and principies
of international protection of human rights cannot be
effectively implemented while sorne States, particularly
Portugal and South Africa, pursue the imperialist policy
of colonialism, use force against independent African
States and developing countries and peoples fighting for
self-determination and support régimes that are applying
the criminal policy of racism and apartheid;

5. Condemns the colonial and usurping Powers that
are suppressing the right of peoples to self-determination and hampering the liquidation of the last hotbeds
of colonialism and racism in the African and Asian
continents and in other parts of the world;
6. Condemns the policy of certain States members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that contribute to the creation in southem Africa of a militaryindustrial complex whose aim is to suppress the movement of peoples struggling for self-determination and
to interfere in the affairs of independent African States;
7. Recalls that it is the duty of every State to contribute through joint and independent action to the
implementation of the principie of self-determination,
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, and
to assist the United Nations in discharging the responsibilities vested in it by the Charter for the implementation of this principie;
8. Urges the Security Council as well as States
Members of the United Nations or members of specialized agencies to take effective steps to ensure the implementation of the relevant United Nations resolutions
on the elimination of colonialism and racism, and to
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
session;
9. Resolves to devote constant attention to the
question of flagrant large-scale violations of human
righ_ts and fundamental freedoms resulting from the
demal to peoples under colonial and foreign dornination
of their right to self-determination;
10. Calls upon ali States to observe the principies
of the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in
the interna! affairs of other States and respect for their
sovereign rights and territorial integrity.
2001st plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
2788 (XXVI). Status of the lnternational Covenant 011 Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on

the status of the Intemational Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the Intemational Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 14
Firmly believing that the entry into force of the
International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocol will greatly enhance the ability of
the United Nations to promote and encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
and wi!I ~ontribute to the attainment of the purposes
and pnnc1ples of the Charter of the United Nations,
Desirous of making ali possible efforts that may be
appropriate to assist in hastening the process of ratification and, if possible, in bringing into force those instruments by the twenty-fifth anniversary of the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in 1973,
'
14 A/8390.

84

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

1. Recommends that Member States should give
special attention to possibilities of accelerating as far
as possible the intemal procedures that would lead to
the ratification of the lntemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of
communications from Governments, to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session and at
such other times as he may consider appropriate on
the progress of the ratification of the Covenants and
the Optional Protocol.
2001 st plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
2789 (XXVI). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having coruidered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees concerning his current
activities15 and having heard his statement,16
Noting with appreciation the results obtained by the
High Commissioner in the accomplishment of his
humanitarian task of providing international protection
to refugees within his mandate and promoting permanent
solutions to their problems,
Considering the increasing and fruitful co-operation
between the High Commissioner and the other members
of the United Nations system in the field of rural settlement, education and training of refugees in developing
countries, particularly in Africa, which results in a
better co-ordination of action and a greater efficiency
of the United Nations system as a whole,
Noting with satisfaction the recent decision of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme to approve the participation of the High Commissioner in the new country programming system
adopted by the United Nations Development Programme
and his association, where necessary, with any efforts
made by Governments, with the assistance of the Programme, to develop regions where large groups of
refugees are being settled with the assistance of the
High Commissioner,
Recognizing the importance of voluntary repatriation
as a permanent solution to the refugee problem and the
useful role that United N ations bodies and nongovernmental agencies can play in facilitating the
rehabilitation of groups of refugees who have voluntarily returned to their countries of origin,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
assistance programme and the substantial increase in
sorne of these contributions,
Commending the growing number of accessions to
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of
1951 17 and the Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees of 1967,18
15 Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/8412) and Supplement No.
12A (A/8412/Add.l).
16 lbid., Twenty-sixth Session, Third Committee, 187 4th
meeting, paras. 1-15.
17United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
lBUnited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 606 (1967), No. 8791.

l. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their humanitarian tasks;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
provide international protection and assistance to
refugees who are bis concem, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
directives of the Executive Committee of the High
Commissioner's Programme;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems of refugees who are his cancero through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or resettlement
in other countries;
4. Urges Governments to continue to lend their
support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian action by:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his task in
the field of international protection;
( b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to refugee problems;
(e) Providing the necessary means to attain the
financia! targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee.
2001st plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
2790 (XXVI). United Nations assistance to East
Pakistan refugees through the United Nations focal point and United Nations humanitarian :.1ssistance to East Pakistan

A

The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on his activities as the focal
point in co-ordinating international relief assistance for
refugees from East Pakistan in India, 111
Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations programme of relief assistance to
the people of East Pakistan,20
Wishing to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner, and to their staffs, for the
work they have done under difficult conditions,
Deeply concerned at the magnitude of the human
suffering to which the crisis in East Pakistan has given
rise and at its possible consequences,
Concerned also at the heavy burden imposed on
India and at the disturbing influence of the general
situation on the process of economic and social development in the arca,
Noting with appreciation the prompt and generous
response of the international community to the needs
that have arisen from the crisis, including the efforts
of non-governmental organizations to raise funds for
the relief of the suffering,
Recognizing that voluntary repatriation is the only
satisfactory solution to the refugee problem and that
this is fully accepted by all concerned,
111 See Ot/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Third Committee, 1876th meeting.
20 /bid., 1877th meeting.
