United Nations

S/PV.4127

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4127th Meeting
Friday, 14 April 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Axworthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Canada)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Kamal
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchynsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation concerning Rwanda
Letter dated 15 December 1999 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1999/1257).

00-39176 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
commissioned the Independent Inquiry, with the approval
of the Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Rwanda
Letter dated 15 December 1999 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1999/1257)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Rwanda in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

In this connection, I should like to recall that in a
statement issued on 16 December 1999, following the
receipt of the report of the Independent Inquiry, the
Secretary-General stated that he fully accepted its
conclusions. In that statement, he also welcomed the
emphasis which the Inquiry had put on the lessons to be
learned from the tragedy and the Inquiry’s careful and
well-argued recommendations, which, he noted, were
aimed at ensuring that the United Nations could and
would act to prevent or halt any other such catastrophe in
the future.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Carlsson. May I, on behalf of the
Council, take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to Mr. Carlsson and to the other members of
the Independent Inquiry, Professor Han and General
Kupolati, for the manner in which they discharged the
important responsibility entrusted to them.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Carlsson.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mutaboba
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ingvar Carlsson,
Chairman of the Independent Inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Carlsson to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1999/1257, which contains a letter dated 15 December
1999 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council, transmitting the report of the
Independent Inquiry into the actions of the United Nations
during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. I wish to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for having

2

Mr. Carlsson: I am grateful for the opportunity to
present the report of the Independent Inquiry into the
actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda.
I am pleased that the report is to be discussed in
substance in the Security Council, one of the main bodies
to which the recommendations were addressed. I
commend Canada’s initiative to convene this meeting.
It is now six years since the beginning of the
genocide in Rwanda, six years since hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children were brutally
massacred by their own countrymen in only 100 horrific
days. This was a genocide which took place before the
eyes of the international community and before the eyes
of the United Nations peacekeeping force. We, the
international community, did not prevent, nor did we stop,
the massacres once they had begun. Our failure to do so
is the reason we are here today. We had a responsibility
to act and failed to do so.
The question before the Security Council today is
why, and what can be done to see to it that what
happened in Rwanda in 1994 never happens again. The
Independent Inquiry was set up at the initiative of the
Secretary-General, with the acceptance of the Security

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4127th meeting
14 April 2000

Council. I was joined by two colleagues, Mr. Han Sung-Joo
of the Republic of Korea, and General Rufus Kupolati of
Nigeria. We had two main tasks: to establish the facts
related to the role of the United Nations during the
genocide and to make recommendations for the future. We
visited Rwanda and other countries in the Great Lakes
region. We visited New York several times and conducted
in-depth interviews with key United Nations officials. We
visited France, Belgium and the United States. We spoke to
a number of survivors of the genocide, the families of the
10 Belgian peacekeepers who were killed, members of the
local staff of the United Nations in Rwanda at the time and
other witnesses. They helped to provide us with the
necessary, if painful, understanding of what happened.

lives to the United Nations, but there were also those who
were left behind when the United Nations left Rwanda.
Some of these were massacred, others were at risk of
being killed. The withdrawal of the bulk of the Mission
left a lot of bitterness behind in Rwanda.

My colleague and I presented our report to the
Secretary-General on 15 December last year. In the report
we identified what we considered were the failings of the
United Nations before and during the genocide and
formulated 14 recommendations for the future.

The Inquiry emphasized the need for the
international community to be prepared to identify
situations of genocide as such and to act accordingly.
Political will is the key here. A lack of political will to
act is perhaps the most dangerous obstacle to United
Nations efforts to bring about and keep peace and
undermines the authority and legitimacy of the United
Nations itself. One of the aspects of the United Nations
role during the genocide which has caused most bitterness
in Rwanda is the fact that a few weeks after the start of
the genocide, the Council decided to reduce the strength
of UNAMIR to about one tenth of the original number.
This decision, and the lack of will to react firmly to the
actions of the extremists, put Rwandan civilians and the
remaining United Nations personnel at risk. It was a
decision taken despite clear evidence of the horrors which
were taking place in Rwanda, in the face of evidence of
a genocide.

Today, I want to highlight the main conclusions of the
Inquiry, but want to focus particularly on the forwardlooking element of the report, its recommendations. This
Council has the power to prevent some of the mistakes that
were made in Rwanda from happening again. I hope
today’s discussion will help to mobilize will in this respect.
The Inquiry found that the overriding failure of the
United Nations was the lack of resources and the lack of
political will to act. The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR) was often called an orphan
operation, one that suffered from being created in the
aftermath of Somalia. It was smaller and weaker than what
was needed, and the mandate was based on an overoptimistic assessment of the peace process in Rwanda at the
time. When the genocide started, the Mission was not
working as a cohesive operation. As we wrote in our report,
there was a lack of political leadership, a lack of military
capacity, severe problems of command and control and a
lack of coordination and discipline.
In the report, we tried to identify in each particular
case where the responsibility lay within the United Nations
system. The United Nations had a peacekeeping operation
numbering 2,500 personnel in Rwanda when the genocide
started. They should have been able to prevent or at least
limit the genocide. In effect, however, despite the
courageous efforts of some of the United Nations staff in
Rwanda, the force disintegrated. There were certainly acts
of bravery by those in UNAMIR who stayed in Rwanda.
There are people in Rwanda and abroad who owe their

I should also say that our report also included
criticisms of UNAMIR and some of the troops in
Rwanda. It is important also to say that those countries
which did not send troops or matériel to Rwanda,
including my own country, also share responsibility for
what happened. It is a terrible fact that UNAMIR was
never able to get the troops that it needed, neither in
quantity nor in capacity.

A key recommendation of our report emphasized the
need to improve the capacity of the United Nations in the
field of peacekeeping. The members of this Inquiry are
not the first to say this, and unfortunately, we are not
likely to be the last. But I would like to ask the members
of the Security Council to take this point seriously. The
United Nations remains the only organization which can
bring global legitimacy to peacekeeping. The reverse side
of that coin is that failed peacekeeping efforts cause
devastating damage to the credibility of this Organization.
To the members of the Security Council I would say, give
peacekeeping operations the mandates they need. See to
it that the resources provided fit that mandate. Mobilize
the political will to provide the troops that the United
Nations needs at short notice and show the same
determination to exercise responsibility for international
law, peace and security, wherever the crisis and whatever
the continent.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
To the Secretary-General I would say, continue to
focus on improving the Secretariat’s capacity to plan and
prepare peacekeeping operations. In recommending
peacekeeping operations, tell the Security Council what the
real needs on the ground are, how many troops, what
mandate, how tough the task is. It is then the responsibility
of this Council not to allow short-term budgetary or other
financial considerations to overrule those needs. It must
ensure that there is full coordination on the ground between
different United Nations bodies involved and use the
lessons learned from previous operations.
I hope that the panel that has been appointed to follow
up on the Rwanda and Srebrenica reports will help in
identifying these lessons. The real challenge will be to
bring the lessons into the everyday planning for
peacekeeping.
Finally, on this point, I would hope that all Member
States will use the Millennium Summit and Assembly to
create momentum to deal with the problems facing United
Nations peacekeeping. Member States will have the chance
to see the political imperatives of making peacekeeping
work and to solve the problems which have plagued
peacekeeping efforts for so long.
During the months leading up to the genocide, the
United Nations, but also Member States and nongovernment actors, failed to really recognize the systematic
horrors of what was being planned. There were warning
signs, but these were not given the attention they needed.
Much attention has been focused on the fate of the Dallaire
cable, and it was discussed in detail in our report. I think
the main lesson is the following: information of that
magnitude, and clearly any information which relates to the
threat to exterminate a population, should be shared with
the Security Council as a whole and must lead to a firm
reaction.
Efforts have been made over the past years to improve
the United Nations capacity for early warning. The Inquiry
believes those efforts must continue. A key aspect is
improving cooperation between departments concerned in
the Secretariat. Another relates to improving the flow of
information to the Security Council. This also depends on
members of the Council receiving briefings from those
officials most qualified to do so, be it the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, or the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Information
on the human rights situation is often a key indicator of
warning signs. This was so in Rwanda.

4

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
Much has been said on the need to improve our
capacity for prevention. Learning the lessons from
Rwanda is a question of putting prevention into practice,
of combining the will to act in time with the capacity to
do so. Improving the protection of civilians is a key task
for the United Nations. The Inquiry recommends that
mandates of peacekeeping operations, where appropriate,
explicitly include the protection of civilians. I very much
welcome the work done within the Council on improving
the protection of civilians, based on the report by the
Secretary-General last year. I hope that this thematic
emphasis will also add momentum when dealing with
these issues in individual conflicts.
I would like to mention two lessons from Rwanda in
this regard. First, there can be no neutrality in the face
of the threat of genocide or massive violation of human
rights. The United Nations and its peacekeepers must
react. Secondly, it is important to recognize that the
presence of a United Nations mission, whether or not its
mandates include the protection of civilians, will create an
expectation among the civilian population that they will
be protected by the United Nations. This needs to be
taken into account when planning operations, but also
when discussing how mandates are implemented.
The mistakes that were made by the international
community in Rwanda were grave. We must make a
determined effort to see to it that the same thing never
occurs again. Preventing genocide is a duty; it is also an
effort which goes beyond what is normally understood by
prevention. The Inquiry therefore recommended that the
Secretary-General initiate a specific United Nations action
plan to prevent genocide. The idea would be for each part
of the United Nations system to examine what concrete
steps it needs to take within its mandate to be better
prepared to prevent genocide. Political analysts,
peacekeepers and humanitarian officers should all be
trained to recognize the warning signs. Headquarters
should be prepared to pick up an early warning and to
translate it into early action. The Inquiry’s hope is that a
United Nations action plan of this kind could provide
concrete input to the World Conference against Racism
next year.
Finally, I want to express the hope that this report
will contribute to improving the relations between
Rwanda and the United Nations. I also hope that the
recommendations will be taken on board in future
discussions on the role of the United Nations in conflict
situations.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: I would like to thank Mr. Carlsson for
his very comprehensive and very significant briefing.
Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): First, allow me to
express my delegation’s appreciation both to the members
of the Independent Inquiry — Mr. Carlsson, Mr. Han SungJoo and General Kupolati — for what is commonly called
the Carlsson report, and to the Secretary-General for having
taken the initiative to set up this Inquiry.
The objective of our contribution to this debate is to
share with the Council a number of thoughts that have
crossed our mind while reading the Carlsson report. Some
of these thoughts may be relevant to what we are doing in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We do not expect to come up with answers during this
meeting. An open Council meeting may be the appropriate
forum for articulating questions; finding answers will
require more time for careful study. We hope that all the
questions that remain unanswered today will be addressed
by the panel chaired by Mr. Brahimi, which has been asked
to conduct to a major study on United Nations peace
operations.
As we are reminded in the Rwanda report, there is
also a Srebrenica report, and both are relevant to the
present analysis. For obvious reasons, my delegation is
acutely aware of this. But in the report before us, we are
also reminded of the responsibility of the great majority of
United Nations Member States, which were not prepared to
send any troops or matériel at all to Rwanda. A similar
observation could, of course, be made about Srebrenica.
Accordingly, instead of criticizing anyone, we would like
to begin by commending Ghana and Tunisia, which allowed
their troops to remain in Rwanda throughout the terrible
weeks of the genocide, despite the withdrawal of other
contingents.
Next, we would like to make some observations on the
issue of feasibility. The report poses what it terms the
“natural question”: why a force numbering 2,500 could not
stop the actions of the militia and Rwandese Government
Forces soldiers that began setting up roadblocks and killing
politicians and Tutsi in the early hours after the plane crash
which killed the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi. The
question becomes even more pertinent if we ask ourselves
what could have been done if the 11 January cable of
Brigadier General Dallaire had been handled properly. In a
case of such urgency, simply replying that the proposed
action would clearly go beyond the mandate entrusted to
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) under resolution 872 (1993) does not, in our

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
view, constitute proper handling. It is true that Rwanda’s
membership of the Security Council complicated matters,
but we feel that the other 14 Council members should
have been informed without delay. Of course, the need to
protect the informant required a high degree of
confidentiality, but if that was the Secretariat’s primary
concern it might have been safer to inform 14 Permanent
Representatives than President Habyarimana.
The point we wish to make is that feasibility
depends on timing. Action which is feasible one day may
not be feasible a month later. Once the window of
opportunity has passed, the need to intervene will usually
increase in inverse proportion to a dwindling political will
to do so. It is not our intention to apportion blame, for
almost all of us live in a glass house as far as action or
inaction in the field of peacekeeping is concerned.
Besides, as for timing, Dallaire’s 11 January cable was by
no means the first warning signal.
How had the international community reacted to the
events of 9 March 1992, when a systematic slaughter of
the Tutsis in Nyamata was aborted thanks to the Italian
lay sister Tonia Locatelli, who succeeded in alerting the
international media by radio but was then brutally
murdered herself? The initial indignation caused by that
event had soon died down because killings in Rwanda
were seen as an age-old phenomenon, best viewed with
a degree of even-handedness and not too much emotion.
Tutsis were at risk in Government-controlled areas, and
Hutu lives were in peril where the Rwandese Patriotic
Front was in control. On 4 August 1993, the Arusha
Peace Agreement was welcomed with a sense of relief
because it gave the international community a peace
process to support, as the perfect expression of its evenhandedness.
This may explain why, one week later, hardly
anyone paid any attention to the report of Mr. Waly
Bacre Ndiaye, the Special Rapporteur of the Commission
on Human Rights on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions. Mr. Ndiaye reported so many massacres of
Tutsis that he asked himself whether the term “genocide”
might be applicable. It is clear why a report of that nature
was not immediately welcomed by an international
community which had just placed its trust in the Arusha
Peace Agreement. What is disconcerting, however, is that
for so long afterwards — even after the genocide had
begun — many protagonists continued to focus on the
risk of jeopardizing the Arusha Peace Agreement, as
though that accord were of a higher value than the
thousands of people who were meanwhile being killed.

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
On 15 April 1994, after the Interim Government had taken
office and already fled from Kigali, the President of the
Security Council made a statement to the press which made
no mention of the ongoing massacres but reaffirmed that
the Arusha Peace Agreement was the only viable
framework for the resolution of the Rwanda conflict. The
Council therefore demanded that the parties agree to an
immediate ceasefire and return to the negotiating table.
This statement was made at a time when, according to
an estimate of Human Rights Watch, killers carried out the
most devastating massacres of the genocide, in some cases
slaying hundreds or even thousands of people in one or two
days. Obviously, this unworldliness of the Council could
not last. On 28 April, Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria
complained that too much attention was being paid to the
ceasefire negotiations and too little to the massacres. Two
days later, on 30 April, the Council issued a presidential
statement which admitted for the first time that killings of
civilians had taken place especially in areas under the
control of members or supporters of the Interim
Government of Rwanda. Even in that statement, however,
the word “genocide” did not appear.
We see a number of lessons to be learned from this
part of the report. First, we should not treat a peace process
as something of a higher order than the populations of the
countries concerned. Secondly, we should not clutch at a
peace process that has ceased to be relevant. A peace
process may be dead, in which case it is the conflict that
demands our attention. Thirdly, we should pay more
attention to non-governmental organizations and, perhaps,
somewhat less to countries with experience in the region.
Most non-governmental organizations have a wealth of upto-date information from the ground. On that basis, they
tend to have a fresh approach and an open mind and are
unlikely to mistake killers for victims. Fourthly, evenhandedness is not a virtue when genocide is going on.
It is pointed out in the report that the credibility of the
United Nations requires that troop contributors refrain from
withdrawing unilaterally from a peace operation if that
withdrawal may be expected to jeopardize the operation in
question. It is understandable, but unfortunate, that a troopcontributing country which suffers heavy casualties will
inevitably find itself under pressure from its parliament and
its media to withdraw its contingent. The more this reflex
can be counted on, the greater the likelihood that precisely
such a contingent will be targeted by parties opposed to the
peace operation. We have no solution for this problem, but
it raises a discomforting question as to the suitability of
democratic countries for peace operations. We recall how,

6

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
in the case of Sierra Leone, Nigeria suddenly found it
more difficult to play its leading role in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) after it had restored
democratic rule.
We have already referred to the complicating factor
that, during the genocide, Rwanda was a member of the
Security Council. The report recommends that further
study be given to the possibility of suspending the
participation of the representative of a State member of
the Security Council in similar circumstances. We would
not object to such a study, but we believe that it would be
difficult to define the nature and scale of the occurrence
that might justify such a suspension. Moreover, quite
apart from the issue of Council membership, we are
concerned about the general reluctance to acknowledge
that, in the event of massive human rights abuses taking
place in a given country — especially if they have given
rise to armed rebellion — the Government of that country
may be in the wrong. We believe that the unwillingness
to condemn the Interim Government of Rwanda for the
genocide it was directing was due not only to its Council
membership.
As for the role of the individual members of the
Interim Government, the report raises the question of
whether their accountability was made sufficiently clear
to them at the time. This question is of immediate
“lessons-learned” relevance for the situation in Sierra
Leone. Can we trust all the actors in that country to be
fully aware that the amnesty provisions of the Lomé
Accord do not apply to human rights abuses committed
after the signing of that instrument and are not binding on
non-parties, anyway?
Equally, in the context of lessons learned, we would
like to point out that the report briefly touches on the
origin of the problem in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which rightly finds itself at the very top of the
Council’s agenda. The outflow from the humanitarian
protection zone under Operation Turquoise is described as
the starting point of one of the most complicated and
sensitive humanitarian emergencies of recent years: the
huge exodus of Rwandan refugees into Zaire, whose
camps were to become infiltrated by the Interahamwe and
other forces behind the genocide.
In this connection, we would like to comment briefly
on some of the recommendations contained in the report.
We agree that the United Nations should acknowledge its
part of the responsibility for not having done enough to

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
prevent or stop the genocide in Rwanda. We have noted
with deep respect the statement made by the Belgian Prime
Minister on the occasion of the sixth anniversary of the
beginning of the Rwanda genocide. Belgium, of course, is
not alone in having failed. The whole international
community should acknowledge its share of the
responsibility. But the best way of doing so today is to
show understanding for Rwanda’s legitimate security
concerns.
Similarly, my delegation fully subscribes to the
recommendation that the international community should
support efforts to rebuild Rwandan society after the
genocide, paying particular attention to the need for
reconstruction, reconciliation and respect for human rights.
We also agree that everything must be done to prevent
future catastrophes of the type that took place in Srebrenica
and in Rwanda. We support the proposals for enhancing
early warning and early response capacity. It is at least
equally important, however, that we be aware that with all
the training of staff at Headquarters, in agencies and in
programmes, and, not least, of personnel in field missions,
we cannot rule out that people may once again expect a
degree of protection from a United Nations peace operation
that the latter cannot deliver.
We should not forget that this is what Srebrenica and
Rwanda had in common. No matter how much we may
increase the robustness of our mandates or how widely we
may broadcast their strict limitations, we can never be sure
that frightened civilians will not force their way into the
compound of a United Nations peace operation and then
expect protection beyond that operation’s legal mandate or
physical capacity. Such a situation could once more lead to
a humanitarian tragedy. We would not like to give the
impression that we have already found a way of making
sure that something of the sort will never happen again.
The Rwanda report is at its most poignant where it
describes the false expectations aroused by the United
Nations presence, for instance among the people who had
sought refuge at the Ecole Technique Officielle. The
essence of the Srebrenica tragedy is of a similar nature.
This may well be the most important problem to be studied
by the Brahimi panel, for as long as it is not solved it
jeopardizes the whole concept of peace operations. Hence,
it must be solved. The inarticulate urge to do something is
a notoriously bad motivating force, but the solution cannot
be that we do not do what needs to be done.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We listened with to
Mr. Carlsson with great interest, and I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to him and to the other
participants in the Independent Inquiry for their great
work done in the study and analysis of the tragic events
that took place six years ago. The report, with its
conclusions and recommendations, is indeed an
outstanding contribution to the work of the Organization
as a whole and of the Security Council in particular in the
fulfilment of their primary task: maintaining and
strengthening international peace and security.
We would also like to commend the delegation of
Canada for bringing this issue to an open briefing. We
hope that our in-depth analysis of the steps and actions
taken by the United Nations, by individual Member States
and officials and by participants in the events will be
correctly interpreted and accepted by the international
community. Honest and frank discussion of the failures,
faults and mistakes of the Organization — a critical look
at ourselves — could to a great extent rehabilitate and
strengthen the credibility of the United Nations.
I would like to emphasize another important point.
The report straightforwardly describes the events, gives
specific names and refers to particular actions and
decisions. We should certainly should give credit to the
Secretary-General for appointing an independent inquiry.
That required great courage and self-criticism on the part
of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat. Their
readiness to assume their part of the responsibility and to
take on heavy and fair criticism undoubtedly deserves
respect.
It would not be erroneous to say that this report also
makes a valuable contribution to enhancing the openness,
transparency and democratization of the United Nations.
The appointment of the Independent Inquiry and the
subsequent release of its report also constituted a lesson
and a warning to all of us — first and foremost to the
Security Council. It proves that no steps and decisions —
or the lack of these — can be concealed from succeeding
generations.
For Ukraine, genocide is not just a term. We
experienced difficult times in our own history: this
century alone witnessed an unspeakable tragedy, when
more than 7 million people were exterminated within two
years by a well-planned famine. These events took place
in the country once called the breadbasket of Europe.
Today’s meeting provides an opportunity for me to
extend, on behalf of my country, deep condolences to the

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
people of Rwanda, who have gone through this deadly
machine of genocide, a tragedy that deeply scarred the
history of that country.
In both cases the international community was aware
of the developments, but did nothing to prevent or
ultimately to stop the tragedy. Therefore, I entirely share
the view expressed by Mr. Carlsson that no consideration
of a political, organizational or financial nature should
prevent the international community, and the Security
Council on its behalf, from taking decisive and
uncompromising measures in the face of similar
catastrophes.
It is not my intention to make a detailed analysis of
the report. In the light of the remarks made by
Mr. Carlsson and by the previous speaker, I will refrain
from commenting on its specific conclusions and
recommendations.
The major point, in our view, is that the report has
become the subject of multifaceted and diverse work. Let
us hope that this will bear fruit with regard to the work of
the United Nations and its bodies, as well as to the
commitment of individual Member States to their
responsibilities stemming from the United Nations Charter.
We shall also refrain from remarks analysing the
causes of events in Rwanda. Genocide is a tragedy of such
immense scale that its causes and consequences have
individual distinctions, and they are unlikely to be repeated
with the same dynamics in other cases — and may God
forbid such repetitions. However, the report and the work
done in that direction are extremely important in our view.
With its factual accuracy, it not only made us look at
ourselves, but also made us see in that mirror all the
shortcomings, mistakes and failures of the United Nations
and the whole international community.
Before concluding, I wish to note that a few days ago
we learned about the early retirement of Lieutenant General
Romeo Dallaire. Members may be aware of the reasons for
the retirement of that 53-year old career officer. We would
like to pay tribute to the courage of that man, regretting
that his honest and dedicated stance did not receive an
adequate response from New York, and that all his efforts
to prevent the tragedy ended in failure.
The President: We appreciate the comments of the
representative of Ukraine concerning the role played by
General Dallaire. We will make sure that he knows fully of
the sentiments he expressed.

8

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
I think it is appropriate, in the context of this
discussion of the failure of the Security Council in
Rwanda, that I announce on behalf of the Council that we
have asked Ambassador Richard Holbrooke to lead, early
next month, a Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The mission is designed to
accelerate full acceptance and implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and to support the relevant
Security Council resolutions. I wish Ambassador
Holbrooke and his mission every success in that very
timely initiative.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I would
like to thank you again, Mr. Minister, for coming back
from Canada to chair this important meeting. I accept the
mandate of the Security Council to lead this mission and
am delighted that the membership of it is shaping up. I
think it would be useful to note that a prior mission to
Kosovo will be headed by Ambassador Chowdhury and
that these two missions further the evolving role of the
Security Council as an organization which, following on
the historic work of Ambassador Andjaba's mission to
East Timor last year, will take a more active role not only
in adopting resolutions but in making sure they are
implemented. So I welcome this assignment,
Mr. President, and I believe that it is a mission that can
be frankly said to give us the hope that we will avoid
another meeting such as this one in the future, so it is
very timely to announce it today.
Mr. Prime Minister, I want to thank you and your
colleagues for you efforts in producing this historic
report. Along with the Secretary-General's report on
Srebrenica, which Ambassador van Walsum has already
discussed, it is a remarkable document, a remarkable selfcriticism. We have much to learn from these documents.
That these reports were sponsored and generated by the
United Nations itself is a testament to our collective
commitment to work with the Secretary-General to reform
the United Nations, to overcome and avoid the failures of
the past and to do better in the future.
Fifty-five years ago the United Nations was created
in the ashes of the Second World War to help prevent
conflict and atrocities. It is the primary responsibility of
this body, the Security Council, to stand against such
horrible actions and take the lead in response. This is our
core task. This is the one, ultimately, upon which the
United Nations will be judged by the people of the world.
The report makes clear that in Rwanda, as in Bosnia
and Somalia, the international system failed and that these

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
collective failures nearly brought the United Nations system
down. It sparked an institutional and political crisis from
which the United Nations system is trying to recover and
which it will be severely tested in the "big four" of
peacekeeping: East Timor, Kosovo, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For its part, our nation accepts its own shortcomings
in this terrible period. This has been expressed with
openness and candour by President Clinton himself during
his historic 1998 visit to Africa. In his visit to Kigali he
said,
“The international community, together with the
nations in Africa, must bear its share of responsibility
for this tragedy as well. We did not act quickly
enough after the killing began. We should not have
allowed the refugee camps to become safe havens for
the killers. We did not immediately call these crimes
by their rightful name: genocide. We cannot change
the past, but we can and must do everything in our
power to help Rwanda build a future without fear and
full of hope.”
There is little I can add to President Clinton's
statement. Like the Carlsson report and the Secretary
General's report on Srebrenica, his words stand as an
indictment of both the perpetrators and the bystanders. They
are a call to action to prevent the recurrence of genocidal
violence.
In the trip that my colleagues and I made in our
national capacity to Africa and to Rwanda in December of
last year, I visited a memorial, on a hillside outside of
Kigali, to the victims of the genocide, accompanied by
many of the survivors, still in a state of shock, five years
later. Like the massacre sites of the Balkans or the factories
of death of Nazi Germany or the killing fields of
Cambodia, a visit to such a place of memory commands
justice for the dead and hope for the living. The people
stood in a field with wooden crosses and asked if the
United Nations could help make it a permanent memorial.
They told me that they estimated the cost would be
$300,000. I hope that some way can be found to
accommodate this request so that we can recognize in a
physical way on that hillside in Kigali the two fundamental
imperatives we must focus on here in this Chamber: never
forget, and never again.
What happened in Rwanda and Bosnia was not the
spontaneous result of some sort of genetic predisposition
for genocide or that dreadful phrase of journalists, “ancient

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
ethnic hatreds”. Such judgements are an excuse for
inaction. I repeat, such judgements are an excuse for
inaction. I have written in my own book on Bosnia how
appalled I was to hear these phrases coming from
American officials in regard to Bosnia, and I commend
you, Mr. Prime Minister, for being so direct and open
about them in regard to this tragedy.
The atrocities in Rwanda were carried out by a small
group of murderers intent on promoting hate to preserve
power — just as was true in Bosnia. These were political
acts, plain and simple. Those perpetrating them must be
held responsible. For not acting against such violence
when there were clear indications it would take place, so
must we, the international community.
Again, we are grateful to Prime Minister Carlsson
and his colleagues for their unsparing report. It is a
historical document and, we hope, a blueprint for the
future.
That future must now be our highest priority. The
prevention of another round of violence, genocidal or
otherwise, in Central Africa is a core element of the
United States policy in the Great Lakes. It is one of the
United Nations greatest current challenges.
The legacy of genocide and ethnic cleansing in
Rwanda, Burundi and the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a tragic reality that must be
addressed and which will, Mr. President, be the focus of
the mission you have announced today. We undertake
your mandate with humility and hope, and I am delighted
that so many members of the Security Council here
represented will join in that mission. I know that you
have decided that every country here should either go to
Kosovo or the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
divisions are still being finalized, but I congratulate you
on an excellent solution to that aspect of the problem,
because Kosovo equally demands our attention.
In regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we must end the cycle of impunity. Our discussion today
should galvanize support for United Nations sanctions
against the Rwandan armed forces and the Interahamwe.
We must also begin to plan and prepare for
demobilization and reintegration of other armed groups in
the Great Lakes region.
The United States supports the International war
crimes Tribunal in Rwanda. We continue to press for
reforms to make it more effective. We support Rwanda's

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
own domestic justice system, which is sometimes
misunderstood by other people. We have allocated
$25 million for the Great Lakes Justice Initiative to help reestablish and strengthen the rule of law in that area.
It is undeniable that many of the Rwandan murderers
remain at large within the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and many of those wish to renew
the genocide. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is unable to prevent the use of its territory by
these armed groups. It is simply outside their physical,
logistical and political capability. It is therefore time for all
the States of the region to come together and find a
common solution for the insurgencies of the groups that are
not fully covered inside the Lusaka Cease Fire Agreement.
Angolan, Rwandan, Burundian and Sudanese groups operate
with impunity in the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The solution lies both within the countries of
origin of these groups and within the country that is the
often unwilling host.
We all know that something must be done. The full
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and a
rededication to the institutions of justice offer the best hope
for an end to the present crisis. We cannot say that the
solution to Rwanda’s problems lies exclusively in actions
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Neither can
we say that Rwanda’s problems should be solved without
addressing the presence of the genocidal militia in a
neighbouring State. Lusaka’s full implementation, local and
international justice, and democratization and institutionbuilding in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are the keys to preventing further conflict and
genocide.
We share the previously expressed view of the
representative of the Netherlands that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is inadequately
staffed and inadequately structured to deal with the massive
challenges that are posed by the African crises as well as
by East Timor, Somalia and their other missions. However,
we emphatically support the Secretary-General’s
peacekeeping commission. We look forward to its results
and urge that it be ambitious in its goals.
Meanwhile, we must deal with ongoing crises. In the
mission to Kinshasa that will begin on 2 May, the Security
Council will assess the status of the progress being made,
and we will urge the parties to do more. In the days ahead,
how we act to help bring peace to the Congo will be the
best tribute to the important report we are discussing today.

10

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
I wish also to thank the President for coming back
to New York to chair this important and, I hope,
potentially historic meeting.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I too wish to
welcome Mr. Carlsson and thank him and the other
members of the Independent Inquiry for the clear-sighted,
courageous and informative report he submitted to us.
Let me recall that in this context the Organization of
African Unity has also established an International Panel
of Eminent Persons to analyse the Rwandan genocide and
related events. Mali is proud to participate in that work
through General Amadou Toumani Touré, former head of
State of Mali.
The main conclusion we can draw from the analysis
of the report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda is that the Organization and its Member States
were not able to prevent or to halt the genocide in
Rwanda. This conclusion is based on what the report
deems to be an absence of capacity for analysis, which is
the reason for the excessive and incomprehensible caution
shown in the face of information regarding preparations
for genocide. It also condemns the lack of political will
to halt the genocide, which was partly the result of
resolution 912 (1994) of 21 April 1994, which reduced
the force level of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda, and partly of the weakening of the mandate
of that Mission.
These considerations were discussed at length in
Mr. Carlsson’s briefing today, and I will not repeat them.
I would like to point out, however, that in addition to
pointing out the failings of the Organization and its
Member States, the report draws lessons from the tragedy
of Rwanda and contains many proposals and
recommendations. Today’s meeting gives us a useful
opportunity to engage in public and constructive reflection
so that we can formulate guidelines to enable the United
Nations to respond effectively to various types of conflict.
I should like in this respect to make a few brief
comments.
My first comment relates to the capacity of the
United Nations in the area of peacekeeping, in particular
regarding the mobilization of resources, the strengthening

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
of the means of the Secretariat in the area of operations
planning, logistical support to the contingents of developing
countries, the definition of mandates and of rules of
engagement, coordination and cooperation between
peacekeeping operations and the non-governmental
organizations that are active in the area of operations, and,
finally, cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.
We support the recommendations contained in the
report, which were mentioned earlier by Mr. Carlsson.
My second comment relates to the decision-making
process in the Council, in this case the question of the
indispensable political will in the Council to give effect to
resolutions and the fairness it must show in dealing with
issues concerning Africa in particular compared to other
conflict areas. Indeed, the political will to act, and in
particular to prevent acts of genocide, such as in the case
of Rwanda, or massive violations of human rights, such as
in Sierra Leone or the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
should be clear and should not be subject to double
standards. Attempts to advance national interests at the
expense of international peace and security should cease.
My third comment relates to the system for gathering
and dealing with information in crisis situations. It is
imperative, we think, that the early warning capacity of the
United Nations be enhanced, particularly its capacity to
analyse information and react effectively to it. While we
welcome the measures already taken at various levels of the
Secretariat, we still must enhance the circulation of
information among the United Nations agencies, in
particular information relating to human rights.
Fourthly, with respect to efforts to rebuild society in
Rwanda after the genocide, we believe that the international
community must continue to give aid and assistance to
Rwanda, devoting particular attention to efforts aimed at
reconstruction and at bringing about reconciliation and
respect for human rights, in order to realize the hopes that
have begun to emerge.
Fifthly and lastly, with respect to the relationship
between the Organization and Rwanda, we believe that the
Organization should acknowledge its share of responsibility
in the tragedy in Rwanda, and we welcome the resolve of
the Secretary-General actively to seek a new beginning in
the relationship between the United Nations and Rwanda.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is grateful to Canada for organizing this

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
open debate and for thus following up the discussion of
the Carlsson report which the United Kingdom instigated
among members of the Council in December.
We pay tribute to Prime Minister Carlsson and to his
Korean and Nigerian colleagues on the Inquiry for the
excellent job that they have done and to the SecretaryGeneral for taking this initiative of commendable
transparency.
It is important that our discussions should look to
the future. We must all, Member States and the
Secretariat, be prepared to learn from the report of the
Independent Inquiry team, to discuss its recommendations
in depth and to explore any other realistic ways to avoid
such humanitarian catastrophes in future. The United
Kingdom is very ready to do that.
We also need to look to the future of the people of
Rwanda. What they need now is political commitment
and practical support in their efforts to rebuild their
country. The United Kingdom Government is committed
to working in partnership with the Government and the
people of Rwanda to build national unity and develop
democratic processes in a society where trust was
destroyed by genocide.
Rwanda also needs to restore the rule of law and
address the devastating economic impact of the genocide.
Given the background of 1994, and before that the legacy
of decades of divisive and exclusionary rule, such a task
will take time. The United Kingdom is committed to
working in an open partnership with Rwanda to keep that
process on track. For instance, we are now providing
long-term development assistance to help Rwanda to meet
international development targets, and I think that answers
one of the points made by the Ambassador of Mali. For
its part, Rwanda has made specific commitments in the
areas of national unity, good governance, conflict
resolution, poverty reduction and economic stability,
commitments which it must fulfil.
The Carlsson report highlights a range of failures
encompassing all those involved, and it puts forward a
number of recommendations for the future. I will focus
on those issues relating to the Security Council. Perhaps
most damning is the apparent failure to face up to the
reality on the ground when it really mattered. This failure
became evident in two important aspects: first, the
original mandate was based on the commitment of the
parties to the Arusha Peace Accords but did not properly
take account of the fragility of those Accords; second,

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4127th meeting
14 April 2000

and most important, the Council failed to respond to the
drastically changing situation on the ground.

comprehensive approach going much wider than
peacekeeping.

It is apparent that there were real problems in the flow
of information, including to the Security Council. Some of
the causes were structural. But there also appears to have
been a perception — probably justified — that the Security
Council, and maybe the United Nations membership as a
whole, did not have the political stomach for hearing and
responding to the unadorned truth. This is fundamental. The
Council needs accurate, timely and unfiltered information.
At the same time, the Council and the United Nations
membership as a whole must demonstrate the political will
to act on that information, however unpalatable, to tackle
complex humanitarian emergencies.

We therefore applaud the Secretary-General’s
intention to tackle these issues in a broad-ranging report
on peace operations due to be issued this summer.
Today’s discussion must inform that process and lead to
effective decisions by the Council which draw the right
lessons from this appalling story.

It is easy to underline the need for greater
responsiveness and flexibility. In an organization of 188
equal States, that is not always so easy to deliver. But we
as a Council have to be clear that no peacekeeping mandate
is set in stone, that operational changes are part of the
Council’s business and that the underlying principles and
responsibilities of the United Nations must not be ignored
or set aside.
We know that for a peacekeeping mission to work,
there must be a peace to keep. And it is right that any
peacekeeping mission must be based on the commitment of
all parties to a peace accord. But at the same time we have
to recognize where fault lines remain — and in any longterm conflict such fault lines will be deep and extend to the
population at large, not just to political and military players.
This principle is bound to apply in most peacekeeping
operations, not least those currently before us in Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We must
also be prepared to recognize and respond to signs of a
major shift in the political or humanitarian situation. As the
report makes clear, this means that any peacekeeping
operation needs to have both a political analysis capacity
and a human rights monitoring capacity. This underlines the
importance, moreover, of the continuing efforts of the
United Nations to strengthen its rapid reaction capability.
We must ensure that lessons learned from Rwanda
inform future Council discussions. The Rwanda and
Srebrenica reports are inextricably linked to wider issues of
United Nations peacekeeping capability and humanitarian
preventive action. These issues have implications for other
United Nations bodies, not just the Security Council. This
point is borne out by current discussions on conflict
prevention, which are detailing the need for a

12

Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like once again to thank you, Mr. President,
for coming to chair the Security Council debate here in
New York. This bears witness to your and your country’s
dedication to and support for this organization and for
humanitarian issues and conflict prevention, as well as the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I would like to start by saying that we deeply
appreciate the Secretary-General’s decision to order an
inquiry into the actions of the United Nations in Rwanda
during the 1994 genocide. As far as we are concerned,
this is an exemplary gesture.
I would like to particularly pay tribute to you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative of organizing
an open debate on the report of the Independent Inquiry,
which was chaired by Prime Minister Carlsson and
included Minister Sung-Joo and General Kupolati. It is a
comprehensive and objective report. Without doubt it will
be a fundamental landmark for the Council’s work,
because without forgetting the past, it looks towards the
future.
It is essential, I believe, that all of us, without
exception — the Security Council, the other bodies of the
Organization and the United Nations in general, as well
as the international community as a whole — should
think about our mistakes, our failings and our lack of
resolve in Rwanda. We must do so with humility and
with a deep sense of self-criticism. The United Nations
did nothing, or at least not enough, to prevent or halt the
genocide in Rwanda. We abandoned the Rwandese people
at the time they needed us the most. Perhaps this was
because we were not prepared from the military and
political point of view, but perhaps also because we were
not psychologically prepared to confront the events which
developed in Rwanda six years ago.
I do not think it is helpful to begin to allocate blame,
but we must take into consideration that following upon
this bitter lesson, the peoples of the world will not forgive

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
us if in the future we fail to prevent or to rapidly and
effectively respond to a genocide or to a massive violation
of human rights.
The Rwandese tragedy inescapably leads us to think
about three fundamental and interrelated issues: conflict
prevention, peacekeeping operations, and the strengthening
of international standards of protection for human rights
and humanitarian law.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report on
the work of the Organization for 1999:
“The main short- and medium-term strategies for
preventing non-violent conflicts from escalating
into war, and preventing earlier wars from
erupting again, are preventive diplomacy,
preventive deployment, and preventive
disarmament.” (A/54/1, para. 36)
The United Nations of the twenty-first century must
gradually become a source of preventive measures.
Preventive diplomacy calls for an accurate assessment of
events, economic resources and, most importantly, political
will. We believe these factors were lacking in Rwanda in
1994.
As regards peacekeeping operations, there are four
points that I consider essential.
First, peacekeeping operations must be endowed with
a clear, realistic mandate commensurate with the established
goals and backed by the necessary political, military and
moral decisions.
Secondly, financial resources must be dependable and
adequate. Voluntary funding can be a useful tool, but never
a substitute for regular contributions.
Thirdly, there must be reasonable security guarantees
for United Nations, associated and humanitarian personnel.
In this regard, we would like to reiterate our call for the
ratification of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel in peacekeeping
operations, and we recall presidential statement
S/PRST/2000/4, adopted on 9 February 2000 following the
open debate held by the Security Council on this topic.
Fourth, in cases such as that of Rwanda, the mandate
must include clear rules for the protection of civilians.
When any deliberate attempt to carry out serious attacks on
the civil population occurs, the United Nations cannot

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
remain indifferent — it has a moral imperative to act.
Security Council resolutions 1270 (1999) and 1291
(2000), establishing the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and extending the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), respectively, are a step in the right
direction. They enable the Blue Helmets, in specific
circumstances, to act under Chapter VII of the Charter to
defend the civilian population. I think this is one of the
lessons learned in Rwanda and Srebrenica. A false idea of
impartiality must not be allowed to prevail when genocide
or crimes against humanity are being committed. It is
against this background, and within a broad interpretation
of the idea of international peace and security, that we
must understand the concept of human security, and the
open debate proposed by Canada for 19 April on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is an initiative
that we unequivocally support.
The need to strengthen standards for the protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law is
another element that must be studied, following the
Carlsson report. It is clear that with certain limitations,
there is already an adequate normative framework. The
fact of the matter is, however, that there is a wide gap
between the existence of these legal standards and their
observance. This is why it is indispensable to establish
appropriate national and international machinery to fight
impunity. Justice is an essential component of a stable
peace. The genocide in Rwanda and other crimes against
humanity must not go unpunished. In this context, we
support the work of the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, and we are convinced that the entry into force
of the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court will contribute to creating an awareness
that impunity will not be tolerated.
The Argentine public learned yesterday, through the
Buenos Aires newspaper Clarín, of the moving
declarations of General Romeo Dallaire, Force
Commander of United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda. Referring to the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, he
said: “I know that God exists because I have shaken
hands with the devil.” The events in Rwanda must move
us all to deep reflection and analysis. As the SecretaryGeneral has said in his report on the fall of Srebrenica,
“The United Nations global commitment to ending
conflict does not preclude moral judgements, but
makes them necessary.” (A/54/549, para. 506)

13

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The President: I would like to thank the
representative of Argentina for his very appreciative words
on the role of General Dallaire.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, Mr. President, we would like to
associate ourselves with the words of gratitude to you for
having organized our discussion of the report of the
Independent Inquiry into the actions of the United Nations
during the time of the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
The Russian delegation has carefully studied the
report, which reminds us of that terrible period when
800,000 entirely innocent people in Rwanda fell victim to
an ethnic conflict that was rightly described by the
international community as genocide. We are grateful to the
authors of the report for their painstaking analysis of what
could have been done by the international community to
prevent that horrendous crime and of what, for a variety of
reasons, was not done. Unfortunately, history does not
know the conditional tense, and the clock cannot be turned
back. Those who fell victim to genocide in Rwanda in 1994
cannot be resurrected from the dead, but we agree with the
view that lessons must be drawn from the past to see to it
that what happened in 1994 in Rwanda never happens
again.
The Russian delegation believes that in preparing new
peacekeeping operations, very careful account should be
taken by the Security Council of the results of the analysis
of actions by the United Nations in Rwanda during the time
of the 1994 genocide. Unfortunately, the world is not
perfect, and even the capacity of an authoritative body such
as the Security Council of the United Nations is not
unlimited, to say nothing of the capacity of individual
countries represented on the Council. Nevertheless, Russia
attaches great importance to a careful analysis of provisions
for protecting civilians in areas where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are being conducted. We must
attempt, on the one hand, to ensure that peacekeepers
provide maximum protection for innocent civilians and, on
the other hand, to avoid creating illusions that are not
backed up by the real capacities of United Nations
personnel.
In the broader context, we again take note of the
desirability of developing norms of international law,
adapting them to new realities in order to produce a proper
international legal interpretation of humanitarian crises and
making it possible to respond to them properly. That was
precisely the thrust of the President of Russia’s proposal

14

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
that consideration be given to the legal aspects of the use
of force in international relations in our globalizing world.
Concerning the current situation in Rwanda and in
the Great Lakes region as a whole, of course we share the
conclusions of the report regarding the need for the
international community to assist the Rwandans in dealing
with the effects of the genocide and in punishing the
perpetrators. At the same time, we believe that the
spinning wheel of violence, one rotation of which was the
genocide in Rwanda, must be finally stopped. In other
words, we call upon all forces involved in the conflicts in
the Great Lakes region to lay down their arms and
intensify the search for a political settlement to these
conflicts, which could ultimately lead to a comprehensive
settlement of the situation in the region within the context
of an international conference on the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open briefing today on
the report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions of
the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
The formal consideration of this first-of-its-kind document
is overdue. For too long, the Organization has shied away
from acknowledging a serious flaw in judgement in its
handling of the situation in Rwanda. The 1994 slaughter
of the 800,000 people still reverberates today, and in
order for us to exorcise this ghastly failure, we must
muster the courage to accept and recognize, in all
humility, our shortcomings. More importantly, we must
learn from the tragedy and not allow a repetition of
Rwanda in any part of the world.
In this regard, we would also like to express our
appreciation to the former Prime Minister of Sweden,
Mr. Ingvar Carlsson, for introducing a sobering, critical
report that has catalogued in painful detail how the United
Nations ignored abundant warnings of impending carnage
and withdrew most of its peacekeeping force as the
massacres began.
We also wish to commend Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his decision in commissioning the report and
for his courage in making a public expression of his
profound regret and acknowledgement of responsibility.
Malaysia believes that it is for the good of the
Organization that the truth be made known. We must
restore the credibility of this Organization and, more
importantly, contribute to the healing and reconciliation
process of the Rwandan people.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Aside from its account of what actually happened, the
report of the Independent Inquiry is also noteworthy for the
timing of its release. Its issuance, on 16 December 1999,
came on the heels of an equally critical internal report
detailing how, in July 1995, the United Nations allowed the
Bosnian Muslim safe area of Srebrenica to be overrun by
Bosnian Serbs. Together, these inquiries have established an
admirable new standard of candour at the United Nations.
They could point the way towards more effective
international action if similar situations were to arise in the
future.
We can succeed only if we are honest with ourselves
and have a clear idea of what has been wrong up to now.
We must strive for a clear set of criteria and guidelines on
how, in future, to better implement and coordinate the
whole range of United Nations activities in the area of
peace and security.
The report has clearly assigned responsibility for the
limitations of the original mandate given to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) where
it belongs. It is clear that an inadequate and flawed analysis
underpinned the recommendations to the Council, which
accepted the recommendation that the Mission be composed
of fewer troops than the field mission had considered
necessary. UNAMIR’s mandate was cautious from its
inception; it was to become equally cautious in its
application on the ground. The mandate was applied in a
manner which would preserve a neutral role for UNAMIR
under a traditional peacekeeping mandate — one that was
grossly inadequate to halt the genocide. This was the scope
of the action that was perceived to have support in the
Security Council. Despite a deteriorating security situation
which should have prompted a more robust and preventive
role for the United Nations, no steps were taken to adjust
the mandate to the realities of the situation on the ground.
Council members must also share the responsibility —
obviously, some more than others. There was no will to
deploy a more substantial force or to use “all necessary
means” to protect civilians at risk. It is clear from the
report that an adequate number of properly trained,
equipped and supported troops could have averted the
horrific tragedy.
It has often been said that UNAMIR was an operation
which was established in the shadow of Somalia. In
particular, the tragic deaths of United Nations peacekeepers
in Somalia in 1993 had a deep effect on the attitude
towards the conduct of peacekeeping operations. The
experience of Somalia appears to have had a constraining

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
effect on the Secretariat, in particular with regard to the
risks that could be assumed during peacekeeping
operations and in respect of the interpretation of
mandates. Nevertheless, while criticism can be levelled at
the mistakes and limitations of the capacity of
UNAMIR’s troops, responsibility should also be shared
by the great majority of United Nations Member States,
which were not prepared to send any troops or matériel
to Rwanda.
My delegation welcomes the commissioning, release
and discussion of the report. It throws much light on the
circumstances surrounding the tragedy that engulfed
Rwanda, which is extremely useful to States Members of
this Organization. However, many questions that should
have been addressed by the Independent Inquiry were
kept in abeyance. Such questions revolve around the
identity of perpetrators and possible accomplices in the
murderous attack that claimed the lives of the heads of
State of Rwanda and of Burundi. That attack, as pointed
out in many parts of the report, served as a catalyst for
the Rwandan genocide. We note that the report is based
on evidence collected from only one side in the conflict,
that is, the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) and its
collaborators. Similar interviews with other personalities
in exile could have proved useful. Such exiles include
members of the two successive transition Governments
before the assassination of President Habyarimana, as
well as members of the first RPF Government who had
to flee the country.
We think it would perhaps have been useful for the
Independent Inquiry to have included in its
recommendations the setting up of a more comprehensive
and detailed commission of inquiry on the Rwandan
genocide. We believe that Rwandans mourn not only the
Tutsis and moderate Hutus who were massacred in 1994,
but also other Hutus and Tutsis who were massacred
before and after that period by extremists from all sides.
Such an inquiry, while painful, would serve to bring this
great tragedy to closure, thereby contributing to the
necessary process of reconciliation between the two ethnic
groups, which is important for the future peace and
tranquillity of the region.
We note the Organization’s admission, in the
aftermath of the 1994 tragedy, that it had, indeed, learned
some lessons from Rwanda. It had failed to respond to
several warnings of the impending genocide. Six months
before the massacre, for example, a report by the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva
signalled what was to come, but the report never made it

15

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4127th meeting
14 April 2000

to the desks of senior peacekeeping officials in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, who might have
acted on it. The failure of communication within the
Secretariat and with the Security Council is less likely now.
However, better internal communication is not the whole
answer. The ability of the United Nations to respond to
crises can be only as strong as the will of its leading
members to provide the necessary resources. It is
regrettable that the Council’s failure to prevent the slaughter
in Rwanda has led many to question its perceived
selectivity when deciding to intervene in conflict situations.

Six years ago, the people of Rwanda suffered a
tragedy that left a mark on its history: the massacre of
800,000 people. The international community, and in
particular the United Nations, did not prevent that
genocide and did not react in time to bring it to a halt.
The report of the Independent Inquiry sheds light on this
dark period of Rwanda’s history and on the international
community’s failings during the tragedy. The report will
inevitably enhance awareness and will be the basis of indepth reflection on how to predict and prevent tragedies
of this kind.

The United Nations may not be able to meet all of the
world’s many humanitarian challenges. But this report from
the Independent Inquiry, coming on the eve of the new
millennium, should be a turning point for this Organization.
The Organization must make a difference to populations at
risk whenever necessary, wherever they happen to be. The
shame of the Srebrenica massacre was that the United
Nations had stationed a token peacekeeping force in the
town, large enough for it to claim that it cared about the
fate of Bosnian Muslims, but too small to actually help
them. The shame of Rwanda, likewise, is that the United
Nations did send a token force to the region but then stood
by as the horror unfolded. We must learn from the lessons
of this tragedy and come to terms with our acts of
omission. In this regard, it is imperative that we give
serious consideration to the 14 recommendations of the
report, which, if adhered to, would ensure non-repetition of
the tragic blunder made in respect of Rwanda. We must
thank the authors of the report for speaking out without fear
or favour.

The Independent Inquiry has set out a series of
conclusions and recommendations that deserve the full
attention of States Members of the United Nations, of the
Security Council and of the Secretariat. These will
undoubtedly serve as a benchmark when future
peacekeeping challenges arise.

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire delegation of
Canada for having organized this open briefing. I wish at
the same time to thank Mr. Ingvar Carlsson for his useful
statement on the report of the Independent Inquiry into the
actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. I commend the members of the Inquiry for their
work, which led to a report of great importance and historic
value.
We should like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General
for his praiseworthy initiative to task the Inquiry with
establishing the facts about the behaviour of the
Organization with respect to the genocide in Rwanda so
that the entire international community, the United Nations
and Member States might draw the lessons needed to
prevent such tragedies in the future.

16

Today’s review in no way detracts from the valour,
the courage and the sense of duty of the members of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR), including Tunisian Blue Helmets, who on
instructions from the Tunisian Government stood their
ground during the terrible weeks of the genocide. The
report of the Independent Inquiry refers to this, and
commends it.
As the Independent Inquiry notes, some measures
have been taken in recent years to enhance the capacity
of the United Nations to respond to conflicts and to avoid
some the mistakes made in Rwanda. But additional
measures are needed to strengthen the capacity of the
Organization to prevent future disasters. Political will and
full support from the international community are
indispensable if this undertaking is to succeed.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
thank the delegation of Canada for organizing today’s
meeting. Our thanks go also to Mr. Carlsson for
introducing the report of the Independent Inquiry. The
Inquiry has succeeded in summing up the experiences
gained and lessons learned by the United Nations with
respect to the massive killings in Rwanda. We convey our
appreciation to the Inquiry for its conscientious and
careful work.
The international community failed to prevent the
tragedy that took place in Rwanda six years ago. The
lessons to be drawn from that tragedy merit sober
reflection. We believe that today’s discussion will help us
analyze the experiences and learn lessons with a view to

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
effectively improving United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to increasing the capacity of the Security
Council to react to and deal with similar crises in the
future.
The Inquiry made many recommendations touching
upon a variety of areas. They have a bearing on
coordination and cooperation among various United Nations
departments. The recommendations relate to such matters
as reform of the United Nations, enhancement of the
efficiency of the Security Council, strengthening of the
political will of Member States, mobilization of adequate
resources, and many other matters. These recommendations
warrant attention and study by the relevant departments,
and deserve comprehensive consideration in the context of
strengthening the role of the United Nations in the twentyfirst century.
We have noted that in recent years the United Nations
has been making efforts to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of its peacekeeping operations. How to carry out
effective peacekeeping operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone, and how to
transform the priority attention we give to African issues
into action in such a way that success will be achieved and
mistakes reduced to the minimum: these are matters of
increasing public concern. We believe that summarizing the
lessons and experience gained from the Rwanda tragedy
will be illuminating in that regard.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I too wish to
welcome Mr. Carlsson and to thank him for the report
before the Council today, which describes the horror of the
genocide committed between April and July 1994:
“Rwandans killed Rwandans, brutally decimating the
Tutsi population of the country, but also targetting
moderate Hutus. Appalling atrocities were committed,
by militia and the armed forces, but also by civilians
against other civilians.
“The international community did not prevent the
genocide, nor did it stop the killing once the genocide
had begun”. (S/1999/1257, annex, p. 3)
The debate that you have organized, Mr. President,
provides an opportunity for us to think about the lessons to
be learned. More than ever before, we need to ensure that
the United Nations will no longer remain inactive or
powerless in the face of such tragedies.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
But I wish first to welcome the initiative taken by
the Secretary-General, who had the courage to task the
Independent Inquiry with investigating the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide. We support that
initiative. When the French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hubert Védrine, received the Independent Inquiry last
November, he said that France shared this determination
to achieve transparency and effectiveness. In France, that
determination was reflected in the 1998 establishment of
a parliamentary fact-finding mission on Rwanda. Let us
in turn have the courage together to look the truth in the
face.
The United Nations seriously failed in its mission.
The report of the Independent Inquiry provides a thorough
analysis of the mistakes that led to the failure of the
United Nations in Rwanda. The report highlights the
shortcomings of decisions taken before the outbreak of
genocide: the inadequate mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), the lack of
resources provided for the Mission, poor use of
information, and an inability to adapt the mandate of the
Mission to the requirements of the situation on the
ground.
The report also highlights the serious mistakes that
resulted in a “Failure to respond to the genocide” (ibid.,
p. 35), a lack of determination to strengthen UNAMIR,
inability to understand the real nature of events and to
decide on what action should be taken.
Of course, as the investigators say, the situation in
1994 was particularly tense. The United Nations had
deployed about 70,000 Blue Helmets throughout the
world, and several missions were facing difficulties.
These elements certainly affected decision-making. We
should also pay tribute to the troops of UNAMIR, those
of Belgium, and particularly of Ghana and Tunisia, who
remained there on the ground and, as well as they could,
protected the threatened civilians.
However, the overall picture is one of failure. The
United Nations was not able to assist the Rwandans and,
as the Inquiry stresses, all of us — Security Council
members, the Secretariat, States Members of the
Organization — bear the heavy responsibility for this.
Before the United Nations undertook its own inquiry
into actions in Rwanda, the French National Assembly set
up a parliamentary fact-finding mission on Rwanda. The
mission, which was presided over by Mr. Quiles,
throughout 1998 gathered testimony from many
participants in and witnesses to the tragedy. All of this

17

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
information, in the spirit of transparency, was made public.
This work made it possible to better understand several
aspects of the Rwandan tragedy. Mr. Carlsson’s Inquiry
supplements those analyses.
From the report of the French Parliament, I note that
France, before the events of 1994, had made an effort to
avoid a military solution and to encourage the parties to
share power in Rwanda. We need to place this tragedy in
its historical context, which goes beyond the offensive by
the Rwandese Patriotic Front in 1990, all the way back to
events of 1959, the time of decolonization. The active
support of France for the negotiations concluded in August
1993 in Arusha illustrated this policy. The accords reached
were the framework in which lasting peace could have been
established with mutual respect for all.
The parliamentary report also demonstrated that
France, while aware of the risk of confrontation,
underestimated the upsurge of extremism. Nevertheless, it
tried to mobilize the international community, through the
United Nations, to prevent a massacre. Mr. Carlsson's
analysis shows that neither the other Member States present
at the time nor the Secretariat used any better the
information that, subsequently, was to prove crucial. This
attitude goes a long way in explaining the inability of the
United Nations to prevent the 1994 genocide. This tragedy
still has one unclear area regarding elements that triggered
the genocide, though this will no doubt be clarified one
day.
In the face of the spring 1994 genocide and in the
light of the delays and difficulties encountered in
strengthening UNAMIR, France, in June, with the support
of the troops of African countries, assisted the people who
were under threat, and it did so in transparency and with
the authorization of the Security Council. We are aware of
the criticism, which we think unjustified, that Operation
Turquoise elicited. But should we once again have stood
by passively? The report submitted by Mr. Carlsson reflects
some of this criticism, but it also says “many ...
interlocutors have credited Operation Turquoise with saving
a number of lives in a situation where few other initiatives
were being taken” (ibid., p. 49). This is the point we wish
to retain from that intervention.
Now we need to learn the lessons of this tragedy.
Several comments could be made concerning the Great
Lakes region, as well as the work of the Council and
peacekeeping operations in general.

18

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
The Rwandan tragedy occurred in a particularly
unstable environment. We recall in particular the
massacres committed in Burundi in October of 1993 in an
atmosphere of general passivity. Since 1994, this
instability in the Great Lakes region has increased. After
the failure to deal with the Rwandan genocide, the United
Nations was not able to face up to subsequent crises.
In the months following 1994, the Council did not
react in time to the problems caused by the presence of
armed elements in the refugee camps in eastern Zaire.
In autumn of 1996, the Kivu crisis prompted the
Council, at the urging, inter alia, of France, to authorize
the dispatch of a multinational humanitarian force. Canada
announced that it was prepared to head that operation.
France said that it was willing to participate. The
disagreement in the Council finally meant that the
operation had to be abandoned. The international
community once again remained inactive in the face of
new massacres, the magnitude of which has not fully
been measured.
As of August 1998, the Council was faced with a
war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
information that reached us reported violence against
civilian populations, particularly in the east of the country
and attested to the seriousness of the situation. This time,
will we be able to take the necessary action?
The events that occurred starting in 1994 are part of
the context created by the Rwandan genocide. As we now
consider Mr. Carlsson's report, we must draw conclusions
for the work of the United Nations in the Great Lakes
region.
Let us turn first to Rwanda. Mr. Carlsson's report
calls upon the international community to help in
reconstruction, reconciliation and observance of human
rights. And we should add, to help in the matter of
justice, which is essential to attain these goals. France
supports this appeal. We participate in this effort together
with our European Union partners. The Secretary-General
has proposed to Rwanda a new partnership with the
United Nations, and we hope that efforts on both sides
will make it possible to make headway in this regard and
that, in exchange for serious security guarantees, Rwanda
will move towards peaceful democracy, allowing a return
to regional stability. This is definitely a source of concern
for the international community.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Indeed, United Nations action with respect to the
Great Lakes region as a whole must be more sustained. The
Council has authorized the deployment of the second phase
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). We must
ensure that this operation receives the necessary means, in
particular the necessary funding. Impartial action by
Council members vis-à-vis each of the belligerents, with a
view to inducing them to fulfil their commitments, is also
essential to buttress the July 1999 Lusaka Agreement, all of
whose elements must be implemented.
The next mission of the Council to the territory will be
an opportunity to get all of our messages through. But it is
the effective deployment of the second phase of MONUC
that will attest to the will of the international community to
contribute fully to bringing about peace in the country and
in the Great Lakes region.
Here it might be useful to recall the situation in
Burundi. The Council lent its support to the facilitation
process led by President Mandela and to the efforts of the
Burundian parties. This process is a difficult one. In order
to strengthen it, the international community must, now that
sanctions against the country have been lifted, assist it by
speedily resuming economic assistance, which is so
necessary to the people.
Beyond the Great Lakes region, we must consider
ways of stepping up United Nations action in crisis
situations.
The report of the Inquiry makes some
recommendations in this respect: a plan of action against
genocide, improved deployment capacities of the United
Nations, protection of civilians, and so on. We welcome
this trend, which is conducive to better circulation of
information in the United Nations and to a greater capacity
to react to events. The report that the Secretary-General
requested from the panel chaired by Mr. Brahimi will make
it possible to conduct a deeper analysis of this situation.
Turning now to the work of the Council, two points
need to be made.
First, in the setting up of new operations, decisions of
the Council must be better prepared. The information
provided by the Secretariat needs to be supplemented,
according to modalities to be defined, by other data —
particularly historical data — so that we can better
understand the situations at hand.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
We must also improve the Council’s follow-up of
United Nations missions. Experience has shown that once
missions have been deployed in the field, implementation
of their mandate is not always followed up carefully
enough by the Council. We need greater regularity in this
area. This means that we need to refocus our work on
crisis situations and United Nations operations. We should
spend more time considering these situations and less
time on the so-called thematic subjects.
Our goal should be to place the Council in a better
position to assess the risks faced by missions in the field
and to adapt their mandate and their means accordingly.
In the face of violence and the massacre of civilians,
the decisions of the Council, and, beyond that, those of
the troop contributors will always be particularly difficult.
When the time comes to commit the United Nations, will
we be sufficiently mindful of the lessons drawn by the
Inquiry into events in 1994 in Rwanda? We certainly
hope so; otherwise, we would be betraying the memory
of the victims.
The attitude of the Council to the violence
committed in East Timor last September is an
encouraging sign. The deployment of the multinational
Force led by Australia made it possible to stop the
violence. The Council made that decision in a very short
space of time.
But we can also think of other situations where the
Council did not take the necessary decisions to put an end
to massive violations of human rights. Can the Council,
duly informed, remain divided and do nothing? We do not
think so.
At the opening of the most recent session of the
General Assembly last September, the Secretary-General
appealed to the international community to consider how
the United Nations could intervene quickly and more
effectively in these situations. A debate was launched,
which we need to continue in order to enable the Council
fully to play the role entrusted to it by the Charter and to
avert in future humanitarian tragedies such as the ones
our world has witnessed in recent decades.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and your delegation for organizing this
meeting. We commend the Secretary-General’s decision
to appoint an Independent Inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 Rwandan genocide. I
wish also to thank Prime Minister Carlsson and his team

19

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
for the extensive work that they have carried out in the
fulfilment of their mandate.
We all witnessed the horrifying events of the 1994
Rwanda genocide. Innocent Rwandese were brutally
massacred by their neighbours and friends. Above all, these
were fellow Rwandese.
The report clearly places on the international
community the responsibility for the total lack of political
will to prevent the human tragedy in Rwanda. The failure
of the United Nations, and in particular of the Security
Council, to respond to the tragedy was a terrible mistake,
and we should now all work together for the good of
humanity to ensure that never again shall we allow
genocide to be repeated — anywhere.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
evaluation, monitoring and support are required and
adjustments should be made to ensure that the mission is
effectively dealing with the situation on the ground.
Fifthly, protection of civilians under threat should
form part of peacekeeping mandates. The lessons learned
from Rwanda clearly illustrate this point. I am therefore
glad that next week we will take up the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We have noticed with regret that despite the Rwanda
experience, some of the problematic measures pointed out
in the report as having contributed to inaction in Rwanda
in 1994 are still being applied today as the United
Nations considers taking action on certain conflict
situations.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda is commendable. We fully support it
and hope that all of the perpetrators of genocide and crimes
against humanity will be brought to justice. Namibia will
continue to cooperate with the Tribunal, and we call on
other States to hand over to the Tribunal all those who have
been indicted.

The recommendation for the Secretary-General to
develop a plan of action to prevent genocide is most
welcome. We look forward to receiving the plan, and we
have no doubt that it will greatly inform the World
Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance scheduled for the
year 2001.

The observations and recommendations of the Inquiry
are pertinent and need to be taken into account when
dealing with conflict situations around the globe. I will
therefore not dwell on all of them but highlight a few
salient points.

We call on the international community to assist the
Rwandese society in its reconstruction and development
efforts. We support the Inquiry’s call for assistance,
paying particular attention to the need for reconstruction,
genuine national reconciliation and respect for human
rights.

First and foremost, it is important for the international
community to focus its resources on addressing the root
causes of conflict and to be proactive in preventing conflict
from occurring in the first place.
Secondly, Member States need to exercise the
necessary political will to adequately address conflicts in a
timely manner, irrespective of where they occur.
Thirdly, we cannot overemphasize the need to equip
each and every United Nations peacekeeping mission with
an appropriate mandate and with adequate human and
material resources. It is true that peacekeeping is costly, but
peace does not come cheap. More often, when
peacekeeping missions are considered, troop size and the
costs involved are foremost in the minds of Member States.
This brings me to my fourth point, concerning
adequate planning for each operation with the necessary
technical and political input. This is vital for the success of
any peacekeeping mission. Furthermore continuous

20

Finally, I wish to pay special tribute to General
Dallaire and commend the United Nations personnel
within UNAMIR and in the programmes and agencies,
who at that difficult time made tremendous efforts under
extremely dangerous conditions and saved lives of many
civilians, political leaders and United Nations staff, as
stated in the report. These brave men and women deserve
recognition for their efforts.
We have all failed the people of Rwanda. Let us
learn from past mistakes and failures and exercise the
necessary political will to make this world a better place
for all human kind to live in.
The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for his words of appreciation to General Dallaire
and the other United Nations personnel in the field who
have made such great efforts.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Mr. President, we join
other members of the Council in expressing our sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Prime Minister Ingvar
Carlsson, whom we welcome in our midst, and his
colleagues on the Rwandese Inquiry commission for
presenting us with an extremely valuable report. The report
is a historic document establishing accountability for the
action of the world body and its different organs, of
individual Member States, of the international community
in general and of the Rwandans involved in the genocide,
and it does so in an objective manner in full transparency.
We commend the Canadian presidency, and your
leadership, for the initiative in having us face the realities
and responsibilities in a formal meeting of the Security
Council. We do agree that emphasis should be put on the
lessons to be learned from the Rwanda tragedy. The
Rwanda experience should be kept in mind in our decisionmaking process so that we do not commit such terrible
mistakes in the future.
Mr. Carlsson’s report makes an elaborate analysis of
the events. It does not hesitate to assign responsibility. We
all share it; we all have to learn lessons. Our sympathy and
our realization of collective failure should be expressed in
the sincerest and clearest terms.
Last December the Secretary-General acknowledged
the failure in Rwanda and expressed his deep remorse on
behalf of the United Nations. The United Nations was
established to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. The explicit reference was to the two world wars.
Civil wars were possibly considered a matter of the past
and were hence not even envisaged. Yet, the unthinkable
happened. Some 800,000 Rwandans were killed by their
fellow countrymen, and the massacre was along the ethnic
divide.
The evident conclusion is that what happened in
Rwanda in 1994 should not have happened. It should not
have happened in our century, particularly after the creation
of the United Nations. The second conclusion drawn is that
the genocide could have been prevented. The third
conclusion is that it could not be prevented because the
international system failed to do so and this failure was of
colossal proportions, seen in terms of the loss of hundreds
of thousands of lives in Rwanda.
The international community failed to prevent
genocide in Rwanda, but it should not fail to do its part as
regards the socio-economic development of Rwanda.

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
The best demonstration of our remorse, the best
assurance of our realization of mistakes or failures would
be to be able to act correctly in the future. That will be
our best apology, that will be our best homage to the
hundreds of thousands of fellow human beings massacred
in Rwanda.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking you for presiding over
today’s open briefing on the situation in Rwanda. My
delegation wishes to commend Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his historic initiative in setting up an
independent inquiry to investigate the actions of the
United Nations during the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
We also wish to express appreciation to Prime Minister
Carlsson and the other members of the Commission for
the thoroughness with which they discharged their
mandate. Their analysis and conclusions in the report
presented today by Mr. Carlsson are even more sobering
as they point to one inescapable conclusion. The terrible
events which occurred in Rwanda in 1994 were almost
certainly preventable.
In this process of introspection, we are not seeking
to attribute blame, but to understand the confluence of
events and systemic deficiencies that allowed the
genocide to take place unchecked, as we seek solutions
which could prevent similar atrocities from occurring ever
again.
As this debate is taking place in the Security
Council, the focus must be on how this body can develop
preventive measures that may be employed in the
prevention of conflicts. The Security Council must assert
its political will to strengthen its conflict prevention
capabilities. We must become proactive and not wait until
a great number of persons has died before we take action.
Understandably, many of the causes of conflict —
social, economic, developmental and political — must be
addressed by the international community as a whole.
However, it remains the responsibility of this Council to
prevent breaches of the peace. We cannot abdicate this
responsibility. With crises such as those which occurred
in Rwanda and in the Balkans, and which are occurring
in many parts of Africa today, the credibility of the
Security Council is constantly being questioned. We
therefore support the recommendations of the Carlsson
commission and will work with members of the Security
Council as we seek to move beyond acceptance of
recommendations to action. To do otherwise would mean

21

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
that 800,000 Rwandan men, women and children would
certainly have died in vain.
The Carlsson report makes several facts clear. The
slaughter of some 800,000 persons over a period of about
100 days, without the use of weapons of mass destruction,
was certainly unprecedented in human history. The Tutsi
population of Rwanda was savagely and brutally subjected
to genocide. Many reasons have been proffered for the
failure of the international community, the United Nations
system and the Security Council in particular to act
decisively to prevent one of the major tragedies of the
twentieth century. This has been summarized as a persistent
lack of political will by Member States to act or to act with
enough assertiveness. Perhaps a major failure was the
inability to recognize or acknowledge the tell-tale signs of
impending catastrophe or to plan an effective response.
My delegation believes that extreme diligence must in
future be exercised during the critical planning stages of
peacekeeping missions. I therefore wish to address my
remarks to one of the recommendations in the report which
aims at improving the capacity of the United Nations to
conduct peacekeeping operations.
From its inception, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) was hindered by a poorly
conceived mandate, the lack of the necessary resources to
carry out that mandate and the lack of political will on the
part of the Security Council to take critical decisions at a
time when the forces on the ground could ill afford undue
delays. We wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the peacekeepers and the humanitarian personnel who
sought to serve the cause of peace, even while the
international community turned a blind eye.
My delegation wishes to point out two critical factors
which must be built into future missions. First,
peacekeeping missions need to be designed with allowances
for rapidly changing circumstances. At the very minimum,
it must be possible to have reinforcements deployed quickly
to augment forces when it becomes clear that the situation
on the ground warrants a reassessment of the mission. The
practice of deploying the minimum number of troops on the
basis of either political or financial expediency takes no
account of the many variables that troops may be presented
with once in the field. We cannot continue to send troops
without the necessary room to manoeuvre when faced with
unforeseen circumstances.
Secondly, the mandates for peacekeeping operations
must reflect the realities on the ground and must be

22

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
matched by the political will and the material means to
implement those mandates. Mandates must also be
formulated in close collaboration with all the parties
involved in the conflict. While only the Security Council
can legitimately authorize troop deployment and
determine mandates, a mechanism must be designed to
allow force commanders the necessary flexibility to
determine their best course of action and be able to
rapidly communicate their decisions to the Security
Council. In this connection, we note the recommendations
of the commission on the protection of civilians. This
must be addressed in all future peacekeeping mandates.
Also, once troops are deployed, they must be under
the command of one central authority. States should not
unilaterally withdraw their contingents without reference
to that central authority.
My delegation also endorses the commission’s
recommendation that the Secretary-General and the
Member States use the opportunity provided by the
Millennium Summit and Assembly to mobilize the
political will to clearly address challenges facing United
Nations peacekeeping. In this context, we look forward to
the report of the Brahimi committee.
The Security Council, after the fact, took action to
bring the perpetrators of the Rwanda genocide to justice
by establishing the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. But we must not stop there. The Security
Council, the United Nations system and, indeed, the
international community as a whole have a moral
obligation to ensure that we do, in fact, have the will to
prevent another genocide from ever occurring. Perhaps
today marks the first step. Rwanda will continue to need
the assistance of the international community as it seeks
to rebuild the economic, social and political bases of its
society and to seek national reconciliation.
Let us not fail them a second time.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.
Isaiah Berlin, the very well-known philosopher, once
expressed the view that the primary duty of politics was
to avoid “extremes of suffering”. This sage counsel has
too often gone woefully unheeded, and nowhere more so
than in the case of Rwanda. The genocide in that country
all too brutally exposed the enduring, darker side of
human nature and the reality of suspicion, destruction,
hatred and unrestrained violence.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
I doubt that anyone in this Chamber can look back at
that time without remorse and without a great deal of
sadness at the failure to help the people of Rwanda in their
time of need. The unchecked brutality of the génocidaires
made a mockery, once again, of the pledge “never again”.
For the United Nations, the Rwandan tragedy came
close to extinguishing belief in our capacity to fulfil its
founding purpose. The presence of United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground created a perception among
civilians that they would be secure from violence. That
such confidence in the United Nations was ill-founded is a
matter of great shame and disappointment to all who
support the principles and ideals which underpin the
Charter.
Still, that those soldiers in blue berets, whose cries for
support were so studiously ignored, still managed to save
tens of thousands, is a source of pride and inspiration.
(spoke in French)
One peacekeeper, the Canadian Commander of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, Lieutenant
General Romeo Dallaire, announced his retirement this
week. As he put it simply, “I am a casualty of Rwanda —
an injured officer.” His moral integrity, vision, insight and
leadership under unimaginable circumstances shine as an
example.
(spoke in English)
I know that the words that have been so generously
expressed by many around the table about his work, and
that of all those who served in the field, will go a long way
towards helping heal some of the scars of that experience.
The report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions
of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide graphically
chronicles, as we heard this morning, the lapses, blunders
and shortcomings. It also draws lessons to which we must
pay close attention.
We owe a great deal of gratitude to Prime Minister
Carlsson and his colleagues for their work. Like many
members, I wish to commend Secretary-General Annan for
making certain that we did not forget and for publicly
acknowledging this Organization’s failure in the tragedy.
The Council must share in the responsibility for this
tragedy. The best way to honour the victims now is through
a firm commitment never to turn away from civilians

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
victimized by armed conflict, but instead to focus energy
and attention to protect them, in both word and deed.
The Inquiry’s recommendations make clear what
needs to be done. First, the culture of impunity must end.
There is an undeniable, growing international consensus
that those responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity should be held to account. The
establishment by the Council of the Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda moved this forward.
The adoption of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court is its clearest expression yet. Council members
have a special responsibility to ensure that the Statute of
the Court is ratified rapidly and to make sure it works
effectively. This will be a major deterrent to future abuse.
Let the message be unambiguous and clearly understood:
violators will be pursued, prosecuted and punished.
The report of the Inquiry also makes it very clear
that information flow must be improved. It leaves no
doubt that the Council must enhance its ability to analyse
and monitor volatile situations and that informationsharing within the United Nations system must be made
better, especially between the Council and United Nations
departments. To that end, we welcome the efforts by the
United Nations Secretariat and by the United Nations
humanitarian agencies to develop a framework for
coordination with an emphasis on prevention and
preparedness.
For its part, the Security Council needs to continue
to broaden its range of interlocutors and sources of
information. The more varied its channels, the greater the
chance that it will hear the signals of looming dangers.
This Council has nothing to fear from allowing the
voices of suffering and oppression to be heard early, often
and openly. This does not undermine the Council’s
legitimacy or its capacity to act. On the contrary, it serves
to strengthen it.
Rapid and resolute response is also essential. Yet at
a time when requests for troops to help protect civilians
are growing, the capacity of the United Nations itself to
manage complex missions is under great strain.
Enhancing United Nations standby arrangements,
including a rapidly deployable mission headquarters
capacity, is vital to reversing this trend. So is a
coordinated, integrated approach to identify, mobilize and
commit the necessary military — and, indeed, civilian —

23

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
resources. Yet efforts to implement these forward-looking
approaches are, quite frankly, left to languish.
The Security Council is on the frontline with regard to
this fundamental question. It is not enough just to authorize
peace operations; it is time for the Council to become more
actively engaged in making sure the capacity is there to
carry out these missions quickly and effectively.
The Council also needs to ensure that United Nations
operations are given adequate finances, the necessary
resources, suitably robust mandates and clear rules of
engagement to carry out the tasks assigned to them.
There are signs that the Council is taking this to heart.
Missions in Sierra Leone, the Central African Republic and
East Timor have the mandates and personnel commitments
to adequately protect people and to address the realities on
the ground. But the Council’s response in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo suggests that there is still room for
improvement.
Together, these measures, if we follow through, will
allow us to better resolve conflict, promote peace, enhance
human security and help to prevent humanitarian disasters.
But if we are honest with ourselves, there is no
certainty that the most severe abuses, such as those that
occurred in Rwanda, will not happen again. Indeed, there
is ample evidence to the contrary. Preventive efforts will
not always succeed. The spiral into extremes of human
suffering cannot always be constrained.
In these most exceptional situations, the protection of
civilians requires strengthening our disposition to intervene
with force if necessary. Let me be very clear. Military
intervention is called for only in the most severe cases:
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and massive
and systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian
law causing widespread suffering and loss of life. The test
we have in mind is very difficult. The threshold is very
high.
The goal of intervention is not to threaten the
territorial integrity of the State, but to bring an end to
widespread suffering. Indeed, outside intervention to protect
people is conceivable only when those who control the
State are unable or patently unwilling to fulfil this basic,
fundamental trust.
In our view, any discussion about the use of force to
alleviate extremes of suffering and the Council’s role in

24

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
such action needs to address three considerations, the first
of which is the justification for action. The cumulative
weight of international human rights and humanitarian
law, the global trend against impunity and the precedents
set by the Council itself all justify action. There is a
growing body of common law that is beginning to
establish new humanitarian standards that must be
recognized.
Secondly, we must look at the guidelines for action.
Once the determination has been made that the violence,
real or anticipated, meets the test, there are other factors
with which to guide a decision to intervene or not to
intervene, including whether time has finally run out on
other peaceful means to resolve the threat; whether there
is a danger that the threat, if left alone, jeopardizes
regional or international security; and whether not being
able to intervene everywhere means we must not
intervene anywhere.
Thirdly, there must be a framework for action. This
should be permissive enough to stop massive and
systematic violations, but clearly balanced with strong
safeguards to ensure that it is not misused. To this end,
we need to be certain that the severity of the crisis is
fully corroborated; that military force can and will
contribute to ending widespread suffering and loss of life;
that the level of force employed is appropriate to the
circumstances; that the use of force is multilateral and
widely supported; and that it is part of a longer-term
strategy to build and sustain peace.
Many have suggested that this is a debate that the
Council is not yet ready to engage in. However, it is a
discussion we cannot and should not avoid having, and
the sooner we have it, the better. The price of inaction
has simply been too high — for the victims of the
Rwandan genocide, for others subject to extreme abuse,
for the security of people generally and for the credibility
of this Organization.
Perhaps if we had grappled with this very difficult
subject earlier and worked to arrive at some common
agreement on it, we might have done more to avoid the
Rwandan genocide or to stop it once it began. Second
chances are rare, but we have one now. Perhaps the most
important proposal contained in the report of the Inquiry
is that for a system-wide action plan to prevent genocide,
to which I would add all crimes against humanity and war
crimes. As the representative of Jamaica said, the
Millennium Assembly offers an opportunity to work
towards this goal and, as the Secretary-General suggests,

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
to “reassert the centrality of international humanitarian and
human rights law”. (A/54/2000, para. 211)
In that context, the legacy of the Rwandan genocide is
not just tragic; it is also hopeful. In his very graphic and
dramatic book, Philip Gourevitch tells of how a group of
young, defenceless Hutu girls in a Catholic convent school
refused to leave the side of their Tutsi friends, even though
ordered to do so by the génocidaires. Given the choice of
freedom from that kind of suffering, they chose to stay, and
paid the ultimate price: their lives. The courage and
sacrifice of those young women in that convent school
should be a guide and inspiration to people around this
table and everywhere, for we can do no less.
The development of a United Nations action plan to
protect people from the most egregious forms of abuse and
from the most serious violators will be too late for past
victims but, hopefully, not too late for us and for future
generations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Rwanda, on
whom I now call.
Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor on a subject of great importance to
my country and to the family of the United Nations as a
whole. I thank Canada for convening this open debate on
the Carlsson report today, almost four months to the day
since the report was issued. My appreciation and
congratulations also go to your distinguished predecessors,
Sir, whose leadership of the Council led this body in its
wise deliberations. We wish you all the best.
We wholeheartedly thank all members for their
statements, and for their words of regret, sympathy and
support for us and for those who perished — especially
those who bravely died trying to save lives.
The Government and the people of Rwanda wish to
thank His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan for commissioning
such a courageous report on behalf of the Organization; we
congratulate him. The United Nations, the world and
Rwanda owe thanks and appreciation to former Prime
Minister Ingvar Carlsson and his team, which was
composed of Mr. Han Sung-Joo and Lieutenant General
Rufus M. Kupolati, assisted by Ms. Elinor Hammarskjöld
and Mr. Lee Shin-wha, for their painstaking and
comprehensive work in compiling what is known today as

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
the Carlsson report. The report describes in fine detail
what happened and what did not happen when it was or
was not meant to happen during a specific period of time
during Rwanda’s genocide while United Nations
peacekeeping forces were on the ground in my country.
Every word, every phrase, every paragraph contains
details of what went wrong, when, how and — shyly —
why.
This is the time for us not to dwell on the past but
clearly to state what comes next and to maintain the
momentum. The world and Rwanda are now waiting to
hear from all members of the Security Council; we have
already heard their statements, for which we thank them,
but what comes next? As a committed and concerned
Member of the United Nations, my country, Rwanda,
wishes to hear from all members of the Council about the
policies and measures that this body has taken or has the
intention of taking to make sure that what tragically
happened in Rwanda, as witnessed on the world’s
television screens, never again occurs elsewhere on the
globe. The report shows beyond any possible doubt that
the world failed Rwanda. The Rwandese Government and
the Rwandese people are grateful to those who have put
their hands on their hearts and apologized on behalf of
their peoples and their Governments for failing Rwanda.
I know that this is not an easy thing to do; it is a
courageous stand that is meant to reconcile us with the
sad past. We wish also to reiterate our sincere thanks to
those who assisted us in difficult times; those times are
not yet gone.
Every Rwandese person — and indeed every friend
of Rwanda — has been in one way or another a victim of
what happened. Victims of genocide in Rwanda are
cruelly suffering from physical, psychological and posttraumatic hardships. The Government of Rwanda is
bleeding itself to contain their cries, but in vain given the
overwhelming dimension of the problem and the scarce
means it has at hand. The Carlsson report’s conclusions
and recommendations are worth revisiting to make sure
that nothing of this sort happens again. Moreover,
recommendations 13 and 14 specifically appeal to all, as
individual Member States, for belated action so that
victims of genocide, including the bitterest, most
desperate survivors, can feel the wind of change coming
their way from the international community. A unique
“mini-Marshall plan” is needed for Rwanda, as many
members often rightly say in the corridors of this
building, but on an individual basis. It is possible to
shock the world again — but by doing something

25

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
dramatically positive at last. All members can do this as
individual countries, and as countries of the world.
It is never too late to make things right or to mend
fences. The Rwandese people whom the whole community
failed had the right to life and lost their best gift from God.
I believe they too have an ear to listen to what we are
saying today; we pay tribute to them. The country and the
survivors lost everything they worked for and lived for. I
am here representing them all. They too have a right to
justice, recovery, rehabilitation, reintegration and genuine
reconciliation as part of a concerted compensation effort
from individual members and from others, from the
countries of Council members and from the rest of the
membership of the Organization. We have concerns. The
Carlsson report is the members’ report. What they do with
it is what matters to the world and to the victims. If the
Government of Rwanda and the Rwandese people can assist
members to assist them better, let me reiterate our full
support and cooperation where immediate action is of the
essence.
The report clearly challenges the conscience of the
international community and invokes the responsibilities of
the parties to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Reluctance to
acknowledge that genocide was going on in Rwanda was
nothing but a manifestation of the unwillingness of the

4127th meeting
14 April 2000
powerful to live up to that responsibility. It is a fact that
many of those who masterminded the genocide in
Rwanda are at large to this day. As Rwanda struggles to
rebuild itself, surely let the words of the SecretaryGeneral, who is not with us today, be a basis for action:
“Of all my aims as Secretary-General, there is none
to which I feel more deeply committed than that of
enabling the United Nations never again to fail in
protecting a civilian population from genocide or
mass slaughter”. (Press release SG/SM/7263,
16 December 1999)
That should be a statement not only of the SecretaryGeneral, but of the Security Council and of us all.
We hope that, in this way, General Dallaire and the
survivors of the genocide will be given a chance to shake
hands with God and with the other heroes: those amongst
us who have made long-term partnerships with Rwanda
to rebuild the country and to restore the badly torn fabric
of Rwandese society.
The President: I now call on Mr. Carlsson.
Mr. Carlsson: I think that the statement just made
by the representative of Rwanda should be the last
statement in this debate.
The President: There are no further speakers on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

26
