Reeolution1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

13. Calls upon the Government of Portugal:
(a) To observe immediately the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949;42
(b) To eradicate the practice of xibalo, or forced
labour, in its African colonies;
(c) To introduce a system in which the products
of the African farmers can be freely bought and sold
in normal market conditions;
14. Condemns once again the actions of those Governments which continue to maintain diplomatic, economic. cultural and other relations with the Government of South Africa and with the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia in violation of United Nations
resolutions;
15. Calls upon those Governments urgently to consider breaking off such relations and, if they have not
already done so, to report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session the reasons therefor;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution and also to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyseventh session on the measures taken to publicize the
report of the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2715 (XXV). Employment of qualified women in
llellior and other profeaional positions by
the secretariats of organizations in the
United Nations system

The General Assembly,
RecalUng Article 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights,
Recalling further the Declaration on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women,
1. Expresses the hope that the United Nations, including its special bodies and all intergovernmental
agencies in the United Nations system of organizations,
will set an example with regard to the opportunities
they afford for the employment of women at senior
and other professional levels;
2. Urges the United Nations, including its special
bodies and all intergovernmental agencies in the United
Nations system of organizations, to take or continue
to take appropriate measures to ensure equal opportunities for the employment of qualified women in
senior and other professional positions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report to the General Assembly on the composition of
the Secretariat data on the employment of women at
senior and other professional levels by the secretariats
of the above-mentioned bodies, including their numbers
and the positions they occupy.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2716 (XXV). Programme of concerted international action for the advancement of women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1777 (XVII) of 7 December
a United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos.
970-973.

81

1962 initiating the study of a unified, long-term United
Nations programme for the advancement of women,
Recalling also the ~laration on the Elimination ol.
Discrimination against Women, adopted on 7 November 1967, and the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, adopted on 11 December 1969,
Noting resolution IX of the International Conference
on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968,'3 on
measures to promote women's rights in the modern
world, including a unified, long-term United Nations
programme for the advancement of women, which
established guidelines for such a programme,
Noting also that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2571 (XXIV) of 13 December
1969 and with paragraph 79 of Assembly resolution
2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, concerning the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, arran1ements should
be made to keep under systematic scrutiny the progress
towards achie~J the goals and objectives of the
Decade, to identify shortfalls in their achievement and
the policies that are not consistent with the attainment
of those objectives and to recommend positive measures, including new goals and policies as needed,
Expressing the hope that general and complete disarmament under effective international control will
allow for the use of the resources released progressively
for purposes of economic and social progress of all
peoples, including the elaboration of programmes designed to advance the status of women,
Believing that a programme of concerted international action, planned on a long-term basis, will advance
the status of women and increase their effective participation in all sectors,
Considering that the success of such a programme
will require intensified action on the part of Member
States, at the national and regional levels, as well as
maximum use of the methods and techniques available
through the United Nations system of organizations,
Believing that an important step in the further development of such a programme would be the establishment of concrete objectives and minimum targets,
1. Recommends that the objectives and targets set
forth in the annex to the present resolution should be
achieved as widely as possible during the Second United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations or
members of specialized agencies and all organs and
agencies within the United Nations system to co-operate
in achieving these objectives and targets, and hopes
that adequate staff and resources will be made available for this purpose;
3. Recommends that concerted efforts should be
made to increase the resources available for technical
co-operation projects which advance the status of
women and that consideration be given to allocating
a specific percentage of the available funds for this
purpose;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to the Commission on the Status of Women if
possible at its twenty-fourth session, information 'on
the ex!ent to which ~omen are participating in, and
benefiting from, techmcal co-operation projects;
63 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E 68 XIV'>)
p. 10.
. .
·- '
