NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 20 SEPTEMBER 1968

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1453) . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 September 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Pakistan and Senegal(S/8819) . . . . , . . . .

1

S/PV.1453

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sekutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN BUNDRED

AND FIFTY-THIRD

Held in New York on Friday, 20 September
B&dent:

Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l453)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 17 September 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Pakistan and Senegal (S/88 19).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
letter dated 17 September 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Pakistan
and Senegal (S/881 9)
1. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Jordan and
Israel, in letters dated 18 September 1968 which have been
circulated in documents S/8822 and S/8823, respectively,
have requested to be invited to participate without vote in
the discussion of the question now placed on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice of the Council and if I
hear no objection, I propose to invite the representatives of
Jordan and Israel to take places at the Council table in
order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan), and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

MEETING
1968, at 11 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the question placed on its agenda at the
request of the representatives of Pakistan and Senegal in
their letter of 17 September 1968 [S/8819/, which refers
to the note of the Secretary-General circulated in document
S/8699, of 31 July 1968. I should also like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the draft resolution
submitted yesterday by the delegations of Pakistan and
Senegal, which has been circulated in document S/8825.
4. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): The
delegations of Pakistan and Senegal have the honour to
submit to the Security Council a draft resolution of a
humanitarian character which I should now like to introduce.
5. First, I wish to make a correction to the English version
of the draft. The words “Calls upon” in paragraph 2 should
be replaced by the word “Request”. The French text, being
the original, is correct.
6. The Council wilI recall document S/8699, dated 31 July
1968, containing a note by the Secretary-General. In that
document, the Secretary-General analysed the background
of the humanitarian question with which we are dealing
today and expressed regret “that these considerations
involving the well-being of a great many people, cannot be
given sufficient priority and be regarded as having sufficient
urgency to override obstacles such as those that have been
encountered thus far” /S/8699, para. 221.
7. By introducing into the discussion matters which are
entirely foreign, in law and in fact, to the humanitarian
procedure which the Secretary-General wished to pursue,
the Israeli Government has actually prevented the implementation of resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967.
Consequently, the Secretary-General has been un.able to
report positively to the Council on the security, welfare and
safety of the inhabitants of the areas occupied by the Israeli
forces following the hostilities of 5 June 1967.
8. What is the real issue? At its 1361st meeting on 14

June 1967, the Security Council adopted its resolution
2. The PRESIDENT: This morning, before the meeting, I
received a request to participate from the representative of
the United Arab Republic. The letter will be circulated in
due course. If I hear no objection, I propose to invite the
representative of the United Arab Republic, on the usual
conditions, to take a place at the Council table in order to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. A. El Kony
(United Arab Republic) took a place at the Council table.

237 (1967). After considering first that there was “urgent
need to spare the civil populations and the prisoners of war
in the area of conflict in the Middle East additional
sufferings”, secondly that “essential and inalienable human
rights should be respected even during the vicissitudes of
war” and thirdly, that “all the obligations of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War... should be complied with by the parties involved in
the conflict”, the Council called upon “the Government of
Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the

13. That is why I said earlier that Israel was trying to
introduce into the discussion matters which were alien to
the real problem of Palestine. Personally, I can only deplore
the fact that the Government of Israel should have
employed procedural manoeuvres to prevent the dispatch
of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, I
sincerely hope that on this occasion the Government of
Israel will co-operate fully with the representative whom
the Secretary-General will send to the occupied areasif, asI
hope, the draft resolution which Pakistan and Senegal have
the honour to submit to the Council is adopted unanimously, assoon aspossible.

inhabitants of the areas where military operations have
taken place and to facilitate the return of those inhabitants
who have fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities”.
9. The Council further recommended “to the Governments concerned the scrupulous respect of the humanitarian principles governing the treatment of prisoners of
war and the protection of civilian persons in time of war
contained in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949”.
10. What is the significance of this resolution? In the first
place, the resolution wasadopted on 14 June 1967, that is,
immediately following the hostilities of 5 June; that is why
it repeatedly refers to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
relating in particular to the treatment of prisoners of war
and the protection of civilian persons in time of war. That
is the first point, to which our draft resolution does not
refer for the moment.

14. The report that will be submitted to us upon the
conclusion of that mission will enable us to form an
accurate opinion on the fate of those Palestinians.
15. I shall not use fine words or grandiloquent phrases. I
shall not even appeal to the conscience and morality of the
international community. I shall merely ask you at this
time when we are celebrating the twentieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to help to
ensure respect for the inalienable rights of a people
condemned to abandon their most sacred possessions, to
take leave of their families and friends and to wander in
poverty, in loneliness and in fear, exposed to the inclemencies of a climate whose rigours we all know.

11. Secondly, and this is the most important point, not
only for emotional reasonsbut primarily becauseit involves
respect for the principle of self-determination of peoples
and the effective implementation of human rights, which
can never be negotiable; these peoples, these Palestinians
whose lands have been occupied, whose possessionshave
been confiscated, are entitled to the respect and protection
of the international community. The international community must be informed of their fate as a result of foreign
occupation. Here I should like to recall that the Security
Council emphasized the urgent need to spare the civilian
population in the area-1 stressthe word “area’‘-of conflict
in the Middle East additional sufferings. I do not know the
precise meaning of the word “area” in English, but I can
assureyou that in French the word “zone”, by which it is
translated, is a geographical entity far more limited than a
“territory”, unless-and I stress this, as does our draft-the
term “territory” is restrictively defined.

16. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): The Security Council has been
considering the situation in the Middle East continuously
for severalweeks.We have been concerned with grave issues
having a direct bearing on the fabric of peace in that region.
Today we are again seized of a question concerning the
Middle East, but the issuesinvolved in our deliberations are
not of a political nature-they bear essentially a moral and
humanitarian character.
17. One thing stands out clearly in the Secretary-General’s
note in document S/8699, and it is this: Israel has raised
certain issues entirely irrelevant to Security Council resolution 237 (1967) in order to becloud the fact that the
Council addressed a clear call to Israel to ensure the welfare
and the fundamental rights of the inhabitants of territories
under its military occupation since June 1967.

12. Resolution 237 (1967) then concerns only those
portions of land on which fighting took place and which
were then forcibly occupied by Israel. I do not think that
there is a single representative of a member of the Security
Council at this table who would go so far asto say that that
resolution also covers the protection of ethnic minorities in
other countries of the world. As Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights for the year 1968 and having studied
the lot of minorities in various foreign countries, I should
like-and I apologize for these words-to sound a warning
to anyone who might seek to raise the question of the
situation and conditions of minorities living in foreign
countries in connexion with that resolution, May I cite one
example? In South Africa and Rhodesia, millions of blacks,
although constituting a majority, live under the repressive
and degrading yoke of white racist rulers. All African
nations are aroused against this situation, and the African
peoples feel the affront to their human dignity. They are
doing everything in their power to free their brothers from
these bonds of slavery. Those African peoples also know
that in some countries there is racial discrimination against
blacks. Nevertheless, their Governments have never asked
for an investigation of the conditions under which those
blacks live, for the simple reason that those blacks are
nationals of the countries in which they live and suffer or,
if they are not nationals, then residents subject to regulations applicable to all aliens living in those countries.

18. The Secretary-General has firmly and rightly refused
to be deviated from the path of his duty as laid down by
this Council in resolution 237 (1967). His report is as lucid
in its expression asit is comprehensive in its content. I need
refer only to a few significant points made in it, as the
Ambassador of Senegal has already so ably dealt with it.
19. First, the Secretary-General’s note categorically states
that the records of the debates in the Security Council and
the General Assembly on the two relevant resolutions
disclosed no reference to the possible inclusion of the
Jewish communities in the Arab States as a concern of the
resolutions. The records of the discussion preceding the
adoption of the Security Council resolution demonstrate
that it was concern for the inhabitants ‘of the occupied
areas, of areas where military operations had taken place,
that motivated that resolution.
20. Second, the first, preambular paragraph of SecuritY
Council resolution 237 (1967) does not say “in the
2

territory of States parties to the conflict”, but “in the area
of conflict”, which is a more limited geographic concept.

effectiveness of the Security Council, The issue to be
determined by the Security Council is a very simple
one-should Israel be permitted to defy the injunction of
this Council calling for the security,,welfare and safety of
the inhabitants in the occupied Arab territories, or not?
The facts are clear. On 14 June 1967 the Security Council
adopted resolution 237 (1967). It was quoted fully this
morning in ,the able statement of the representative of
Senegal, Ambassador Boye, and I therefore need not read it
out again. That resolution was later welcomed with great
satisfaction by the General Assembly in its resolution
2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967.

21. Third, the reference to “areas where military operations have taken place” in operative paragraph 1 of the
Security Council resolution is even more explicit and, in the
absence of anything in the resolution to the contrary, this
phrase must be considered relevant to an interpretation of
the term “Governments
concerned” in the succeeding
operative paragraph 2.
22. We are entirely in agreement with this interpretation.
No amount of juggling with the term “Governments
concerned” will make resolution 237 (1967) applicable to
any territories other than those under the military occupation of Israel. To try to construct another interpretation on
that basis is to try to build a castle of sand.

28. On 18 August 1967 the Secretary-General reported
[S/8124] that he had sent Mr. Gussing to the Middle East
early in July to obtain on-the-spot information required for
the effective discharge of his responsibilities under paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution 237 (1967).
Mr. Gussing visited the area and submitted his report, which
was incorporated in the Secretary-General’s report of
2 October 1967 fS/SlSS/.

23. In fact, the import of resolution 237 (1967) is crystal
clear. It is simply a call addressed by this Council to Israel;
and the Council had good reason to address this call to
Israel. The cease-fire resolution of June 1967 had failed to
include a call for withdrawal of Israeli armed forces to
positions held by them before the hostilities of June 1967.
The merits of this decision of the Council are not here at
issue; but what must be said and said again is that, having
suffered Israel to remain in military occupation of territories which everyone agreed did not belong to it, the
Council did not turn a blind eye to the inhabitants of those
territories. On the contrary, it called upon the Government
of Israel to: “ensure the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the areas where military operations have
taken place and to facilitate the return of those inhabitants
who have fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities”.

29. At a later stage Ambassador Thalmann, the personal
representative of the SecretavGeneral, visited Jerusalem
on another fact-finding mission and his findings were also
included in a report of the Secretary-General, that of 12
September 1967 [S/8146].
30. The information in both reports explains why the
Israelis refused to co-operate with the Secretary-General
when he indicated the usefulness of and the need for
sending a representative to the area. The Israelis resorted to
devious means to frustrate the work of the Secretary
General. They claimed that the new mission should also
look into the conditions of the Jewish minorities in the
United Arab Republic, Syria, Iraq and Lebanon. By this,
they attempted to rewrite Security Council resolution
237 (1967), an attempt which,obviously was not and could
not be acceptable to the Secretary-General nor, I am sure,
to the Security Council.

24. In dealing with the Secretary-General’s note and with
the draft resolution which has been so ably presented to the
Council by the Ambassador of Senegal and which the
delegation of Pakistan has the honour of co-sponsoring, the
Council is seized of a matter for which it has a moral
responsibility. It is the clear duty of the Council to ensure
that, pending final settlement of the political issues, the
people who have been left under Israeli military occupation
are not denied their fundamental rights.

31. On 27 June 1968 the Secretary-General, replying to
the Israeli attempt, said the following:
“Permit me to observe in passing that the projected
mission, which would operate under the resolutions cited
above, would not, broadly speaking, be concerned with
minority groups in the area. Indeed, the Arab people in
the area constitute not a minority but virtually the total
population of the territories under military occupation.
The Jewish communities in the Arab States are, of course,
minority groups on a religious basis but it is a factor of
importance that the members of these communities for
the most part are, in fact, citizens of the Arab States in
which they reside.” [S/8699, para. 8.1

25.
To attempt to defeat the Secretary-General’s mission
in the implementation
of the Council’s resolution
237 (1967) is, in fact, an attempt to deny this Council the
opportunity of discharging its moral duty. It is simply an
attempt to bury a humanitarian question under the debris
of political issues. This attempt must be resisted. The full
moral weight of this Council should be brought to bear
upon this situation.
26. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative

of

32. Again on 15 July 1968 the Secretary-General,in a
letter to the Israeli representative,expressedhis regrets
concerning the conditions put forward by Israel. He also
enclosed a brief legal analysiswhich repudiated Israel’s
interpretation of resolution237 (1967). He said:

27. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr, President, my delegation is grateful to you for convening this meeting, and to
the Permanent Representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Boye, and the acting Permanent Representative of Pakistan,
Mr. Mohammad Yunus, for bringing this important report
of the Secretary-General before the Security Council. What
is before us today involves the authority and indeed the

“Under a strictly legal interpretation of Security Council resolution 237 (1967) of 14 June 1967 and General
3

Assembly resolution 2252 (ES-V) of 4 July 1967 it is
clear that they do not apply to minorities in the
territories of even those States most directly concerned.
Operative paragraph 1 of Security Council resolution
237 (1967) calls upon Israel to ensure the safety, welfare
and security of the inhabitants of the areas where military
operations have taken place, This paragraph applies
without question to the area .occupied by Israel since
June 1967. Strictly interpreted it would not, however,
apply to Arabs in, for example, Nazareth or Haifa, and of
course could not apply to Jewish persons in Arab States
since paragraph 1 is addressed solely to Israel.” (Ibid.,
pura. 10.1

Second, the Israelis have unlawfully
religious rights of the inhabitants;

Third, the Israelis have forced prisoners of war to take
part in services of military production, which would be
used in war operations against their country;
Fourth, the Israelis have arbitrarily arrested many
innocent individuals without trial and tortured many
others;
“k,
Fifth, the Israelis have expelled thousands of Palestinians and many of their leaders from Sinai, and the
Gaza Strip and from the west bank of Jordan to the east
bank;

33. The Secretary-General concluded:
“I strongly feel that the inability to dispatch the
mission is not only regrettable but also that the obstacles
to its dispatch could be easily surmounted, given the will
to do SO. That is why I have urged that the scope and
terms of the new mission afford a good enough basis for
acceptance of the mission by both parties.

Sixth, the Israelis have ignored the lawsof the occ:pied
territories, changed the status of officials and judges, and
promulgated Israeli laws ip direct violation of intemational law and practice;
Seventh, the Israelis have destroyed Arab houses and
confiscated Arab property;

“The first humanitarian (Cussing) mission went out
without anything approaching the sort of difficulty about
its scope and terms of reference which has been encountered in the effort to establish the second mission. I have
emphasized time and again, orally and in writing, that the
projected second mission is to havi the same scope and
terms of reference as the first. I find it hard to believe
that there can be any doubt or confusion in anyone’s
mind about this. Thus, if the Cussing mission was
acceptable and accepted, and given the necessary access
and co-operation, it is not apparent to me why the second
mission should not enjoy the same treatment.” /Ibid.,
paras. 15 and 16.1
34. Finally, the Secretary-General

interfered in the

Eighth, the Israelis have settled Jewish groups on Arab
lands in occupied territories;
Ninth, the Israelis have imposed harsh and discriminatory and economic measures on the inhabitants of the
occupied territories;
Ten, the Israelis have committed acts leading to the
systematic destruction of the essential foundations of the
life of the Palestine people.
37. If the Israelis follow their usual pattern of behaviour
in this Council, we can expect them to deny each and every
one of these charges. The Council, which is acquainted with
Mr. Tekosh’s performance here, certainly will not be
surprised to witness the same performance today. This
denial, however, would not suppress the truth. It would
reinforce the fact that there is only one way to find cut,
and that is by on-the-spot investigation. We are not
surprised that the Israelis are afraid of the projected
investigation, because they are afraid of the truth.

said:

“The projected second mission, which has been the
subject of this report, would be concerned exclusively
with humanitarian matters. It is most unfortunate, in my
view, that these considerations involving the well-being of
a great many people, cannot be given sufficient prL]rity
and be regarded as having sufficient urgency to override
obstacles such as those that have been encountered this
far.” (Ibid., para. 22.1

38. Let us turn to the charges which I have just cited. In
the first place, we have charged the Israeli authorities with
denying the right of the inhabitants to protection, safety,
welfare and security-a right emphasized in resolution
237 (1967) unanimously adopted last year and sponsored
by the delegations of Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia. The
Special Representative would be in a position to verify this
charge for himself.

35. The question arises: why are the Israelis objecting now
to sending the fact-finding mission to the occupied territories? For an objective observer in the Middle East it is
not difficult to see why the Israelis are resisting an impartial
investigation. They have already been exposed, in the two
previous reports, to world public opinion, and further
investigation would uncover further evidence of criminal
acts and lawless Israeli behaviour. The Israelis may succeed
for a time in concealing, wholly or partially, their policies
in the Gaza Strip and the west bank and their treatment of
the inhabitants of the occupied areas, but the truth will
eventually emerge despite Israeli tactics.

39. The Israeli practices and means of intimidation aimed
at terrifying the people and subjecting them to all manner
of coercion and pressure were lately manifested before the
whole world in the Holy City of Jerusalem itself. This was
communicated to the Council in my letter of 19 August
1968 [S/8750]. Israeli mobs savagely attacked Arab residents in Jerusalem, stoned Arab taxis and buses, smashed
windows, and seriously wounded scores of civilians. Loot*
ing took place and Arab stores were attacked and property

36. The world should know that:
First, the Israelis have denied protection to the inhabitants; they have denied the safety, welfare and security
which resolution 237 (1967) stressed;

4

destroyed. Two weeks later, Israeli mobs savagely attacked
Arabs in Tel Aviv and Jaffa. Not a single Israeli was
detained or tried for these acts. Such outrages upon
individuals and their personal dignity, such humiliating and
degrading treatment, such torture and cruelty, continued
grave Israeli violations of the Security Council injunction
-all this can be verified by the Secretary-General’s representative.

gambling and addiction to morphine and other drugs.
However, neither the letter of the Arab womennor other
protests helped to put an end to such immoral Israeli
behaviour.
46. The situation deterioratedfurther. The spreadof night
clubs and placesof immoralentertainmentin the Holy City
very near to suchshrinesasthe Holy Sepulchreincreased.
This time the Archbishopsof various religiousChristian
communitieshad to intervene and maketheir voicesheard.
They appealedto U Thant for intervention. In a cabledated
27 August 1968 Bishop N. Simaan, Roman Catholic
Church; Archbishop Assaf, Greek Catholic Church; Archbishop Deodores, Greek Orthodox Church; Father A.
Zehtelawie and Father Haroutian Diuleghianof the Armenian Orthodox Church; Reverend Sh. Farah, Anglican
Church and ReverendB. Touma, Syrian Orthodox Church,
askedthe Secretary-Generalto protect the Holy City from
Israeliimmoral actsandviolations.

40. Secondly, we have charged the Israelis with unwarranted and unlawful interference in the religious rights of
the inhabitants. Respect for the religious convictions and
practices of the inhabitants of occupied territories is a
well-known
principle of international law. The Israelis
should cease interfering in the daily religious practices and
worship of the people. They should not interfere in the
administration of religious institutions. As it is, the Israelis
have confiscated the income of Waqf, an Islamic endowment institution, properties and thus deprived Holy Places
and Islamic orphanage institutions of their only source of
maintenance and upkeep.

47. I shall read out their cablein full so that it can be
embodied in the verbatim record of today’s meeting.It
reads:

41. Ambassador Thalmann reported to the Council
through the Secretary-General’s report of 12 September
1967 [S/8146/ the shock of Christian and Moslem populations by Israeli acts which violated the sanctity of their
religious shrines.

“The spread of night-clubs and places of immoral
entertainment in Arab Jerusalemat the handsof the
Israeli occupation authorities conflicts with the sanctity
and spiritual traditions which this city enjoyed throughout the ages.

42. On previous occasions we ,have brought to the attention of the Council the case of the deportation of the
highest Moslem leader, She&h Abdul Hamid Assayeh. What
is more, places of worship are allowed to be used for acts of
indecency and immorality by Israeli teenagers. The use of
the Moslem Holy Mosque Al-Aqsa as a background for an
Israeli fashion show, displaying Jewish girls in miniskirts, is
a glaring example of the contempt of the Israeli authorities
for the second holiest place of the Moslems.

“The profanation of this Holy City is the inevitable
result of Israel’scontinuousattempt to Judaize Jerusalem and to annex it in utter disregardto the successive
United Nations resolutions.
“‘We condemn these immoral actions and appealto
Your Excellency to senda representativeto inform YOU
of the realities of the situation in order to protect the
Holy City from suchimmoralactsandviolations.“2

43. Jerusalem, the centre of worship and reverence, has
become a place for sin and immorality. For the first time in
2,000 years, the Holy City has become a centre for
prostitution. According to The New York Times of 31
August 1968, Israeli prostitutes have come to Jerusalem
from Haifa. No effective Israeli action has been taken
against such desecration of the Holy City.

48. Certainly that message
from Palestinereligiousleaders
is a reminderto this Council that what the Israelisaredoing
doesnot reflect the great message
that Jerusalem,the great
centre of religion, hasto deliver.

44. Perhaps this is exactly what the Israeli officials were
aiming at. One cannot but wonder whether, according to
their plans, Jerusalem is to become, not a city surrounded
by an aura of reverence and divine love, but a second
Sodom or Gomorrah. Christians, no less than Moslems,
would feel a deep pang of pain if this were indeed to come
to pass, and the highest and holiest thing demeaned and
made over by anti-religious alchemy into so many tourist
attractions to bring in more revenue to the Zionist
movement.

49. Thirdly, we have charged the Israeliswith forcing
prisonersof war to take part in services,be they engineering
or technical, of military production whichwould be usedin
war operationsagainsttheir ownpeopleandcountry. Many
casesof this kind werereported to usby reliablesources.
50. Fourthly, we have chargedthe Israeliswith torturing
prisonersand arbitrarily arrestingindividualsand detaining
them without trial. The SpecialRepresentative,if given
freedom of action to meet people unaccompaniedby
Israelis,would have much to hear about Israelitorture and
inhuman crimes.I say, unaccompanied
by Israelis,because
their presenceby itself amountsto undue pressureand
coercion.Mr. Gussing,in his report, remindedusthat:

45. On 11 August 1968, sixty-four prominent Arab
women of Jerusalem protested to the Prime Minister of
Israel against the opening of night clubs and other indecent
and immoral entertainment places. That protest and other
documentation were circulated this morning in document
S/8820.1 The Arab women referred to the spread of
1 Offi&/ Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1968, document

S/8820.

5

I‘. . . it would have been of great psychologicalimportance and would have provided for franker exchanges
for
2Ibid., annexI.

the Special Representative and for the people to whom he
spoke if he had had the opportunity to meet and talk
without witnesses to whomever he wished.” [S/8158,
para. 9.1
That view was conveyed to the Israeli Government,
without result.

he will be able to expose many facts to the Security
Council,facts which could be proven beyond the shadowof
a doubt.
56. Fifthly, we have chargedthe Israeliswith undertaking
continuousand forcible deportation and expulsionof Arab
leadersand groupsof inhabitants in violation of interna
tional human behaviour and United Nations resolutions,I
will give only one example.

but

51. On the question of torture, my Government received
the following information about methods used against Arab
inhabitants of the west bank and the Gaza Strip who had
been arrested by the Israelis and who are still detained
without trial. Those methods include: burning of eyelashes
by cigarettes, throwing hot cigarette ashes in the eyes,
amputation of nails, electric shocks, hitting brutally and
clubbing, starving the prisoners and having them sleep
without blankets on cold nights, and putting a person’s
head deep into water until he becomes unconscious. We
have seen some of that on television with respect to other
areas. More severe and shameless methods are also used by
the Israelis.

,

57. On 5 and 6 December1967 Israeli occupation forces
expelled 294 membersof the Nuwaseirattribe to the east
bank of Jordan as is reported in document $3290 of
8 December.1967.
58. On 20 December1967 two prominent representatives
from Jerusalem,namely, Ibrahim Bakir and Karna.lNassar,
a
former memberof Parliament, were deported as statedin
documentS/8311 of 27 December1967.
59. A few weekslater, Mr. Anton Attalah, former Minister
of Foreign Affairs and one of the leadersof the Christian
Arab community-he hasbeenhere and I amsureheis well
known to many representativesaround this table-was also
deported.

52. One hundred and seventy-eight ladies from the west
bank sent a letter on 24 July 1968 to,the Israeli Military
Governor emphasizing the savage attacks of Jewish prostitutes on certain prominent Arab ladies,arbitrarily detained
in the sameprison. This occurred to sucha degreethat the
Arab ladies were beaten into unconsciousness.
The letter
cited the namesof thesewomen victims who come from
respectablefamilies. Marks of this savagetreatment were
still obvious on the facesand bodiesof thesevictims. That
letter is incorporated in document S/8820,3 which was
circulated this morning.

60. In my letter of 7 March 1968 [S/8445], I reported
that Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, the Mayor of Jerusalem,who
appearedbefore the Council this year, was arbitrarily
deportedby the Israelioccupying forces.
61. Hundredsof people from the Gaza Strip and the west
bank were forced or encouragedto leave daily to the east
bank of Jordan as reported in a letter dated 31 January
1968 from the representativeof the United Arab Republic
[S/8373].

53. Representativesof all women’s organizations and
institutions in Jerusalemwarned about the effects of such
ugly behaviour, which is in direct violation of basicethics,
civilized norms, human integrity and conscience. They
requested the immediatereleaseof the imprisoned ladies
but those appeals,petitions and continued requestsdid not
bring any result. The crimesare continuing and the Security
Council can draw its own conclusions about why the
Special Representativeis not permitted to enter and seefor
himself and look into thoseunfortunate cases.

62. The Israeli authorities have been trying to expel the
50,000 refugees of Jabalia camp in the Gaza Strip,
commencingon 28 July 1968. Thesemassexpulsionswere
the subject of my letters to the Secretary-Generalof 25
July 1968[S/8691], 29 July 1968[S/8698] and 5 August
1968[S/8722]. Many of thesepeoplewere forcibly carried
in busesto King Husseinbridge and thus renderedrefugees
for the secondtime in twenty years. They are not allowed
to go back to the Gaza Strip; they are forced by the Israeli
forces to live in the Jericho area and wait for any
opportunity for the Israelisto expel them to the eastbank
of Jordan.

54. Moreover, the leadersof the west bank, from all walks
of life, including religious figures, petitioned the Israeli
Military Governor of the west bank and referred to’the fact
that the people arrested were subjected to all kinds of
torture and intimidation, In their torture the Israelis did
not differentiate, they said, between the elderly and the
young, or between men and women, They emphasizedthat
the tortures were carried out with the cognizance of the
Israeli authorities. In their petition of 24 July 1968, they
said that many of those tortured were later proven
innocent. However, it was too late, for many of them had
become handicappedfor the rest of their lives. A copy of
the letter was sent to U Thant,4 to the International Red
Crossand to foreign consulsin Arab Jerusalem.

63. Only two weeks ago, the Israeli occupying forces
expelled three Arab leadersfrom Jerusalemand one from
Al-Khalil-Hebron. These were: Mr. Kamal Dajani, a lawyer
and former Minister of the Interior; Dr. Daoud El-Husseini,
a former Member of Parliament; Miss Zleikha Shehabi,a
leader of women’sorganizations; and Mr. YasserAmre, a
lawyer and prominent leader in Hebron. These arbitrary
expulsionscameonly two weeksafter the attacks of Israeli
mobs on Arabs of Jerusalemas I said in my letter of 17
September1968[S/881 7/.

55. Certainly when the Special Representativeis able to
visit those prisonersand to meet with any of thbsepeople,

64. The streamof thoseexpelledhasnot stoppedsincethe
cease-fireresolution. Thousandsof people were forcedto
leave. The Israeli occupying forces are using all sortsof

3 Ibid., annexII B.
4 Ibid.,

annex

II A.

6

-

arbitrary measures of intimidation and torture. Their aim is
to change the demographic nature and Arab character of
the occupied territories. After sixteen months of foreign
occupation, there are fewer Arabs and ‘more Jews in the
occupied territories. More Israeli settlements are being
built, and more Arab villages are being demolished.

-

Security hmil
and the General Assembly. They were
illegal acts. Such Israeli laws aiming at demographic
change
in the occupied territories culminated in the infamous
Administrative Regulation Law, 1968, passed by the
Knesset on 27 June 1968. Under the cloak of administra.
tive regulations, the Israeli authorities are executing
another
stage of their lonerange plans for turning what is Arab into
something that is Jewish and Israeli, This law regulates in
detail the economic and commercial, as we11 as the
administrative, life in the occupied territories, It alms at a
gradual and concealed change of what is Arab into Israeli, Jt
is sufficient t0 Comment on only a few of the articles in this
infamous and unacceptable law,

65. The tragedy of Yalu, Beit Nuba and Imwas is a case in
point. Here are three villages that were completely razed to
the ground; the inhabitants either were expelled to the east
bank or took refuge far away from their destroyed homes
and lands in the Ramallah area. They were subjected to all
kinds of pressure, to a state of misery. Today no help is
reaching them, and they are forbidden to reach the sites of
their villages and even to gather their own crops. They were
asked to sell their lands to Israel, but neither hunger nor
misery made them do so.

70. In the “Abolition of absenteeism”, which has been h
effect since I950 and which gave the Israeli Government a
free hand to dispose of and confiscate Arab property under
the new regulations, the Israeli authorities again d&rim&
nated against the Arabs. What applies to Israelis in retaining
their property in Jerusalem does not at all arise or apply in
the case of Arab property in the other part of Jerusalem or
other parts of Israel. This is surely aimed at minimizing
what is Arab and changing the demographic nature and
character of Jerusalem and other parts of the occupied
territories.

66. When the Israelis destroyed these villages long after
the cease-fire resolution, they said this was done for
security purposes, but security from what? The villages
were on the Arab side of the armistice demarcation line.
The area behind the demarcation line up to the Jordan
River is now occupied by Israel. The Israeli military
presence in the west bank by itself belies the Israeli
contention and makes the claim that the villages were razed
to the ground for security purposes utter nonsense.
Moreover, if it is a question of security, why are the Israelis
not permitting the farmers to cultivate their lands adjacent
to the villages? And why were most of the villagers
frightened and intimidated into crossing the river and
leaving Israeli occupied territory? Was it not in order to
make their lands absentee property ready for confiscation?
Certainly, the leaders of Israel do not wish to receive the
Special Representative. They have every reason for such an
attitude. They do not want any individual or international
body to uncover their crimes.

71. Paragraph (a/ of Article 9 of the infamous Administrative Regulation Law, 1968, makes it impossible for Arab
companies to exist. Indeed, it makes it imperative that
these Arab companies be within a six-month limit affiliated
or amalgamated with Israeli companies which will exercise
authority over the merged Arab companies. Measures of
this kind are intended to obliterate all traces of Arab
economic independence and to leave Arabs in Jerusalem
and elsewhere at the mercy of the foreign occupier.
72. All such decrees, laws and regulations are null and void
and have no legal basis. The Security Council itself has
called upon Israel to desist from such measures and to
rescind all steps taken that may change the character or
legal status of Jerusalem. That must also apply to other
parts of the occupied territories.

67. My sixth charge is as follows. We have charged the
Israelis with ignoring the native laws of the occupied
territories ‘and with the promulgation of Israeli laws that
aim at the requisitioning and annexation of more Arab
lands and property. These Israeli measures are against the
will of the people. They are in direct violation of
international law and norms of behaviour.

73. My seventh charge is as follows. We have charged the
Israelis with continued confiscation of property and looting
of shops. International law requires that private property
must be respected and cannot be cbnfiscated. The Israelis
have arbitrarily expropriated lands and offered them to
Jewish settlers. They have annexed Jordan territory in
violation of international law and Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

68. Ambassador Thalmann, during his inquiry last year,
was informed how the Israeli authorities applied Israeli civil
laws to Jerusalem, They were rejected by the Arabs, 110.t
only because the laws of Israel superseded the existing
Jordanian laws but because they were alien to their own
traditions and religious beliefs.

74. InternationaI law considers a seizure of even public
property as a punishable war crime under the provisions of
article 6 B of the Charter of the Nuremberg War Crimes
Tribunal; yet seizure of public and @fate
properties
continues.

69. The Israelis started with military decrees and orders.
These limited freedom, especially political freedom, for the
Arabs in occupied territories. Some of these orders prohibited innocent elderly people and children from returning to
their homes. Other decrees of expropriation of Arab land
and property followed. The so-called Absentees’ Property
Law was put into practice. By that law Israel thought it
would give more legitimacy to its acts of expropriation and
acquisition of Arab land and property. It is needless to
mention that these measures and acts cannot be condoned
or accepted by Jordan. Indeed, they are rejected by the

75. During Mr. Gussing’s visit to a refugee camp, a
spokesman and a member of the Municipal Council drew
his attention to continuing searches of the camps by Israeli
forces, which frightened women and childrefi at night, as
well as continued looting of shops which created fear
among shopkeepers. Long after the cease-fire resolution the
7

Israelis looted property in various places such as the Jericho
District Co-operative Society. In that Co-operative Society,
seventy-five houses, new houses, were left without anything
but their walls standing. All furniture, electric equipment
and even windows were looted.

these areas would suffer a decline in living standards
and . . . nutritional problems might develop ” [S/8158,
para. 921.
82. This situation was not remedied by the Israelis.
Instead, they showed a systematic lack of interest in the
elementary economic needs of the inhabitants of the
occupied territories. Deliberate attempts were made to sack
and disrupt the native economies.

76. We have also charged the Israelis with maliciously
demolishing Arab houses. The mining of houses on the
mere suspicion that arms have been found there or that
they belong to a possible member of the national resistance
has become a daily Israeli practice. In order to destroy one
house, the Israelis use destructive explosive material in
quantities sufficient to destroy not only the house selected
for demolition but many of the adjacent houses as well.

83. Taxation and custom duties were arbitrarily imposed,
The inhabitants of the occupied territories were compelled
to buy only Israeli commodities, Israeli goods at Israeli
prices. The policy adopted for the import of goods is a
policy not of an occupied territory but of an annexed
territory. Priority and consideration are given to the
protection of Jewish interests in Israel, not to the interests
of the indigenous inhabitants of these territories. On the
other hand, products of the inhabitants are subjected to
strict regulations aimed at creating conditions of poverty as
a means of pressure for voluntary Arab immigration. These
Israeli practices violate principles of basic human decency
and justice.

77. The intention is to force more evacuation and more
Arab immigration. It is a part of a policy aimed at mass
deportation of civilians from occupied territories.
78. Eighth, we have charged the Israelis with the establishment of Israeli settlements on territories of sovereign States
Members of the United Nations. Israeli settlements have
been established in the west bank, the Golan heights, Gaza
and Sinai. Arab lands and property were confiscated and
some villages demolished to make room for Jewish settlement, and Arab inhabitants were expelled to vacate the
territory for Jewish settlers. At the beginning of the
occupation, this was most obvious in Jerusalem and its
neighbouring villages. Documents S/8634 of 13 June 1968
and S/8666 and S/8667 of 3 and 5 July 1968 give only a
few examples of these Israeli settlements erected on the
territory of a sovereign country. Another Jewish settlement
followed in the city of Al-Khalil-Hebron as is stated in my
letter of 3 June 1968 [S/8609/.

84. The closing of all banks in Arab territory occupied by
Israel and the confiscation of all funds and assets were
intended to serve the goal of disrupting the economy of
these territories. According to Ambassador Thalmann’s
report, he was informed that the measures already introduced by Israel with respect to taxes, customs duties,
licences, absentee properties and other economic matters
were considered oppressive and that there was a growing
feeling of economic strangulation.
85. Tenthly and finally, we have charged the Israelis with
committing acts leading to the systematic destruction of
the essential foundation of the life of the Palestine people.
The main objective of this obvious Israeli plan is the
disintegration of the political and social institutions, of the
culture, language, national feelings and religious and economic existence of the Palestine people, as well as the
destruction of the personal security, liberty, health, dignity
and even, as I have shown earlier, the lives of the
Palestinians. Those are acts of genocide that come squarely
within the definition of the Genocide Convention. The late
professor Raphael Lemkin, himself a Jewish non-Zionist
scholar, emphasized that even the hindrance and destruction of cultural activities are genocide. So also is the
destruction of libraries, archives and museums.

79. In my letter of 18 July I968 [s/8685],
I attached a
map which was circulated among the participants in the
twenty-seventh World Zionist Congress held in Jerusalem
during the month of June 1968. The map depicted the
creation of some thirty-five new Jewish settlements. The
majority of these were even then to be established on the
occupied territories of sovereign countries. Some have
already been established in the Golan heights and in the
west bank. This was confirmed in The Times of London of
20 June 1968.
80. These settlements carried out by Israeli official departments are part of the expansionist and annexationist plans
to achieve “Greater Israel”. This should not be accepted by
the Council members or any other sovereign State. Many of
these settlements are, built at the expense of new Palestinians who have been expelled and rendered homeless even
since the cease-fire resolution.

86. This is the case of the peop!e of the Arab occupied
territories. Israel’s crimes are obvious, as is also the
treacherous spirit which motivates them. Israel’s refusal to
accept the Special Representative needs no explanation.
The ten charges I have just brought forward against Israel
are an additional reminder of how Israel is violating its
Charter obligations, supposedly accepted when it became a
United Nations Member.

81. Ninthly, we have charged the Israelis with imposing
economic control on the. inhabitants of the occupied
territories in order to promote Israel’s own selfish interests.
In the report of the Secretary-General of 2 October 1967,
Mr. Cussing summarized the economic conditions in the
occupied areas in these words:

87. The Security Council should not condone, by its
inaction, the crimes of Israel. It is incumbent upon the
Council to remedy the human conditions of the people of
the Holy I-and. Only by demanding that Israel co-operate
with the Secretary-General and facilitate the mission of his

I‘- . . if there should be a delay in the resumption of
normal economic life both on the west bank and in the
Gaza Strip, a considerable portion of the population in
8

,

Special Representative can the Security Council justify the
hopes placed in it by the peoples now being subjected to
Israeli suppression, as well as the hopes of the peoples of
the world that the United Nations can bring stability and
justice to them.

camPaign launched in 1967 to stifle 1sra:l altogether, to
throw its People into the sea, to deny it not only the right
to independence but also the right to life?
95. Here is Jordan, the invader of 1948, the aggressor of
19679 the country that destroyed all Jewish communities in
the territories occupied by it in 1948, the country that did
not leave a single Jew within its borders, the desecrator of
JewishHoly Places, shrines and cemeteries; it is Jordan
whose amed forces were issued on the eve of the June war,
official written instructions to massacre Jews indiscriminatelY, whether men, women or children, that claims now
to be concerned about human rights,

88. When I speak of the people of the Holy Land, I should
like to speak of the people of the world; the Christians in
the Holy Land, the Moslems, all those in every continent,
Asia and Africa, no less than Europe and America, who
cherish their shrines. All religions and all communities have
a stake in what happens in the Holy Land. Jordan expects
all members of the Council to share in the responsibility.
The responsibility, indeed, more than ever rests on you, the
Security Council. The world will mark your action.

96. The Arab complaint arises from a proposal made by
the Secretary-General last February to Israel and to the
Arab Governments, to dispatch to the Middle East a second
representative on a fact-finding mission within the context
of resolution 237 (1967), adopted by the Security Council
on 14 June 1967, and General Assembly resolution
2252 (ES-V), adopted on 4 July 1967.

89. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
90. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As the Security Council meets
in urgent session on the eve of the twenty-third General
Assembly, the world can but wonder what has brought
about this event. Is it in order to hear that the Arab States
are ready to terminate the Middle East conflict and
conclude peace with Israel that we are being convened? Is
it to announce that the Arab States wish to end their
continued warfare against Israel that we are called into
session? Is it because the Arab States intend to abandon
the Khartoum policy of no’ peace, no negotiations, no
recognition of Israel, that we meet today?

97. In a conversation with the Secretary-General on 1.5
March 1968 and in a note of 18 April 1968, the
Government of Israel conveyed its willingness to co-operate
with such a representative. This willingness remains unaltered.
98. On 29 July 1968 the Foreign Minister of Israel wrote
to the Secretary-General:

91. None of these reasons motivates the new Arabinitiated complaint. It is in order to argue that anti-Jewish
discrimination and oppression, anti-Jewish laws, anti-Jewish
incitement and physical attacks should be ignored by the
United Nations, that the Arab Governments have decided
on another debate in the Council.

“The position of my Government in this matter cannot
accurately be taken as imposing ‘conditions’. It is the
Arab Governments who are imposing conditions. We have
never objected to your Special Representative carrying
out his mission in Israel-held territory. We co-operated
with Mr. Gussing’s mission, We ask only that the mission
should have an equal opportunity to investigate the
situation of Jewish communities cruelly persecuted in the
Arab countries since the recent conflict. This is clearly
within the scope of the relevant resolutions, as was
confirmed by you in connexion with the Gussing mission.
I am at a loss to understand why this should cause any
difficulty. In the light of our generation’s history the
United Nations cannot in all conscience appear to
embrace the doctrine that the problems and hardships of
communities and individuals are of international concern
unless the communities and individuals are Jewish.

92. The complaint before the Security Council is but a
reflection of continued Arab hostility and intransigence, an
expression of the Arab refusal to advance towards a just
and lasting peace. Indeed, it should be evident to its
initiators, its sponsors and those who support them that, far
from contributing to the promotion of understanding, this
step heightens tension, increases differences and imprisons
us again in the straitjacket of sterile acrimony. It is an
unhappy welcome to Ambassador Jarring, who is on his
way to New York to pursue his efforts towards attainment
of agreement between the parties. Surely it is obvious that
through agreement and peace the present situation of
cease-fire lines and military administration would be replaced by recognized boundaries and normal government. It
is regrettable that the Arab Governments are delaying this
process.

“It is, therefore, the unwillingness of the Arab Governments to co-operate in this respect that is delaying the
mission. They have sought to impose the unjustified
restriction that the mission should confine itself entirely
to Israel-held territories, and should turn, a blind eye to
the pl+ht of the Jewish communities which have suffered
and are suffering as a result of the confkt.
Our position
is not only that the Israel Government should not
acquiesce in the discrimination, but that the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations should be obdurate,
constant, austere and even indignant in his refusal to
acquiesce in it.

93. The complaint before us purports to be motivated by
humanitarian considerations and concern for the plight of
civilian populations.
94. Do the Arab States believe for a single moment that
the world is not aware of their crimes against humanity, or
that it is ready to forgive them for those crimes? DO the
Arab States really believe that the world has forgotten Arab
aggression against Israel since 1948, and the concerted

“If there is no basis at this time on which you could
instruct the mission to undertake its work men this is
9

solely because the Arab Governments insist that the
mission be based on anti-Jewish discrimination.

However, the meeting for the first time since 1948 between
Israelis and Arabs has demonstrated that peaceful coexistence between the two peoples is now possible and that both
peoples want peace. It is Israel’s hope that this coexistence
will prove to be a bridge to final peace with the Arab
States. It is regrettable that the Arab Governments appear
to be guided so far by different aspirations, that they
manifest unhappiness at the normalization of life and
growing understanding between the Jews and the Arabs,
that they continue warfare, incite to hatred and hostility,
and encourage incidents of violence and terror. However,
neither these incidents nor the security measures which
they engender change the general picture in the Israeliadministered territories.

‘I . . .
“I would again assure you that my Government is fully
discharging its responsibility for the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of all Israel-held territories.
Our record in administering these territories has been
constructive. There is no basis for the sweeping propaganda allegations that have been made by the representatives of Arab States.
“My Government would be glad to furnish you with
any information you may require in this regard. The
scrutiny of the world is freely accepted in these areas.
There is intensive movement in and out of the region and
few parts of the world are under closer examination by
the world press. Thoysands of official and unofficial
persons, from other couptries, have free accessto them;
and inhabitants are at lib’erty to expressand publish their
own opinions. Whenever a distinguished guest comes to
Israel we willingly help him to make contact with this
situation. What we oppose is acquiescencein the negative
condition that an official United Nations mission must
abstain from addressing itself to the sufferings of the
Jews. It is the curtain of darkness surrounding the
inhuman treatment of Jews in certain Arab countries that
needs to be drawn aside. Here no eye is allowed to
penetrate, no scrutiny to take place. I am convinced that
historic memory demands that the strongest moral
influence be brought to bear on Arab Governments to
persuade them to cease. obstructing and delaying the
proposed mission.” (S/8699, pnra. 14.f

103.

The well-known neutral organ of a neutral country,

the Neue Zurcher Zeitung, wrote on 8 June 1968:

“Life in the occupied Arab areas has, for all practical
purposes, returned to complete normalcy . . .
“ . . . also the Israeli armed forces are distributed
through the area in as unobtrusive a manner as possible.
In the larger towns one hardly encounters Israeli soldiers . . .
“The system of occupation built up by the Israelis in
the occupied areasis able to function thanks solely to the
far-reaching co-operation that prevails between them and
the local Arab administration. The Israelis have made it a
cardinal principle to interfere as little as possible in the
Arabs’ internal affairs. At the head of the various
communities, nearly everywhere, are still the same people
asbefore 5 June 1967.

99. I am authorized to state that any person present at
this Security Council table who wishes to come to Israel
would be welcome and we would be happy to facilitate his
visit to the territories under Israeli control so that he can
form his own impressions. We would be glad to assisthim in
becoming personally acquainted with the situation. However, what we cannot accept is a deliberate disregard for the
fate of Jews who are in distress. This consideration touches
our innermost feelings. Respect is due to it, if not from the
Arab Governments, at least from the United Nations and its
organs.

“Law and order are maintained locally by an Arab
police force, which has hardly changed in composition
since the war.
“Israel endeavours to maintain the occupation strictly
according to international law. That is why local law has
remained in force.
“The courts, too, have hardly been touched by the
upheaval of June 1967.
“The school system was subjected to a minimum of
interference as a result of the occupation. The schools are
being run with the same teaching personnel and the same
instructional material as before.

100. Any reference to areas under Israeli control is
meaningless without, recalling why Israeli forces are stationed today on the Suez Canal, why Israeli troops guard
the crossings on the Jordan River and patrol th& cease-fire
line in the Golan heights.

“The occupied territories have not produced an indigenous underground movement.

101. .%‘e stand where we stand today because the Arab
States did not let us live in peace where we were before
June 1967. We are where we are today becausehaving spilt
our blood and drained our strength for nineteen years, the
Arab States mounted last year the onslaught that was to
bring about Israel’s final annihilation. Israel found itself in
control of these territories because it survived and dislodged
the Arab armies from their bases of aggression.

“The terrorists brought in from the outside hardly
found support among the indigenous population.”
104. The impressions of thousands of other visitors have
been the same. Their reports have appeared in the press,
radio and television all over the world. The isolated
exceptions, simply repeating hackneyed Arab propagan#a,
merely emphasize by their rarity and anomaly to what
extent the true picture varies from their accounts. This
applies, of course, also to the Amman-inspired and fabri.

102. Thus, resulting from Arab aggression,Israeli presence
in these areas is imposed by the vital exigencies of security.

10

YI
i

cated trash submitted this morning by the Jordanian
representative. He seems to have forgotten one thing-the
truth about the situation in the areas under Israeli control is
freely accessible to all and does not depend on Arab
propaganda stunts.

114. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
There is no doubt that in referring to anti-Semitism in the
Moslem countries, the speaker is interfering directly in the
domestic affairs of sovereign States, such as Egypt and the
other Moslem States. I would ask the President to request
the speaker to confine himself to the subject of our
discussion and not to deal with other matters.

105. HOW different is the situation of Jews in Arab States
since June 1967: It is there that the real humanitarian
problem lies. It is there that human beings are still detained
in concentration camps, that entire communities have been
deprived of freedom of movement and expression and live
under constant threat, that Hitlerite legislation has singled
out groups of people for discriminatory treatment and
oppression. Indeed, this is the humanitarian problem in the
Middle East which has been deliberately concealed.

115. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Algeria for attempting to help the President of the Council,
who is, of course, quite capable of following what is said by
various representatives. The question that is before the
Council relates to the humanitarian issues raised by the
report of Mr. Gussing and the relevant resolutions. I would
ask the representative of Israel to adhere to those matters.
He may proceed.

106. The PRESIDENT: I cdl on the representative of
Algeria on a point of order.

116. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is not my intention to react
to the interferences by the representative of Algeria, but
surely he is aware that these matters are being referred to at
great length in the two reports presented to the Security
Council by the Secretary-General in the one on which the
complaint is based, and in the report presented following
._^
. .
upon Mr. tiussing’s mission.

107. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from Rench): A
few minutes ago, the Security Council adopted its agenda.
That agenda refers to the consideration of the note of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/8699 of 31
July 1968.

I

’

I

117. In Egypt, hundreds of Jews were arrested and held
under inhuman conditions in prison, without food or water.
Almost all the men in the community, apart from the very
old and sick, were imprisoned. They were confined in the
Abu Zaabal prison near Cairo and the Al-Burja prison near
Alexandria. Their only crime was in being Jews. The
conditions of their confinement were outrageous. Reports
published by some of the inmates who in the meantime
have been released and allowed to leave Egypt speak of
shocking mistreatment and gross indignities.

108. The situation of nationals of the Jewish faith in Arab
countries and elsewhere is not before the Council. I would
therefore ask the President to require the speaker to
observe the Council’s rules to confine himself strictly to the
agenda item and to refrain from interfering in the domestic
affairs of sovereign States.
109. The PRESIDENT: May I ask the representative of
Israel to proceed on the item on the agend;d.z
110. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): This is the humanitarian
problem in the Middle East which has been deliberately
concealed. This is a problem which requires urgent attention by the international Organization.

118. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Algeria to speak on a point of order.
119. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
The fact that we are discussing humanitarian questions does
not mean that we can speak of plague in Asia or famine in
Latin America, or even of the fate of prisoners throughout
the world. Of course, one can speak of any subject.
However, there is a specific item on our agenda, and it is
not the problem of Egyptian nationals of Jewish faith that
is at issue here. I would ask the President, theretore, to be
good enough to call the speaker to order and to request him
to confine himself to the matter before the Council.

111. The Islamic Congress held in Amman between 16 and
21 September 1967 adopted the following resolution:
“The Jews of the Arab countries have not responded
with respect to the degree of protection granted to them
by Islam over the generations, they have encouraged
Zionism in the world and Israel, in all manners of
aggression against the Arabs. The Congress announces
that the Jews of the Moslem countries. . . will be
regarded as enemies of Islam and ‘will no longer be
granted the protection normally given by Moslems to the
protected (Zimmi) religions and declares that all Moslem
Governments should regard them as enemy forces. All
Moslem peoples, together and singly, must boycott the
Jews and treat them as sworn enemies.”

120. The PRESIDENT: I would draw the attention of the
representative of Algeria to the fact that the item on the
Council’s agenda is “The situation in the Middle East: letter
dated 17 September 1968 . . ,“, which letter relates to the
report of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian question. I will ask the representatives who speak to confine
themselves to this item. If anyone wishes to change the
agenda or to impose a restriction-which
is not common
-on those who address this Council, I Could ask him to
submit a motion. If anybody wishes to challenge this ruling
he may do so by the usual method of making a motion.

112. This resolution, which speaks for itself, sanctioned
anti-Jewish steps in the Arab States immediately after
5 June 1967 and encouraged Arab Governments to take
further measures in the same spirit. In Egypt hundreds of
Jews were arrested and held under inhuman conditions in
prisons without food or water.

121. I ask the representative of Israel to proceed.
122. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Their only crime was in being
Jews. The conditions of their confinement were outrageous.

113. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Algeria on a point of order.
11

I
i

131. The Charter of the United Nations, the precepts of
international law and justice, the memory of Jewish
persecutionin Nazi Europe, now being re-enactedin the
Arab States,are sufficient groundsfor international action.
However, the Security Council is armed with more than
these, It has humanitarian resolutionswhich have already
beenappliedto the situation of Jewsin Arab landsafter the
June 1967 hostilities. It hasbefore it the experienceof the
first missiondispatchedby the Secretary-Generalon the
basisof thoseresolutions.

Reports published by some of the inmates who in the
meantime have been released and allowed to leave Egypt
speak of shocking mistreatment and gross indignities. Some
gave up hope and took their own lives; others were
committed to prison cells set apart for the mentally ill.
123. Today, several hundreds heads of Jewish families are
still imprisoned. They are held in the concentration camp
AI-Turra near Cairo. Their families tive in abject misery and
subsist on a mere pittance granted to them by the
impoverished Jewish community. They are close to starvation, having been deprived of all sources of income,
employment, and property.

132. It is clear from the text of the relevant Securit)Council and General Assemblyresolutionsthat they relate
to the conditionsof the civilian population throughout the
Middle East area of conflict, and not only in Israel-held
territories. Thus the scope of the first humanitariarl
mission, carried out in July-August 1967 by Mr. Nils
Gussing,included the condition of Jewsin Arab States in
the area.Mr. Gussinghimself requestedclarification on this
point from the Secretary-General, and his report of
2 October 1967stated:

124. This is Egypt, which masquerades as the champion Of
human rights.
125. The Jews of Syria have been virtually confined, since
June 1967, in ghettos. Jn Damascus and provincial towns
such as Aleppo, they have been deprived of their means of
livelihood. There are frequent threats, stonings and other
attacks on Jews, who live in constant fear for their lives.
The Syrian authorities have banned their departure from
the country.

“The Secretary-Generalinformed him that the pm+
sionsof Security Council resolution 237 (1967) might
properly be interpreted as having application to the
treatment, at the time of the recent war and asa result r!f
that war, of both Arab and Jewishpersonsin the Staler
which are directly concerned becauseof their partic@”
tion in that war.” [S/8158, parfz. 212.1

126. Shortly after the hostilities, on 17 June 1967, the
Baghdad radio proclaimed: “The Jewish cancer in Iraq
constitutes a grave danger to our existence and the future
of our country”.
127. The Iraqi radio, television and press continued to
carry incitement against Jews and called for the denial of all
rights and properties to the Jews. Religious sermons
whipped up anti-Jewish feelings. The Arabs were told to
stop all commerce tid contact with Jews. The authorities,
and principally the security services, subjected Jews to
threats of murder and sequestration and other forms of
molestation. Dozens of Jews were arrested in Baghdad and
thrown into gaol without trial. Police officers and Government officials have used the opportunity for extorting
money from Jews. A stop has been put to Jewish
commercial activities. Jewish employees have been dismissed from their jobs. Jewish students have been expelled
from schools and universities. The Iraqi Government, like
other Arab Governments, has forbidden emigration of Jews.

133. How far Mr. Cussingwasableto dischargethis aspect
of his missionis describedin chapterV of that report. IKE
proposingthe secondhumanitarianmission,the Secreton:Generalinformed the Israeland the Arab Governments th,at
the new representative would have the sameterms of
referenceas Mr. Cussinghad last year. The Arab Govern”
ments concerned have, however, advised the Secretary
General that they would bar the representative fr~r~r~
enquiringinto the situation of the Jewishcommunities,ZL%
Mr. Gussinghad tried to do. This is an attitude contrary 10
the relevant Security Council and GeneralAssemblyresole.
tions. It is contrary to the Secretary-General’sinterpretstion of the scopeof the Gussingmission.It is contrary 211%
the obligationsof the Arab States under the Charter of thr
United Nations.

128. Then in March 1968 came the climax of anti-Jewish
measures. For the first time since the Nazi laws directed
against the Jews of Germany, a State Member of the United
Nations adopted legislation singling out Jews in its territory
for discriminatory treatment.

134. The Arab Governmentscandemonstratetheir sincc8+
ity by ceasingtheir opposition to the inclusion of this
aspectin the new mission,and if they were to do this the
problem would solve itself and the long-delayedmissit%
would no longerbe frustrated.

129. The persecution of Jews in Arab States in the wake
of the June 1967 hostilities is a shocking violation of
human rights. It cannot be ignored by the United Nations;
it cannot be ignored by Israel,

135, The situation is quite different from that to which
the precedingspeakershave askedthe Security Council ~*a
give credence+Israel has no objection to a humanitarian
missionin the Middle East. But the Arab States’insisten@
on a reinterpretation and distortion of last year’s resoha%
tionsis frustrating that humanitarianmission.

130. Discrimination and oppression of Jews, incarceration
of Jews in concentration camps and prisons for no crime
other than that they are Jews, the promulgation of
anti-Jewish legislation, barring Jews from contact with the
outside world, prohibiting them even to seek refuge in
other lands, constitute a situation that in itself calls for
United Nations action. Indeed, the Secretary-General himself has recognized this in his report.

13G. The situation presentsitself asa choice between the
view that the persecution of Jews, which was within thescopeof the first humanitarianmission,shouldbe exclude-d
from the scopeof the second,and the view that there
can
be no discrimination and that the mission should, ifa
12

accordance with resolutions 237 (1967) of the Security
Council and 22.52 (ES-V) of the General Assembly,
apply
to the civilian populations in the area of conflict in the
Middle East, Jews and Arabs alike.
137. For twenty
centuries my people has been subjected
to discrimination and persecution. We are tired of it, We are
tired of seeing our brethren oppressed and the world
standing by idly. We are tired of being told that human
rights are an international problem but that, as the Nazis
kept on repeating, the persecution of Jews is an internal
matter. We are tired of being told that the human rights of
Jews became tenuous because their numbers are small, We
are tired of hearing that martyrdom of Jews evokes
sympathy, but action must be taken only on the alleged
suffering of Arabs ~110 by fault of their own Governments
are in areas under Israeli control. We are tired of coming to
the Security Council year after year to find that the murder
of Jews cannot be condemned and that Israel’s rights
cannot be vindicated because of the technicalities of vote.
We are tired of aggressors preaching law, and of offenders
against justice and human rights masquerading as protagonists of the rights of man.
138. Such distortion of international values will not
weaken Israel’s adherence to them. The Jewish people,
steeled and hardened by 4,000 years of history, will not
bend to evil hypocrisy, will not become a partner in the
suppression of truth and will persevere in the struggle to
ensure its rights in the family of nations.
139. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan in exercise of his right of reply.
140. Mr. EL-FARRA
(Jordan): Of course an invited
member has no right to intervene or to raise objections on
the question of procedure. That is why I did not find it
possible, although it would have been desirable, to refer to
the procedural aspect raised earlier. But, of course, I am
entitled to speak about a procedure that has been adopted.

Council, answerall the fabrications,distortionsandmisrepresentations-1 would say the deceit-contained in
Mr. Tekoah’sstatement.
143. But there are two points which I should like to
discussand answer.
144. Mr. Tekoah attempted to presenta rosy picture of
the people. living in the occupied areas.He said that
everything is all right; what the Security Councilhasheard
is Arab propagandaand one shouldnot pay attention to it.
But did Mr. Tekoah answerone singlechargeof the ten
charges I presented? I presentedfacts and figures. I
presentedstatementsof clergymenand archbishopsof all
communitiesin Jerusalem.He calledthat “the usualtrash,
Arab propaganda”.I am not makingthesestatements.I am
only carrying a messagefrom the clergymen, from the
people in the area, from the victims of Mr. Tekoah’s
authorities. I do not think that sayingthat this is nothing
but “trash” can convinceanyone. When archbishops
speak
they are inspired by moral values,not by Zionist inclinations.
145. If there is a dispute,what is the way to solveit? Is it
not to go and find out? All that we are sayingis that we
have presentedten charges.Either acceptthe evidencewe
introduce-and it is clearevidence--oremphasizethat Israel
shouldallow a manfrom the United Nationsto undertakea
fact-finding mission,to find out for himself, to comeand
tell the Council objectively what is goingon. Wewant an
impartial investigation. Either accept the evidence, and
there is ampleevidence,andwork on it or senda manfrom
the Security Council.Mr. Tekoahkeepssaying“Let anyone
go and find out”. All right, let the objectiverepresentative
of the Security Council, U Thant, sendhismanto the area.
146. Is that too much to ask? Is it not the Council’sduty
to protect the future and the lives of the peoplewho are
still in gaol or under detention or beingtortured? I think
that questionis very clear.

141, I think that the question before the Council involves
one single issue: the report of the Secretary-General
explaining the refusal of Israel to accept the Special
Representative. There was a letter from the Ambassador of
Senegal and the Acting Permanent Representative Of
Pakistan requesting a meeting to consider this very issue,
and I was hoping that the deliberations would be confined
to that aspect of the Middle East situation. Of course the
report of Mr. Gussing will come before the Council at a
later stage when it has all the evidence before it and after it
receives the report which will be coming from the projected
mission requested by U Thant. I do not think that the
Council is now considering the facts of the Gussing report.
It is discussing the failure of Israel to enable the Council to
obtain complete evidence about what is going on in the
occupied areas. I say this in passing, as I said, it relates to
procedure.

147. Then Mr. Tekoah said: “Let ushave equal opportunity to an investigation”. Thosewerehis words.Equal to
what? The mandate stemsfrom Security Council resolution 237 (1967) sponsoredby the delegationsof Brazil,
Ethiopia, andArgentina. Thisis the mandate,andthis is the
resolution. What doesit say? It is quite clear, and it was
adopted unanimously.This is what the Secretary-General
saidto us: “This paragraphapplieswithout questionto the
area occupied by Israel sinceJune 1967. Strictly interpreted it would not, however, apply to Arabs in, for
example, Nazareth or Haifa . .” [S/8699, para. lo]. Even
the Arab minority in Haifa, within the occupiedterritory,
1 .+.
within what is called Israel, does not come uncrertms
mandate.The mandateappliesonly to the peoplewho were
expelled and to thosewho are living within the territories
occupiedsince5 June 1967. I hope that we shalladhereto
the properinterpretation and to the onesingleissue.

142. I now come to the many distortions we have just
heard. The hour is late and I do not think that the members
of the Council would welcome a rebuttal by me of every
single issue raised by Mr. Tekoah. With the permission of
the President I shall, at a time more convenient to the

148. My last point relates to the question of peace.
Mr. Tekoah is gifted in singingthe songof peacewhen he
meansaggressionand pressure.He hasagainspokenabout
peace.The Councilis dealingwith a humanitarianquestion.
I do not think that Mr. Tekoah’sremark shouldbe left

155. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): When the representative of
Senegal speaks about our letter, he speaks for my delega.
tion aswell as his.

unanswered. Yes, we are for peace. Here and now, and I say
this in the Security Council for all the world to hear, we
reaffirm our adherence to the Armistice Agreement. We
reaffirm our adherence to all Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, We accept all the resolutions of the
United Nations. Let the Israelis here and now say the same.
If the Israeli promises-and I want this to be clear-are to be
accepted in the future, we ask that Israel honour its
obligations of the past. The Israelis cannot seek new
obligations-call it negotiations or treaties or whateverbefore honouring their previous obligations and before
announcing their adherence .to every resolution that has
been adopted. We hereby announce our adherence to every
single resolution and every single agreement, be it the
Protocol of Lausanne, the General Armistice Agreement, or
the Council’s resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.
Let Mr. Tekoah say the same thing.

156. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel in exercise of his right of reply.
157. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Jordanian representative’s
readiness to announce, on behalf of his Government,
loyalty to and acceptance of United Nations resolutions is,
I must say, most disarming. His Government has shown
adherence to all United Nations resolutions since 1948
calling for peace between Israel and the Arab States by
waging war against Israel for twenty years and refusing to
make peace with Israel today. It has more recently shown
its acceptance of Security Council resolutions calling for an
end to violations of the cease-fire by continuing with grave
acts of aggression in violation of the cease-fire, such as the
one which occurred yesterday in the Jordan Valley.

149. If the value of an Israeli promise is to be demonstrated, we must see Israel’s promises of the past also
honoured. This is the crux of the problem. I shall have
more to say on this at a later stage.
150. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Jordan, whose remarks on procedure I have noted. I should
make clear my understanding of the procedural situation to
which he was good enough to refer, and to which the
representative of Algeria also referred. The item on our
agenda is “The situation in the Middle East”, under which
we are considering the letter dated 17 September 1968
from the representatives of Pakistan and Senegal [S/8819/.
That letter in turn refers to a note by the Secretary-General
of 3 1 July 1968 [S/8699/, which contains the views of the
Secretary-General as well as the views of certain Governments and includes a letter from the Foreign Minister of
Israel. The views expressed in this document range across
the very issues which were referred to by the speakersin
this debate today. It is therefore not appropriate, in my
view, to rule those referencesout of order. It is on this basis
that I would ask representatives, when we resume our
proceedings, to adhere to the documentation before them.
151. I calI on the representative of Senegal on a point of
order.
152. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from FLenchj: For
the record, I should like simply to recall the terms of our
letter of 17 September 1968, which reads as follows:

“Uppn instructions from our Governments, we have the
honour to request you to call an urgent meeting of the
Security Council as early as possible, to consider the
report of the Secretary-General, contained in document
S/8699 dated 31 July 1968, submitted by the SecretaryGeneral under Security Council resolution 237 (1967)
dated 15 June 1967”. (S/8819.]

158. We are, however, concerned here with a more specific
question: humanitarian resolutions adopted a year ago
interpreted for the purpose of the first humanitarian
mission that was carried out by Mr. Gussing, and the
Secretary-General’s report. The representative of Jordan is
apparently unable to accept even the simple facts and the
obvious interpretations of these texts. He referred to the
question of Arab minorities in Israel, and I should like to
draw the Council’s attention to the fact that this question
wasincluded, in fact, in the scope of Ambassador Gussing’s
mission. I shall quote briefly from the letter sent to the
Secretary-General by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel and included in the Secretary-General’s report:
“It should, therefore, be recalled that both the Israel
Government and Mr. Gussing regarded the Arab minority
in Israel as coming within the scope of his mission. We
shall not oppose the mission addressing itself to problems,
if any, arising from that community as a result of the
conflict. In paragraph 215 of the Secretary-General’s
report on the Gussing Mission [S/81X?/, a summary is
given of the written information furnished to Mr. Gussing
on security measures taken by the Israel authorities at the
outbreak of the war, affecting Arab citizens. These
measures were confined to the temporary detention of
forty-five persons as security risks, and a temporary night
curfew in one or two border areas. Except for these
security measures, the Arab citizens of Israel had suffered
no discrimination . . .
“At that time,“-that
is at the time of Ambassador
Gussing’s mission-“there was no suggestion from any
quarter that the Arab citizens of Israel lay outside the
scope of the Secretary-General’s fact-finding mission. On
the contrary, it appears from paragraph 217 of the
Secretary-General’s report that Mr. Cussing wasexpected
by the Arab Governments to concern himself with the
Arab minority in Israel . . . In other words, the factfinding mission is required to deal with any community in
the Middle East region, Jewish or Arab. if it is alleged that
they have suffered during or since the June 196-7 war.”

1.53. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
The Algerian delegation fully shares the interpretation
which the representative of Senegal has just placed upon
the item on the Council’s agenda.

[S/8699, para.14./

154. The PRESIDENT: I take note equally of the comment of the representative of Algeria, which, of course, is in
accord with the remarks which I had just made.

159. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Jordan has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
14

160. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I am sorry, but I cannot
leave that distortion unanswered, Mr. Tekoah referred to
what happened yesterday. I wish he had continued and had
said what really happened yesterday. Yesterday the Israelis
tried to expel 400 inhabitants from the Gaza Strip to the
east bank. That is what happened yesterday. I am not aware
of anything else that happened, other than the Israeli
allegation that certain resistance took place within the
occupied territory, and that certain Israeli soldiers and
certain national resistance members, freedom fighters, were
also killed. If that is true, it is the legitimate right of the
people within an occupied territory to resist. That is only
legitimate. It is a God-given right for the people to resist the
invaders and the occupiers. That has happened in many
places. I think that the majority of the Members around
this table resisted invasion in one form or another. The
people in the occupied areas are not an exception to the
rule.

‘sui generis character of “the Jewish people” concept,’
and urging clarification of the Department’s views with
respect to ‘the Jewish people claim’. You state: ‘The
central point is that the Zionist-Israel sovereignty uses
“the Jewish people” concept as the basic juridical claim
directed against the Jews in States other than Israel who
insist upon maintaining their single nationality Status. Its
principal function,’ you state, ‘is to change the legal
status of Jews from that of individual nationals of Jewish
religious faith to members of a juridically recognized
transnational nationality group with additional “rights”
and obligations to the Zionist-Israel sovereignty. The core
of “the Jewish people” concept is its nationality characteristics . . .’
“The Department of State recognizes the State of Israel
as a sovereign State and citizenship of the State of Israel.
It recognizes no other sovereignty or citizenship in
connexion therewith. It does not recognize a legalpolitical relationship based upon the religious identification of American citizens. It does not in any way
discriminate among American citizens upon the basis of
their religion.

161. I come now to another point. Mr. Tekoah keeps
repeating that Israel, represented by Mr. Tekoah, is the
champion of the Jewish cause everywhere. He seems to try
to create the picture that Israel represents the Jewish
minorities in the United States, Canada, the United
Kingdom, France and other Member States. I do not think
that is the case, I think the Jews in every Member State
would like to be nationals of that State and would not like
to be called citizens of Israel. That is something that breeds
discrimination; it breeds crimes. In saying this, let me quote
good official authority.

“Accordingly,‘it should be clear that the Department of
State does not regard ‘the Jewish people’ concept as a
concept of international law.”
163. If Mr. Tekoah-and I am referring to the procedural
aspect-is permitted to discuss the life of the Jewish citizens
in every Member State, he will have very many problems
because Mr. Tekoah’s State has been living on this idea 0f
persecution and discrimination for a long time-they repeat
the same slogan time and again. I think he would be
rendering a service to Jews all over the world if he would
treat them as nationals wherever they are.

162. I am quoting the Government of the United States of
America. This is its interpretation of what a citizen is and is
not. The United States Assistant Secretary of State, on 20
April 1964, speaking before the American Council for
Judaism in New York, and answering Rabbi Berger on this
very issue, said the following:

164. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on mY
list. I therefore propose to adjourn the meeting.

“Dear Mr. Berger,
“We have carefully studied your letter of March 14,
1964, drawing the Department of State’s attention t0 the

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

15

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Notions
Unier
sent
en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les ogences
dipositairer
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
oupr&s
de votre libroirie
ou adrersez-vous
61
Notions
Unier, Section
der venter, New York ou Genhve.
HAK

flOJY’fG1Tb

M3AAHHH

OPrAHM3AuMH

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAUCIA

~h;111111111 O~~r~lllll:lCtl~nn
06ZCplIlCllIllJS
Ikll~llfi
JIOiIillO iiyllSlTb
II Iillll2illl~lS
WUWlllaX
II
i1l'CIIT~'TIIllS
110 III'CX ~Il~iiOll~S Wlpli.
klllO~ilTC
Ulpalllill
Od ll:1~allIlJlX
II IllllllC~I
lillll~lillOY
MtlRl:lnllC
11.~11 IllllUllTC
110 IlJ~lCL'~ : Opraiinaaqwl
O~)~~~~II~IIIII~~X
1Ia1~11il. CCKI~III
IIO
UpOJlUic
ll:lgUlnil,
IIhlo-fiOpIi
lyn W?llCBtl.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los pubticociones
de 10s Nociones
Unidos
est6n
en lodor porter
del mundo. Consulte
o su librero
Ventar.
Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

UNIDAS

en vcnto en librerias
o dirljose
a: Naciones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cosos dirtribuidoros
Unidas,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

x666-October

1972-2,050
