204

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

4. Endorses the recommendations of the Commission
on Human Rights in its resolution 1986/52 that Governments in need of technical assistance in the field of human
rights should be encouraged:
(a) To make use ofthe possibility offered by the United
Nations of organizing, under the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, information and/or
training courses at the national leve! for appropriate government personnel on the application of international human rights standards and the experience of relevant international organs;
(b) To avail themselves of the advisory services of experts in the field of human rights, for example for drafting
basic legal texts in conformity with international conventions on human rights;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to pay special attention to the most appropriate ways
of assisting, at their request, countries of the different regions under the programme of advisory services and to
make, where necessary, the relevant recommendations;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the
state of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights and to include therein the results
of action taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
7. Decides to consider this question further at its fortythird session.

in this field, on the Charter ofthe United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
other relevant international instruments and to refrain
from activities that are inconsistent with this international
legal framework;
2. Considers that such co-operation should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights, to
the promotion ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms
for al! and to the strengthening of international peace and
security;
3. Emphasizes that co-operation in the field of human
rights should be guided by justice and equality, with due
respect for the dignity of al! people without any disci:imination;
4. Notes the important place that the promotion and
protection of human rights has secured on the international agenda and in relations between States;
5. Invites al! States to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral their views on means and methods of strengthening international co-operation in the field of human rights;
6 Decides to consider this question at its forty-second
session under the item entitled "Report of the Economic
and Social Council".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/155.

Strengthening of international co-operation in
the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the purposes of the United Nations inelude the achievement of international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international
co-operation in the field of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international co-operation should
be based on the principies embodied in the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 22 the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 22 and other relevant international instruments,
Deeply convinced that such co-operation should be based
on a profound understanding of the economic, social and
cultural realities and the variety of problems existing in
different societies,
Emphasizing the necessity for the international community to continue its efforts to take practical measures to
prevent mass and flagrant violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms affected by situations that jeopardize international peace and security, such as apartheid, ali
forms of racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign occupation and domination, aggression and threats against national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity,
as well as the refusal to recognize the fundamental rights
of peoples to self-determination,
1. Calls upon al! Member States to base their activities
for the protection and promotion of human rights, including the development of further international co-operation

41/156.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of ali Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 40/140 of 13 December 1985, in which it
decided to continue its consideration of the situation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at
its forty-first session,
Recalling a/so the previous resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights on the subject, and taking note of
Commission resolution 1986/62 of 13 March 1986, 31
1. Welcomes the process of democratization and return to constitutionality, which are fundamental steps
towards complete and effective enjoyment ofhuman rights
and fundamental freedoms, and encourages the Government of Guatemala to continue to take measures for the
effective implementation of the Constitution and other
laws aimed at safeguarding these rights and freedoms;
2. Requests the Government of Guatemala to continue
co-operating with the Commission on Human Rights by
providing it with information about the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular in regard to the application of the new legal order for the protection of these rights and freedoms;
3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should continue to consider the situation ofhuman
rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala, in accordance with Commission resolution 1986/62, and decides
to continue its consideration of developments in that situation at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
