United Nations

S/PV.6715

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6715th meeting
Thursday, 9 February 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-22841 (E)

*1222841*

S/PV.6715

on a cross-dimensional set of agreed principles and
commitments.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of Ireland, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Gilmore.
Mr. Gilmore: It is a pleasure and an honour for
me to speak before the Security Council in my capacity
as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In my
address today, I will outline the main priorities of
Ireland’s OSCE chairmanship and also discuss a
number of key issues common to both of our
organizations.
With 56 participating States covering a
population of over 1 billion, the OSCE is the world’s
largest regional organization under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. The United Nations and the
OSCE are founded on core principles and common
values. We share a common belief in a comprehensive
approach to security that addresses that challenge in all
of its dimensions.
In my address to the OSCE Permanent Council in
January, I outlined that Ireland would adopt a
pragmatic and fair-minded approach to our
chairmanship responsibilities. I noted that our aim was
to elaborate a set of priorities that would ensure a
balanced and coherent approach across all three
dimensions:
politico-military,
economic
and
environmental, and human. I can assure the Security
Council today that we will take forward work in all
areas in 2012. We will do everything in our power to
achieve concrete results and deliver tangible benefits. I
am firmly committed to the OSCE’s concept of a
common, comprehensive and indivisible security based

2

Ireland has always attached importance to the
human dimension, and we will have an ambitious
agenda this year. The Irish chairmanship will work
closely with the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities, and the Office of the
Representative on Freedom of the Media to address
specific instances where OSCE commitments are not
being met and to take forward a number of key issues.
We intend to prioritize the issue of internet
freedom. As in other parts of the world, the threat to
freedom of expression online is ever-present in the
OSCE region and appears to be growing. We will work
to ensure that existing OSCE commitments in relation
to freedom of expression and freedom of the media
apply to all forms and means of their exercise. As part
of these efforts, we intend to organize a conference in
Dublin in June for OSCE participating States, at which
we will aim to move towards a common understanding
of the issues at stake.
Human dimension events are also planned on a
range of other topics. We intend to organize meetings
focused on freedom of association and assembly,
freedom of religion and belief, trafficking in human
beings, and racism and intolerance in sport. Ireland
also intends to maintain the highest standards for
OSCE election observation activities. This year will
see important elections throughout the OSCE region.
In the politico-military dimension, we hope to see
continued progress on the updating of confidence- and
security-building measures and enhancement of the
conflict prevention capacity of the OSCE. We will take
forward work that will enable the OSCE to deepen its
involvement in all phases of the conflict cycle and to
strengthen its capacity to tackle conflict, from
prevention to resolution. In this regard, we will work
closely with OSCE Secretary General, Lamberto
Zannier, on implementation of the conflict cycle
decision that was agreed at the Vilnius ministerial
meeting.
We will examine the options available to us to
achieve progress in the areas of arms control, conflict
prevention and resolution, and transnational threats,
which pose challenges to all of our societies. In
relation to the updating of the Vienna Document, we
will work with the chairs of the Forum for Security

12-22841

S/PV.6715

Cooperation to build on the good results achieved last
year. We will also encourage participating States that
are party to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces
in Europe to strive to overcome the current impasse in
this area.

regarding the territory of Transdniestria; in Georgia
regarding the territories of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia; and the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. I have
appointed two Special Representatives to assist me in
addressing these complex conflicts.

A shared challenge for our two organizations is to
ensure close and effective cooperation to tackle
complex transnational threats. One key area of shared
interest is counter-terrorism, where the focus of the
OSCE's activity is to support the implementation of
United Nations anti-terrorism instruments. The OSCE
also cooperates closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. During our chairmanship, we will
build on our joint efforts to tackle transnational threats
such as organized crime, cyberthreats — including
cybercrime — drugs, terrorism and trafficking.

As regards Moldova and Transdniestria, we stand
ready to build on the momentum achieved by Lithuania
with the successful resumption of the official 5+2
talks. We look forward to hosting the first official talks
under our chairmanship in Dublin later this month.

Within the economic and environmental
dimension, the core theme of the Irish chairmanship
will be the promotion of security and stability through
good governance. We firmly believe that weak
governance undermines economic development and
exposes states to greater security risks. Here, too, we
see great potential for building on the existing
cooperation with the United Nations in this field.
Ireland's ratification last year of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption signals our
determination to further international cooperation in
this area. The United Nations Convention is a
comprehensive anti-corruption treaty that requires
countries to implement legal and regulatory regimes
within both the private and public sectors. The OSCE
Ministerial Council decision on combating corruption
specifically highlights this Convention and encourages
OSCE participating States to ratify it. During our
chairmanship, we will promote further dialogue within
the OSCE on the role it can play to support and
encourage implementation of the Convention.
During our chairmanship, we will focus in
particular on measures to counter corruption, moneylaundering and terrorist financing. We will also
consider the issue of confiscation of the proceeds of
criminal activity. In this regard, we intend to highlight
the work of Ireland's Criminal Assets Bureau as a
model for other participating States to consider.
As Chairperson-in-Office, I will seek ways in
which progress can be made towards lasting
settlements of a number of conflicts that persist in the
OSCE area. Among these are the conflicts in Moldova

12-22841

The situation in Georgia, particularly the
humanitarian situation, is a matter of utmost concern.
Ireland strongly supports the Geneva discussions in
facilitating engagement and a way forward for all
concerned. We very much welcome the rich
cooperation with the United Nations in these
discussions, and would like to pay tribute to the work
of United Nations Representative to the Geneva
international discussions, Ambassador Antti Turunen,
and his team.
We also commend the continuing efforts of the
OSCE's Minsk Group in addressing the long-running
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and look forward to
working closely with the co-Chairs and other members
of the Minsk Group during the year.
In supporting these efforts, we will draw from our
own experience of conflict resolution. I will host a
conference in Dublin on 27 April that will focus on
Northern Ireland as a case study, aiming to explore a
number of aspects that might be applicable to conflict
situations in the OSCE region. I believe that we can
encourage those engaged in negotiations elsewhere to
persevere in their efforts by showing that it has been
possible to create and build peace in Northern Ireland
and by explaining how this was achieved and how it is
being sustained. I will also share some of Ireland's
experience in this area through the United Nations
Group of Friends of Mediation, of which Ireland is a
member. Let me take this opportunity to welcome the
vital enhancement in recent years of the United
Nations capacity in the area of mediation, which we
have been pleased to be able to support on a national
basis.
At a time of constrained resources and ever-more
complex transnational threats, a closer partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations is
indispensable. Our cooperation has advanced not only
in the development of common approaches to the

3

S/PV.6715

challenges we face, but also at the field operational
level. The OSCE mission in Kosovo is the first
example of the organization’s becoming an integral
part of an operation led by the United Nations. That
mission has a specific tasking from 1244 (1999) to take
the lead role in matters relating to institution and
democracy building and human rights and the rule of
law. Indeed, the former United Nations Special
Representative for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Lamberto Zannier, is now serving as Secretary General
of the OSCE. In the valuable contribution which he has
made to each, he embodies the ever-closer relationship
between the two organizations.
Close and effective cooperation exists in many of
the OSCE's 16 field missions with many of the United
Nations agencies, notably the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On Afghanistan, I recall that Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon specifically welcomed greater OSCE
involvement when he addressed the OSCE summit in
Astana. I am pleased to confirm that we will promote
implementation of the decision agreed at the Vilnius
ministerial meeting through concrete projects in
Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the United
Nations and other international actors in the region.
The United Nations has provided strong
leadership on the issue of women and peace and
security, reflected in resolution 1325 (2000). Ireland’s
national action plan, launched last November, is a
powerful statement of our commitment to the rights of
women affected by conflict. Within the OSCE context,
the promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) is carried out
by the Forum for Security Cooperation. In that regard,
a dedicated military office, based in our permanent
mission to the OSCE in Vienna, has been tasked to
examine ways that the Forum can support the
implementation of that and other resolutions related to
gender and security.
A great many tasks lie before us as we direct the
work of this organization across a wide range of
activities. It is a signal honour for Ireland to discharge
this important multilateral responsibility in 2012. As
Chair of the OSCE, a key regional partner of the
United Nations, I pledge my full support and
partnership. I am confident that our cooperation will be
richly successful.

4

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Gilmore for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I should like to
extend a warm welcome to the Tánaiste and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland, Mr. Gilmore,
to the Council today in his capacity as Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him for his
briefing.
The United Kingdom fully supports the priorities
set out by the Chairperson-in-Office today. The
promotion and protection of human rights, fundamental
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law are
cornerstones of the OSCE. Greater effort is needed by
all OSCE participating States to ensure that they not
only fully meet the commitments they have freely
entered into, but that they also recognize that
commitments need to keep pace with developments in
the real world. For example, freedoms of the media
need to be updated to reflect the huge changes in
information technology of recent years. We recognize
that consensus in this sensitive area will be difficult to
reach, but we are confident that Irish leadership,
building on the excellent work of the Lithuanian OSCE
chairmanship in 2011, can take us further forward. I
welcome the emphasis on freedom of expression online
in the address that we have just heard from the
Chairperson.
As the Chairperson-in-Office has just pointed out,
conflicts within the OSCE space remain unresolved.
We very much welcome Ireland's intention to place
particular emphasis on the need to advance the
resolution of such conflicts. Of course, each conflict is
different, with its own history and circumstances, but
important lessons can be learned from successful and
unsuccessful efforts at conflict resolution and
prevention. We echo the thoughts of the Chairpersonin-Office that sharing the successful experience of
conflict resolution in Northern Ireland may help reveal
some common ground for fresh ideas and renewed
impetus. We therefore welcome and look forward to
the planned conference in Dublin in April to look at
those issues. We will be ready to engage fully and at
high level in that event.
The United Kingdom also remains committed to
the conventional arms control and confidence and

12-22841

S/PV.6715

security building regimes across Europe, which
contribute greatly to transparency and predictability,
and therefore to European stability. We regret that
implementation in this area is incomplete. It is clear
that more effort is needed within the OSCE to update
and revitalize those key instruments, and we very much
welcome the intention of the Irish Chair to support
such an effort.
The United Kingdom currently has the honour to
hold the chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe. We fully appreciate the
expectations that come with this rare opportunity to
lead the Council of Europe's work for six months. The
overarching theme of our chairmanship is the
promotion and protection of human rights, mirroring
the importance we attach to the human dimension work
of the OSCE. We urge all OSCE participating States,
first, to redouble their efforts to meet their existing
human dimension commitments fully, and secondly, to
recognize the need to extend those commitments
further. We must review issues such as the protection
of journalists and the freedom of expression in digital
media and cyberspace.
The continent of Europe has experienced
enormous political change over the past 30 years,
driven by the will of the people for greater freedoms
and true democracy. It is the duty of all responsible
Governments to listen and respond appropriately and
fully to the demands of the people whom they serve.
The role of chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE
is both a great honour and a heavy responsibility. We
applaud how Ireland has set about the task, with a
programme and priorities that promote those principles
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy,
good governance and the rule of law on which the
OSCE is founded.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland, Mr. Gilmore.
The priorities of the Irish chairmanship presented to
the Security Council establish a solid base for
implementing well-designed plans, which it is our hope
will allow that organization to reach a qualitatively
new level. We all want to see an OSCE that is more
effective and meets the interests of all its member
States.

12-22841

The
Russian
Federation
advocates
a
comprehensive development and improvement of
cooperation between the United Nations and its
Security Council, on the one hand, and regional and
subregional mechanisms on the other, among which the
OSCE occupies an important place. Such cooperation
should be based on the solid foundation of the United
Nations Charter, especially Chapter VIII, taking due
account of the relative advantages of these global
organizations and mechanisms. There is no doubt that
the Security Council holds the principal responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
The OSCE enters the new year with a solid set of
tools for establishing a community of equal and
undivided security, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok. First and foremost is the problem of
transnational threats and challenges, such as combating
drugs, the framework for police activity and the
counter-terrorism mandate of the OSCE. We look
forward to the completion of agreements on the
strategic instruments and the adoption of relevant
decisions.
An important challenge is to develop confidencebuilding measures in the use by member States of
information and communication technology to bolster
the United Nations global efforts to improve
international information exchange and security. We
hope that the outcome of the annual security review
conference, as well as the conferences on combating
drugs and terrorism, will make major regional
contributions to these global efforts, including those
conducted under Security Council auspices.
The OSCE human dimension requires rethinking,
above all in rejecting selectivity on country and
thematic issues and to give due prominence to
important themes in human rights issues. Crisis
resolution remains one of the key functions of the
OSCE. We believe that the lasting settlement of
conflicts is possible only through substantive, creative
negotiations towards compromise, involving all
concerned parties. To that end, the OSCE chairmanship
should take into account that some of the so-called
frozen conflicts no longer need to be so. Our approach
must take account of new geopolitical realities.
We hope that the work of the OSCE in 2012 in
that area will be based on the agreed principles of
settlement: consensus, the rule of international law, the
peaceful settlement of conflicts through negotiations

5

S/PV.6715

within existing forums, the unacceptability of the use
of force, and consent by all parties to conflicts to the
measures proposed by the OSCE. We support efforts to
reform the OSCE to make its work more effective,
especially by reviewing its founding document. We
hope that Ireland will pursue efforts in that matter.
We hope that the philosophy of the Irish
chairmanship set out by Mr. Gilmore goals will allow
the organization to overcome the crises of recent years
and to adapt to the new global realities. We are ready to
work with the Irish chairmanship and all other
participating States on this issue. We wish Mr. Gilmore
every success in addressing the current urgent
challenges facing the OSCE.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Deputy Prime Minister Gilmore
to the Security Council and congratulate both him and
Ireland on having assumed the chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. I
also thank him for his comprehensive briefing today.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has unique capabilities to assist the 56
OSCE participating States and 12 OSCE partner States
in addressing a range of security concerns. As the
world’s largest Chapter VIII regional organization
under the United Nations Charter, the OSCE is a key
partner in implementing the international legal
obligations, as called for in Security Council
resolutions. It is an effective regional multiplier for the
United Nations and contributes meaningfully to
advancing peace and stability. In this regard, I have
several points I wish to make.
First, the United States appreciates the crucial
role the OSCE plays in democratic institution-building,
including by observing elections and providing
technical assistance to Governments and civil society.
The United States also welcomes the OSCE’s
commitment to supporting transition in North Africa
and to working with Governments that seek to build
pluralistic and democratic societies. We welcome
continued close cooperation between the United
Nations, the OSCE and other regional organizations in
assisting this transition. In the Western Balkans,
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus, the
OSCE’s 16 field missions and offices support a wide
range of United Nations priorities and specialized
agencies, particularly the Office of the United Nations

6

High Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
For example, the OSCE supported the creation of
regional security centres in Central Asia and the
Caucasus through its field missions. The OSCE office
in Baku is working with the United Nations Economic
Commission in Europe to promote an agreement
between Azerbaijan and Georgia on shared water
resources. The OSCE mission in Kosovo plays a
critical role in assisting the development of Kosovo’s
democracy and new institutions. For example, the
mission helped to establish municipal offices in
Kosovo to protect the rights of displaced persons,
returnees and community members — a crucial
element in supporting the United Nations efforts.
Secondly, we strongly support the OSCE’s efforts
to protect human rights and promote tolerance and
non-discrimination through its Office of Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. The United States
remains focused on gender issues, particularly
discrimination and violence against women, and we
greatly appreciate the OSCE’s support, through its
Forum
for
Security
Cooperation,
for
the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security.
The OSCE is also an important forum for helping
States adapt to the changes of the twenty-first century,
including expanding our support for and protection of
fundamental freedoms in this digital age. We look
forward to the results of the June Dublin conference for
OSCE States on this important issue.
Thirdly, the OSCE has demonstrated capacity in
the fields of early warning, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and response to atrocities. We encourage
progress in the Geneva Group process, co-chaired by
the United Nations, the OSCE and the European
Union, to resolve outstanding issues between Georgia
and Russia. In Moldova, we welcome the resumption
of the official 5+2 talks aimed at reaching a
comprehensive settlement with regard to the
Transdniestria issue. As a co-Chair of the Minsk
Group, the United States remains committed at the
highest levels to achieving a lasting and peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The United States applauds the work of the OSCE
field offices in the Balkans in monitoring local war
crimes trials and providing assistance to support legal
reform processes. We welcome OSCE collaboration

12-22841

S/PV.6715

with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia on the War Crimes Justice Project, which
transfers skills and knowledge to local courts. The
OSCE Community Security Initiative is also helping
rebuild trust between citizens and law enforcement
following the unrest in Kyrgyzstan in 2010, which
contributes to the United Nations work in post-conflict
situations.
Finally, the OSCE continues its strong advocacy
with participating States on combating national threats.
The United States consistently advocates for the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions, and
we have found the OSCE to be a useful partner in this
regard. To this end, we have provided extrabudgetary
resources to the OSCE in support of ongoing United
Nations non-proliferation efforts. We urge other
Security Council members to consider providing a
modest contribution, financial or in kind, to help
sustain this successful regional initiative, which is a
value-added contribution to the efforts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and to the efforts of the United Nations Office
of Disarmament Affairs.
The United States also supports the OSCE’s
ongoing projects with Central Asian States and
Afghanistan towards strengthening those countries’
capacities to combat cross-border security challenges,
including drug trafficking, cyberthreats, terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
further welcome the decision by OSCE ministers at the
December 2011 Vilnius Ministerial Council meeting to
broaden the organization’s support to Afghanistan
across all dimensions. We encourage as well the
OSCE’s efforts to promote cooperation between
Afghanistan and the Central Asian States, which will
facilitate those countries’ long-term security,
development and prosperity.
The United States is a proud member of the
OSCE. We value the fundamental commitments of the
organization, which have provided clarity, stability and
continuity to participating States for more than 35
years in our common effort to promote comprehensive
security throughout the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
regions. These commitments remain as relevant today
as they were in 1975.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank the Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in

12-22841

Europe (OSCE), the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland,
Mr. Eamon Gilmore, for his statement and for his
important briefing on OSCE cooperation with the
United Nations and the security challenges they face.
The briefing should lead us to consider in-depth
the functions of the Security Council itself. Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter provides for
regional organizations to play an integral role in
promoting collective security and attaches importance
to their vision, actions and initiatives in finding
solutions in their respective regions. To this end, we
have encouraged dialogue and cooperation with
organizations in all regions of the world, because we
believe that such engagement promotes better
understanding of specific situations and comprehensive
visions of security, encompassing the human, political,
economic, environmental and military aspects of the
regional dimension.
Colombia recognizes that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe plays a very
important role in conflict resolution and the promotion
of peace, security, respect for human rights, and the
rule of law. We note that the same principles guide both
organizations, with which we share the view of liberty,
democracy and respect for human rights as essential
prerequisites of peace and security.
The interaction between the Security Council and
the OSCE has allowed both bodies to exchange frank
opinions and establish support mechanisms in areas of
common interest. We value the OSCE’s support for the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and its plans to extend its
participation in Kosovo; its participation in
Afghanistan and its cooperation with other countries of
the region; and its regional initiatives to fight
terrorism, cybercrime and the illegal arms trade, among
other transnational challenges.
In Colombia’s view, it is critical that the United
Nations and the world’s regional organizations
complement each other’s efforts to strengthen their
institutional capacity in the framework of their
purviews to address international security challenges,
particularly conflict prevention, the establishment of
confidence-building measures, mediation, crisis
management and post-conflict stabilization. This will
allow regional organizations to complement the
Security Council’s exercise of its main responsibility to

7

S/PV.6715

uphold peace and to focus on the priorities of their
respective agendas.
In the negotiations for the Charter for the United
Nations, one of the central issues in the discussion was
how cooperation between regional organizations and
the Security Council was to work. Some delegations
viewed it as an obligatory first step before turning to
the Security Council; others believed that it was not
necessary in all cases. Our position favoured resort to
regional efforts in the first instance with a view to
preventing disputes, situations or events from evolving
into major confrontation or conflict. At the same time,
it remains true that the Security Council’s capacity to
act cannot be constrained in cases when the urgency or
severity of circumstances require.
Finally, Colombia wishes to highlight the role
that multilateralism plays in the resolution of the
complex conflicts of the world today, and the important
contribution of open communication and cooperation
between regional organizations and the United Nations
to join efforts in support of peace and prosperity. In
this regard, we welcome the detailed briefing of
Mr. Gilmore on the priorities identified by the Irish
chairmanship and the cooperation of the OSCE with
the United Nations and its contribution to international
peace and security.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
should like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Eamon
Gilmore, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Ireland
and Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and to
thank him for his statement.
Azerbaijan supports the OSCE concept of
comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible security,
and considers the organization to be the most
appropriate and unique framework for discussions on
European security under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We believe that, as a regional
arrangement, the OSCE has the potential to play a
more consistent role in encouraging participating
States to comply with their obligations under the
United Nations Charter and the OSCE Helsinki Final
Act of 1975, as well as to implement the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. As an OSCE participating State and elected
member of the Security Council, Azerbaijan stands
ready to contribute to these efforts.

8

The OSCE provides an ongoing forum for
discussion towards a settlement of the conflict between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, which sometimes is
mistakenly referred to as the dispute over Nagorno
Karabakh or even the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh.
The correct use of terminology is important to
addressing the root causes of the problem, especially in
situations involving flagrant violations of international
law. It is well known that the conflict is being dealt
with by the OSCE Minsk Group; as noted in
resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993), 884
(1993) adopted by the Security Council in 1993 in
response to the illegal use of force against Azerbaijan
and the occupation of its territories, as well as General
Assembly resolution 62/243 on the situation in the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan, adopted on
14 March 2008.
Although the mediation efforts conducted for
over 20 years have not always been consistent and
have yet to yield results, Azerbaijan continues to be
committed to the negotiated settlement of the conflict.
We proceed from the understanding that at the core of
the ongoing political process is the settlement formula
based on putting an end to the illegal occupation of our
territories, the restoration of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the return of forcibly
displaced persons to their homes, and ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of Azerbaijanis and Armenians in
the Nagorno Karabakh region within Azerbaijan.
At the same time, the lack of agreement on
political issues cannot be used as a pretext for
contempt and disregard for international law, in
particular international humanitarian and human rights
law. Thus, continued illegal activities in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, in particular those aimed at
changing their demographic, social and cultural
character, definitely serve to further consolidation of
the status quo of the occupation.
In 2005 and 2010, at our initiative in the United
Nations, OSCE-led fact-finding missions visited the
occupied territories of Azerbaijan. Both missions
documented the facts of illegal activities in those
territories involving, inter alia, the implantation of
settlers, the extensive redrawing of boundaries, the
changing of place names and the discriminatory
treatment with respect to cultural property and sacred
sites. However, we are seriously concerned that the
recommendations of those missions remained on paper
and that nothing is being done to translate them into

12-22841

S/PV.6715

deeds. Azerbaijan hopes that the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice will insist on the need to immediately and
unconditionally cease all actions that cause serious
obstruction to the perspectives of a negotiated and
international-law-based settlement of the conflict.
It is essential to strengthen OSCE capabilities in
all areas of conflict prevention, crisis management and
peacekeeping. We expect that the OSCE chairmanship
will continue working on all elements of the conflict
cycle, keeping in mind the OSCE documents
incorporating and reaffirming the relevant approach in
this regard. We believe that increasing attention to
mediation-related topics within the United Nations,
including in particular the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 65/283 on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as the development of guidance for
more effective mediation, may serve as a useful basis
for deliberations in the OSCE in the coming months.
We expect that the OSCE will vigorously develop
peacekeeping capacities in order to be adequately
prepared to implement its role as a regional
arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and in accordance with chapter III of
the OSCE Helsinki Document of 1992.
Azerbaijan also believes that the development of
the police component of OSCE peacekeeping
operations will contribute to efforts in maintaining
regional peace and security. We consider it vital to
further strengthen the cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and the OSCE in these
areas.
One of the OSCE's major contributions to peace
and security under the politico-military dimension is
mainly delivered through arms control and confidenceand security-building regimes. The work on updating
and tailoring these regimes to the current security
environment should take into account the legitimate
security needs of participating States, especially those
non-members of military alliances with conflictaffected territories, and the consequences of conflict,
including military intervention and illegal deployment.
The OSCE acknowledges the leading role of the
United Nations in combating international terrorism
and organized crime. In this context, better interaction
between the two organizations — including, inter alia,
by equipping the OSCE with the principles of

12-22841

cooperation and approaches elaborated within the
United Nations in that area — would undoubtedly
serve the greater unity of purpose and action in
addressing transnational threats.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Promoting
tolerance
and
non-discrimination,
countering racism, encouraging dialogue among
cultures and civilizations, and addressing the
fundamental rights of displaced persons, including
their right to return, represent examples of areas in
which the international community can benefit from
close relations between the two organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to touch upon a
particular aspect of environmental security that gives
rise to the need for more coordinated efforts between
the United Nations and the OSCE. Ageing nuclear
power plants located in the OSCE area may pose
serious risks to the security of States and their
population. Therefore, the ongoing policy debate on
stricter nuclear safety standards and the timely
decommissioning of old-generation reactors represent
an essential component of the targeted agenda on good
governance and transparency in the field of security.
We believe that the OSCE, along with other specialized
institutions, including those within the United Nations
system, based on its comprehensive and cooperative
approach to security, might provide a complementary
forum to explore ways to address this challenge.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to join my colleagues in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
Ireland, to the Security Council this afternoon. I thank
him for his comprehensive briefing on the activities of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and his priorities in the months to
come.
India supports the role of regional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and their cooperation with the United Nations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Article 54 of the Charter
enjoins those organizations to keep the Security
Council fully informed of their activities for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore warmly welcome the briefing by the OSCE’s
Chairperson-in-Office.

9

S/PV.6715

Mr. Gilmore covered a wide canvas of issues,
several of them concerning our immediate and
extended neighbourhood. Naturally, those are of great
interest to my delegation. We appreciate the work that
the OSCE has been doing to promote security in its
political, military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions. It has addressed a wide range of securityrelated concerns, including arms control, confidenceand security-building measures, human rights, national
minorities, democratization, policing strategies,
counter-terrorism and economic and environmental
issues. The OSCE has contributed to managing some of
the most important problems in the post-cold war
period and world.
In the past decade or so, the OSCE has expanded
its activities significantly in our neighbourhood, under
the Asian Partners for Cooperation and the Asian
Contact Group. We have noted the OSCE’s cooperation
with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum, of which India is a member, on
matters related to confidence-building measures and
preventive diplomacy. We also welcome the OSCE’s
partnership with Afghanistan in border security
management and electoral assistance.
We wish the OSCE great success in its efforts and
activities towards the promotion of understanding,
peace and security among member and partner
countries. We also extend our good wishes to the Irish
chairmanship of the OSCE and to Mr. Gilmore
personally. We hope that, under his stewardship, the
OSCE will continue its important work.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me join others in welcoming Deputy Prime
Minister Eamon Gilmore, and in thanking him for his
presentation. I congratulate him on assuming the
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and wish him every
success in his mandate.
Guatemala is convinced that regional and
subregional organizations can make an important
contribution to further strengthening the multilateral
system, including in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I am sure that, under Ireland’s
chairmanship, the OSCE will promote dialogue and
cooperation with the United Nations. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE is a
concrete product of an alliance that has helped to
promote peace and security in Eastern Europe, the

10

Caucasus and Central Asia. We therefore call attention
to several timely initiatives on themes that are on the
agenda of the Security Council.
In Afghanistan, the OSCE has actively
participated in efforts to enhance political dialogue,
increase national capacities and support the democratic
process. In that regard, Guatemala notes with
satisfaction the close coordination between the OSCE
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We recognize the assistance offered by
the Government of Afghanistan in the areas of border
security, police training and the struggle against drug
trafficking.
With respect to the situation in Kosovo, the
OSCE also plays a constructive role, in close
coordination with the United Nations and the European
Union, in an environment of great challenges.
Guatemala recognizes the work that has been
accomplished, among other things, to strengthen the
rule of law.
We note the priorities outlined by Ireland for its
chairmanship in 2012, and we are pleased to learn that,
alongside the efforts to resolve long-lasting conflicts,
attention will also be paid to a renewed commitment to
democracy, the rule of law and human rights, as well as
to new avenues for promoting freedom of expression in
the digital era. We welcome its decision to hold a
meeting in Dublin in April to share its experience in
conflict resolution. We agree that every conflict
situation is different, but it is also true that there are
always lessons learned and experiences to share,
especially from a regional perspective.
Finally, Guatemala joins other countries in
expressing its support for the vision and priorities
Ireland has established for the OSCE’s work this year.
We look forward with interest to fruitful cooperation
between that organization and the United Nations.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I join my colleagues in
warmly welcoming Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
Ireland, to the Council today. I also thank him for his
comprehensive briefing setting out Ireland’s priorities
as it assumes the chairmanship-in-office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2012. Germany looks forward to working
with the Irish chairmanship on the key issues the
OSCE is facing, including the chairmanship’s
priorities.

12-22841

S/PV.6715

Let me briefly comment on four aspects.
First, we consider progress in the resolution of
the remaining protracted conflicts in the OSCE area to
be of particular relevance. We welcome the recent
decision of the Ministerial Council of the OSCE to
strengthen the OSCE’s capability in conflict
management. That area, together with its newly
strengthened capacities to deal with transnational
threats, will be one of the key parameters of the
OSCE’s work in the months to come.
Germany commends the OSCE’s active
participation in the political process aimed at settling
the Transdniestrian conflict. We welcome the
resumption of the formal 5+2 talks under last year’s
Lithuanian chairmanship of the OSCE. Germany fully
and actively supports the Irish chairmanship in its
efforts to encourage and facilitate steady progress on
that issue. We express our hope that the conflict parties
will extend their full cooperation with those efforts.
Germany also welcomes the role of the OSCE in
pursuing a settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict within the framework of the Minsk Group. We
commend the Russian, United States and French coChairs of the Minsk Group for their efforts, and would
welcome the continuation of the additional Russian
initiative of meetings with the conflict parties on the
highest political level. We believe that a strengthening
of OSCE monitoring activities and the inclusion of
humanitarian measures could prove beneficial.
On Georgia, we remain committed to the
principle of re-establishing an OSCE presence
throughout Georgia. It remains important that all
parties fully implement the 2008 ceasefire agreements.
We continue to support the active engagement of the
OSCE in the ongoing Geneva talks to reduce tensions
and build trust among affected communities. We also
stress the importance of the functioning of the two
incident prevention mechanisms, and welcome the
recent exchange of detainees as a result of the meetings
under that instrument.
Secondly, as regards the implementation of
commitments made with respect to the human rights
dimension in the OSCE area, Germany remains
particularly concerned about existing restrictions on
fundamental freedoms — in particular the freedom of
the media and the freedoms of expression and of
assembly — in many OSCE participating States. We

12-22841

welcome the Irish initiative to prioritize the issue of
Internet freedom.
In the context of the democratic process, we
consider OSCE election observation missions to be a
vital instrument. We commend the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights for
providing the relevant methodology, and we would like
to thank Minister Gilmore for his clear commitment to
the OSCE’s role in election observation activities.
Thirdly,
concerning
the
economic
and
environmental dimension, we welcome the Irish
chairmanship’s promotion of security and stability
through good governance. Good environmental
governance will be a key topic at the forthcoming
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development. In that context, the environment and
security initiative is an important example of interagency cooperation and partnership between the
OSCE, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and others. Germany will complement efforts in that
field by hosting a conference on water issues with
OSCE participating States from Central Asia on 7 and
8 March in Berlin.
Good governance also comprises the fight against
corruption, money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. In that field, we will support the Irish
chairmanship in view of pursuing the objectives of the
United Nations Conventions on Transnational
Organized Crime and against Corruption in the OSCE
area.
Fourthly, referring to the politico-military
dimension, let me underline that Germany attaches
great importance to further developing synergies
between the OSCE and the United Nations. In that
regard, we welcome the first ever memorandum of
understanding and annual plan of action agreed last
year between the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the OSCE secretariat, which provides an
excellent framework for intensifying programmatic
coordination, joint programming and even joint
fundraising. We look forward to similar initiatives —
for example, with UNDP — in the traditional area of
cooperation on small arms and light weapons and
ammunition stockpile projects in the OSCE region.
Let me also point to the exemplary cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in Kosovo,
where, as an integral pillar of the United Nations

11

S/PV.6715

Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the OSCE
contributes to the security and well-being of all
communities. Moreover, the OSCE continues to be an
attractive model for regional cooperation, in particular
for our neighbouring OSCE Partners for Cooperation in
the Mediterranean region and, as our Indian colleague
mentioned, in Asia. In that context, the application of
Mongolia to become a participating State of the OSCE
is noteworthy and deserves our support. Regarding the
OSCE partner Afghanistan, Germany welcomes the
Vilnius Council’s decision to further strengthen the
OSCE’s support of stabilizing that country.
As Foreign Minister Westerwelle pointed out at
the OSCE Ministerial Council in Vilnius last
December, the OSCE can and should pursue efforts
aimed at creating a Euro-Atlantic security community
reaching from Vancouver to Vladivostok. That is one
of the main tasks the OSCE assigned itself at the
Astana summit. As an important step in that direction,
Minister Westerwelle spoke of a “track two” initiative
being undertaken by German, French, Polish and
Russian think tanks to organize a series of joint
academic conferences on that subject in the course of
2012, starting on 20 March in Berlin.
Finally, let me thank the Chairperson-in-Office
once again for his briefing, and reiterate Germany’s
full support for the Irish OSCE chairmanship.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome to the Security Council today the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Eamon
Gilmore, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland. Like its European
partners, France shares his vision and will to
concentrate on a limited number of well-identified
priorities with a view to the ministerial conference in
Dublin in December.
The OSCE is a unique model for cooperation
based on the conviction that ensuring the security of
the European continent must go hand in hand with the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. At the Astana summit in 2010, the participating
States made important commitments and reaffirmed
their shared objectives for regional security, economic
and human development, and respect for human rights.
The threats to fundamental freedoms and human
rights are a reality that concerns and motivates us. In
that regard, the revolutions in the Arab countries have

12

reminded us of the universality of those principles. We
must see to it that these values are not thrown into
doubt in Europe as well.
From that point of view, we support the choice of
the Irish chairmanship to stress the human dimension
and its will to prioritize respect for commitments made
in the area of human rights, especially respect for
fundamental freedoms over the Internet. The freedoms
of expression and of the media are challenges that
mobilize the United Nations as well. In that regard,
fruitful synergies can certainly be found between the
two organizations.
We trust that the chairmanship will not neglect
other dimensions covered by the OSCE. Indeed, from
Central Asia to Afghanistan, as well as the Balkans, the
OSCE has demonstrated its essential role in conflict
resolution and the promotion of peace in the region,
and hence its ability to act in concert with other
regional organizations, for example in Kyrgyzstan
alongside the United Nations and the European Union.
Accordingly, the decision taken in Vilnius to
strengthen OSCE capacity in the area of conflict
prevention is a step forward that we believe should be
strengthened. Encouraged by the resumed 5+2 talks on
Transdniestria, we remain engaged in the collective
effort to resolve the Nagorno Karabakh conflict as coChair of the Minsk Group. In 2008, the Georgian crisis
also proved that war between two participating States
of the OSCE was possible. France therefore supports
the Geneva talks, which is another good example of
cooperation between international organizations in the
service of peace.
With respect to the politico-military dimension,
significant progress is expected in the implementation
of a security community, as expressed at the Astana
summit. From that point of view, it is important to
continue updating the Vienna Document. As a
participating State of the OSCE, France is prepared to
consider those issues and to discuss them with other
States at the annual meeting on security questions in
June. We also expect the OSCE to remain committed to
the struggle against transnational threats, especially
human trafficking, the fight against organized crime,
money-laundering and corruption.
Finally, from a longer-term perspective, I recall
that, at the Ministerial Council of the OSCE in Vilnius
on 7 December 2011, to which my German colleague
referred, France announced the launch of an initiative

12-22841

S/PV.6715

to create a network of French, German, Polish and
Russian think tanks with a view to organizing, during
the first half of 2012, four seminars on the
implementation of a Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
security community. The second of these seminars will
be held in Paris in April.
I again thank the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland for
participating in this meeting, and again assure him of
our full support throughout his chairmanship. We count
on him to strengthen the links between the OSCE and
the United Nations in line with our shared objectives of
peace, stability, security and respect for human rights.
Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Mr. Gilmore, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland, for
his briefing on behalf of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The OSCE is an important organization for the
maintenance of international peace and security in
Europe. It is also a major partner of the United
Nations. We value the contributions of the OSCE to
preventive diplomacy, dispute settlement, post-conflict
peacebuilding and counter-terrorism in the Caucasus,
the Balkans and Central Asia. China has always
maintained that dialogue and consultations are the best
approach to resolving differences and to preventing
and settling conflicts. We encourage the OSCE to
continue its efforts in that regard.
China attaches great importance to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security lies with the Security Council, but the
vigorous support of regional and subregional
organizations is indispensable. Both sides should make
full use of their comparative advantages and
complement each other in a common effort to promote
international peace and security.
Deputy Prime Minister Gilmore’s briefing to the
Council today will help the Security Council and the
OSCE to enhance their communication and
coordination and to take their pragmatic and effective
cooperation in maintaining international peace and
security to a higher level. We encourage the OSCE to
continue to make full use of its comparative

12-22841

advantages and to play a positive role in maintaining
regional peace, security and stability.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to welcome
Minister Eamon Gilmore of Ireland to the Security
Council. I congratulate him on his assumption of the
functions of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
thank him for the very informative briefing outlining
the Irish priorities for the OSCE in 2012.
At the outset, let me assure the Minister that
Portugal fully supports his efforts to promote the
OSCE agenda and acquis in order to achieve the
further strengthening of its legacy of a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible concept of
security. In fact, the outcome of the Vilnius Ministerial
Council showed us that the OSCE’s greatest strength
and achievement — its comprehensive concept of
security — cannot be taken for granted. It has to be
defended and further developed.
That legacy is based on the understanding that
global and regional security encompasses a large range
of issues, which the OSCE has traditionally grouped
into three dimensions, namely, the political-military,
economic-environmental and human dimensions. We
therefore
welcome
the
Chairperson-in-Office’s
intention to promote progress across all areas of OSCE
activities in a balanced manner, thus further expanding
the excellent work done by his predecessor, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
As an OSCE participant, Portugal attaches special
importance to the advancement of close cooperation
between the OSCE and other international
organizations, in particular the valuable partnership
being developed with the United Nations in addressing
security challenges. In that context, I will refer briefly
to the Irish programme of work for the OSCE, which is
also relevant to further cooperation between our two
organizations.
First, concerning the human dimension — a
crucial component of the OSCE’s comprehensive
concept of security — we welcome the Chairperson-inOffice’s aim to prioritize such issues, in particular
when international commitments are not being met,
working to achieve full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democratic institutions and the
rule of law.

13

S/PV.6715

The Council has recently been confronted with
situations where human rights and fundamental
freedoms were systematically being violated, be it in
Libya or, more recently, Syria, where the regime in
Damascus is pursuing, unabated, the violent repression
of its own people.
We also agree that freedom of expression and
freedom of the media apply to all forms and means
through which those rights are exercised, specifically
where the Internet or other digital vehicles are
concerned. We support the proposal of the
Chairperson-in-Office
to
focus
on
racism,
discrimination and intolerance, in particular in the
context of sports events, bearing in mind this year’s
European championships in Poland and Ukraine and
Olympic Games in the United Kingdom.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to join the
other speakers in thanking Mr. Eamon Gilmore, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of Ireland and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for his comprehensive briefing on the
programme of work of the OSCE during the Irish
chairmanship.
Pakistan supports the role of regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security and their cooperation with the United
Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. In view of their unique understanding
of local issues, regional organizations can effectively
contribute to addressing regional challenges and to
strengthening the multilateral system.

Secondly, Portugal believes that it is of particular
importance to take stock of where we stand in terms of
collective efforts to enhance arms control, prevent and
resolve conflicts, and ensure stability and security at
the regional and global levels. We commend the OSCE
on updating the Vienna Document last year, and
sincerely hope that the impasse in the field of
conventional forces in Europe will be solved in the
near future.

The Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe ─ the predecessor organization to the OSCE ─
played an important role by providing a forum for
dialogue and negotiation between the East and the West
during the cold war and in dealing with the post-cold
war transition in Europe. The OSCE continues to be
relevant to its member States on matters of security,
conflict resolution, addressing transnational tracks and
the promotion of and respect for human rights.

Under that political-military dimension, we
consider it crucial to also address transnational threats,
such as terrorism, the trafficking in persons, drugs,
organized crime and cyber threats, including
cybercrime, as outlined in the Chairperson-in-Office’s
programme.

Lately, it has also undertaken initiatives for
dealing with post-conflict peacebuilding and economic
and environmental issues as well. The OSCE’s role in
advancing the goals of peace and stability in and
around Europe, including through conventional arms
control among its members, is one of its most
acknowledged activities. Pakistan itself has been
advocating the cause of stability and peace in South
Asia through a conventional arms control approach.
Such approaches and best practices can be replicated in
other regions.

Thirdly, Portugal is very concerned about the
threat to security that protracted and unresolved
conflicts in the OSCE area continue to present. That is
an area with great potential for further cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. We
welcome the substantial decision taken in Vilnius last
December on the conflict cycle, aimed at enhancing the
OSCE capacity to prevent and to respond to conflicts.
We are encouraged by the nomination of two Special
Representatives of the Chairperson-in-Office to
Transdniestria and the South Caucasus.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm Portugal’s
confidence in the Irish leadership and reiterate our full
support to the OSCE’s Chairperson-in-Office in its
efforts to fulfil the extremely demanding tasks that lay
ahead, namely, in upholding and promoting the
OSCE’s wide acquis.

14

We particularly value the work of the OSCE in
the capacity-building of States. In that regard, we
appreciate the activities of the Organization in
Afghanistan in the capacity-building of the Afghan
National Police, the combating of drug trafficking and
customs and border management. Such initiatives will
help overcome the significant challenges faced by that
country.
In conclusion, we wish Ireland a very successful
chairpersonship of the OSCE. We take note of its
priorities and hope that under its stewardship the
organization will continue with its important work.

12-22841

S/PV.6715

Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like to join my colleagues in welcoming to the
Security Council the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland,
Mr. Gilmore, the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I should like to thank him for his extensive
briefing and to congratulate him on his assumption of
the chairmanship of the OSCE for 2012.
Morocco accords particular importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and to their
cooperation with the United Nations, pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The OSCE makes a significant contribution in
that respect through its efforts in the area of conflict
resolution and conflict-prevention mechanisms,
through the Conflict Prevention Centre. We welcome
the experience and expertise that the OSCE has gained.
The Security Council was informed in February
2011 about the priorities of the Lithuanian
chairmanship of the organization. We are very pleased
to note the progress that has been made in achieving
the objectives set out at that time. We believe that the
priorities set out by the Irish chairmanship are in line
with those objectives and build upon the achievements
made. In that respect, we welcome the identification of
priority areas such as the human dimension, arms
control, transnational threats and the promotion of
peace and security through good governance — areas
to which Morocco attaches particular importance.
In March 2011, the representative of Morocco
highlighted before the OSCE Mediterranean Contact
Group the efforts Morocco was undertaking and the
reforms it was carrying out at the political, socioeconomic and human rights levels.
Morocco
is
following closely the efforts of the Irish chairmanship
and stands ready to enhance cooperation with the
OSCE.
Morocco is one of the OSCE’s Mediterranean
partners and takes an active part in the Mediterranean
Contact
Group.
Morocco’s
interest
in
the
Mediterranean partnership of the OSCE derives from
the great importance it accords to the priority areas of
that partnership: migration and development; security
issues, including the combat against terrorism; the

12-22841

combat against other forms of crime and
discrimination; trafficking in persons; the promotion of
tolerance; and the economic and environmental
dimensions.
I should like to reiterate in that regard my
country’s call for a review of the status of the
Mediterranean partners for cooperation in terms of
ensuring them a more participative role. In that regard,
Morocco had submitted a document reflecting the
Moroccan vision of the format and content of that
partnership, which includes a number of proposals
aimed at enhancing the partnership and making it more
substantive on the basis of a renewed agenda.
Morocco, which supports all initiatives aimed at
promoting tolerance and interreligious dialogue and at
combating all forms of discrimination, reiterates its
appeal to enhance cooperation between the OSCE and
the Alliance of Civilizations. We believe that that
appeal is in line with the priorities set out by Ireland
for its chairmanship and enhances the objectives of the
OSCE in terms of peace, security and cooperation.
Morocco remains convinced that the United
Nations could benefit from the experience and
capacities of the OSCE in a number of areas, including
arms control, non-proliferation and the combat against
transnational threats. To that end, we are encouraged
by Ireland’s readiness to enhance cooperation with the
United Nations, particularly in the area of combating
transnational threats, including organized crime and
terrorism.
Along those same lines, we welcome the entry
into force of the memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the OSCE on
cooperation in the area of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, particularly the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We wish every success to the Irish chairmanship
of the OSCE.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in welcoming the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Minister Eamon Gilmore, to the Security
Council. We wish to thank him for his briefing on the
work of the OSCE. As Minister Gilmore stated,
Ireland’s own experience in conflict resolution can be a
positive influence on its work as Chair of the OSCE.

15

S/PV.6715

We have taken note of the challenges that the
OSCE helps to address, from Kosovo to Moldova, to
Nagorno Karabakh and to Georgia. The decision taken
by the OSCE in Vilnius in December last year to
increase its engagement in Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the United Nations and other
international actors in the region, is also noted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peace and security is a priority for my delegation, and
we welcome all efforts to strengthen the relationship
between the OSCE and the United Nations.
South Africa’s support for that relationship stems
from our belief that multilateralism is strengthened
through enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Article 54 of Chapter VIII of the Charter, under which
the OSCE is briefing the Council today, envisaged
strong cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We reiterate, however, that each regional
organization is unique in terms of the challenges it
faces in the maintenance of international peace and
security, as well as the manner in which it addresses
those threats. Moreover, my delegation does not
believe that the efforts of regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security absolve
the Council of its Charter-mandated responsibilities as
the guardian of international peace and security.
On 12 January, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2033 (2012), which focused attention on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including in the area of conflict
prevention, resolution and management. Speaking in
the debate preceding the adoption of the resolution,
President Jacob Zuma reaffirmed South Africa’s
support for the role of regional and subregional bodies
in peace and security (see S/PV.6702). President Zuma
stated that regional bodies are closer to the situation,
are familiar with the issues and often understand the
dynamics of the conflict. It is therefore our belief that
regional organizations such as the OSCE are in a good
position to advise accordingly on the situation on the
ground and to tackle some of the challenges faced.
In conclusion, we are of the view that the sharing
of experiences between the OSCE and other regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, is vital,
and we hope that such cooperation can be

16

strengthened. We would like to assure the OSCE of our
support for those efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Togo.
I should like at the outset to welcome to the
Security
Council
Minister
Eamon
Gilmore,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and to thank him
for his briefing on the mandate and the multifaceted
activities of his organization under his country’s
chairmanship. I commend the efforts that the OSCE is
making in many varied areas, including human rights,
democracy and good governance, the administration of
justice and the rule of law.
We note that the combat against organized crime;
peaceful coexistence between peoples, with an
emphasis on the protection of minorities; the
prevention of and the fight against terrorism; the
protection of the environment; and non-discrimination
are among the most important areas of activity of the
OSCE. We note with interest that those areas broadly
match the issues on the Security Council’s agenda for
February: transnational organized crime and violence
against women, including girls, before, during and
after armed conflicts.
Those issues are of great importance to my
country. I am pleased that the OSCE is taking
commendable action in those areas. We also
acknowledge with satisfaction that the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights has
considerable expertise in promoting democracy, the
rule of law, human rights, tolerance and
non-discrimination.
It is also encouraging to note that the OSCE
programme includes a human dimension component as
part of its response to the issues of freedom of
expression
and
religion,
intolerance
and
non-discrimination. We also welcome the OSCE’s
decision to address the difficult issue of racism and
intolerance in sport. Indeed, although current events
highlight the growing problem of racism in sport, there
is an unfortunate and appalling tendency to minimize
the issue.
We welcome the successful work of the OSCE in
assessing the situation of ethnic minorities and the
promotion of dialogue, as well as national legal
reforms to curb ethnic conflict, which can jeopardize

12-22841

S/PV.6715

peace, stability and relations within and among OSCE
member States.
The commitment of the OSCE to preventing
conflict using early warning mechanisms, conflict
management and post-conflict reconstruction is an
initiative that should also be encouraged. In that
regard, Togo supports the OSCE’s contributions to
bringing peoples closer together, in particular when an
upsurge in nationalism and identity politics carries the
occasional risk of social exclusion and threatens peace.
We also commend the OSCE for its contribution
to calming the situation in Georgia and resolving the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict, as well as for its ongoing
availability to work with the Minsk Group. Its
determination to continue contributing its expertise to
efforts aimed at resolving those various conflicts
should be encouraged. We hope that the OSCE can
make its expertise available to regional and subregional
organizations, in particular in Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Gilmore so that he may
respond to the comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Gilmore: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and all representatives for their words of support. Time
does not permit me to give a comprehensive reply to
all of the issues raised here today, but if the Council
will allow me to do so, I would like to briefly address a
number of those issues.
The philosophy of our chairmanship is one of
inclusion and involves a balanced approach across the
various dimensions. We intend to give concrete
expression to that philosophy in our actions throughout
the year. That applies equally to such issues as OSCE
reform, transnational threats, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), and respect for commitments
across the board.
The Ambassador of the United Kingdom
reminded us of the importance of the Council of
Europe. I look forward to cooperating closely with
Foreign Secretary Hague in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee of Ministers.
Picking up on the theme of United Nations-OSCE
cooperation, I am more convinced than ever of the
importance of strong links between the two
organizations. I will work closely with Secretary
General Zannier to ensure that our practical
cooperation is enhanced.

12-22841

Looking ahead, I hope that we will soon be able
to confirm the sequence of chairmanships of the OSCE
up to and including 2015, which marks the fortieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act. I look forward to
early engagement with the future chairs to chart out our
common vision for the OSCE region.
As I outlined in my briefing, Ireland’s approach
to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE region is
influenced by its own experience of successful conflict
resolution in Northern Ireland. We firmly believe that
even the most intractable conflicts can be settled with
the goodwill and meaningful engagement of all sides.
In that regard, I wish to re-emphasize my own
commitment as Chairperson-in-Office to work within
the existing structures and processes to contribute to
the resolution of those conflicts.
As I have made clear, during our chairmanship,
we will be giving prominence to the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in various
areas. In many parts of the world, threats to human
rights are multiplying. I note that Syria was mentioned
in our debate today. If I may speak for a moment as
Foreign Minister of Ireland, what we are currently
seeing in Syria is completely intolerable. My
Government condemns the appalling suffering of the
Syrian people at the hands of the Al-Assad regime.
Ireland is gravely concerned by that worsening crisis,
which threatens to affect the wider region, and by the
price that the people of Syria are being required to pay.
My Government strongly supports the plan of the
League of Arab States and all other efforts being made
to bring the violence to an end and begin the process of
political transition. While recognizing that, in recent
days, the Security Council has been unable to speak
with a single voice on Syria, Ireland fervently hopes
that it will soon be able to deliver a united response to
the challenge posed by that crisis.
Turning back to my role as OSCE Chairpersonin-Office, I look forward to cooperating closely with
the United Nations on the programme of work on
which we are embarking. I look forward to working
closely with all other OSCE participating States during
our chairmanship.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

17
