A /74/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

39th plenary meeting

Thursday, 5 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
High-level plenary meeting devoted to the midterm
review on the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024
Agenda item 21
Groups of countries in special situations
(b) Follow-up to the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
Draft resolution (A/74/L.7)
The President: This meeting is held in accordance
with resolutions 72/232, of 20 December 2017, and
73/243, of 20 December 2018.
Before proceeding, I would like to inform members
that action on the draft political declaration, contained
in document A/74/L.7, will be taken following the
statement by the Secretary-General.
Statement by the President
The President: I welcome all delegations to the
midterm review of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024. Adopted in 2014, the Programme is
aimed at contributing to the eradication of poverty in
landlocked developing countries. I recognize the efforts
of all Member States to come to an agreement on the
political declaration to be adopted shortly (A/74/L.7).
This political declaration is a testament to the strength

of multilateralism today, which is the only vehicle that
can effectively address cross-cutting and cross-border
issues. In this case, we have addressed issues related
to landlocked developing states, transit countries,
developing and developed States.
The political declaration provides us with a road
map to align the objectives of the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024 with the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). The emphasis placed on SDG 1 on
poverty eradication is a prerequisite for sustainable
development. Indeed, I have designated poverty
eradication as a key priority for the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly.
Landlocked developing countries are at risk of
being left behind. Their economic growth has declined
in the last five years, and one third of their population
lives in extreme poverty. Furthermore, many landlocked
developing countries are below the range of high human
development in the United Nations Development
Programme’s Human Development Index. The average
ranking of landlocked developing countries lags behind
the world average by 20 per cent, and of the 10 lowestranked countries, seven are landlocked. Many of these
nations continue to struggle in the shadows of historical
injustices. This should not continue.
Landlocked developing countries are highly
vulnerable to the effects of the climate emergency and
are experiencing desertification, land degradation,
drought, loss of biodiversity and receding glaciers.
No Member State is free from the effects of climate

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-39433 (E)

*1939433*

A/74/PV.39

change, but for those that are the most vulnerable,
the effects are compounded. Just nine months ago,
the landlocked States of Malawi and Zimbabwe were
hit by Cyclone Idai, despite being many miles from
the sea. Undernourishment in landlocked developing
countries reached an alarming rate of 23.2 per cent in
2016, and food insecurity affects 51.6 per cent of their
population — a problem that is compounded by the
effects of climate change. Furthermore, communities in
landlocked developing countries are being left behind
in a rapidly developing world. Forty per cent of their
population does not have access to electricity. We need
to invest in infrastructure to ensure that everyone,
everywhere has the opportunity to fulfil their potential
in a digital world. We cannot allow the digital divide
to deepen.
We must change this grim picture. We must work
to make landlocked developing countries land-linked
developing countries. Today’s process is important for
the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
The ranking of landlocked developing countries in the
Human Development Index improved by 1.5 per cent
between 2014 and 2018. Health, education and gender
equality indicators show progress, for example in the
rise of the enrolment of girls in primary school, from
34.2 per cent in 2010 to 43.4 per cent in 2016. We have
also seen progress in areas such as infrastructure and
connectivity. Air-carrier departures in landlocked
developing countries have increased by 8.4 per cent
since the adoption of the Programme of Action, some
trade corridors have achieved the Programme targets,
and participation in regional trade agreements has
increased in all regions since 2014.
Effective implementation of the Political
Declaration will require partnerships with all States,
as well as with the private sector, civil society, youth
and academia. The Political Declaration includes
commitments to targets and to taking accelerated action
to remove all legal, social, economic and other barriers
to achieving gender equality. Indeed, the declaration
aims at the full enjoyment of human rights by every
human being, as called for in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
I am greatly encouraged by the commitments
undertaken by Member States, including the agreements
reached at the Financing for Development Forum,
the second High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation, held in Buenos Aires, and
the Political Declaration adopted at the SDG Summit.
2/30

05/12/2019

Moreover, regional dialogues greatly contributed to
this midterm review.
As we move forward, we need to ensure that
all efforts are made to support the sustainable
development of landlocked developing countries,
including combating illicit financial flows, which
are detrimental to domestic mobilization and the
sustainability of public finances. Examples of this
include e-government programmes and grass-roots
anticorruption movements in many countries that have
been successful in employing digital technologies to
tackle illicit financial flows. We need to strengthen
trade financing for micro-, small- and medium-sized
enterprises and trade-facilitation programmes.
Landlocked developing States need to continue to
seek private-sector investment and work to improve
economic governance and business regulations. We must
also provide technical support to facilitate bankable
infrastructure and transport-development projects. The
work done by multiple United Nations agencies, other
international organizations, development partners
and civil society already shows the importance of
partnerships for achieving the Vienna Programme of
Action. We will only achieve a better world for all by
working together.
Our world today is marked by significant changes
as we approach the decade of action and delivery on the
SDGs starting in 2020. We must ensure that a substantial
foundation is laid so that all Member States can prosper.
To ensure sustainable development for generations to
come, we must work together now. Our actions must be
guided by the spirit of cooperation and solidarity. We
must implement the Vienna Programme of Action in a
full, effective and timely manner as an integral part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to ensure
that no one is left behind, which is our commitment. I
look forward to today’s discussions and to action by
Member States to implement the commitments set forth
in the Political Declaration.
I now give the floor to Secretary-General
António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank all present for
joining this important meeting.
We are all keenly aware of the geographical
disadvantages faced by the world’s 32 landlocked
developing countries. Many are in remote locations.
By definition, they do not have access to the sea,
19-39433

05/12/2019

and other forms of connectivity — roads, railways,
the information superhighway — are also lacking or
underdeveloped. All of this combines to increase costs,
decrease opportunities and impede the integration of
these countries into the global and regional economies,
which has a negative impact on poverty alleviation and
sustainable development.
However, with partnerships, these challenges can
be overcome. Cooperation among transit countries
and development partners is crucial. We need the
right policy mix, increased investment, reliable
transit infrastructure, efficient customs operations
and improved access and use of technology. We need
cooperation from the international community to
stem the massive amounts of resources that continue
to flow out of landlocked developing countries in the
form of illicit financial flows, and we need to assist
the landlocked developing countries that are in debt
distress or at high risk of it.
We have the tools to eliminate distance and
inefficiencies. We also have the framework. Five years
ago, we adopted the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 20142024, a comprehensive and ambitious plan to achieve
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, reduce
poverty and ensure the integration of landlocked
developing countries into the global economy. Our
shared hope is for a win-win solution for landlocked
developing countries, transit countries and development
partners. They all — and indeed we all — stand to
benefit from ensuring a sustainable development path.
We have made headway in some key areas. Real
gross domestic product per capita has increased in
many landlocked developing countries. Encouraging
progress has been recorded on some indicators related
to health, education, energy, gender equality and
information and communication technology. The
Vienna Programme of Action is now better integrated
into national development strategies and into the work
of the United Nations development system itself. Work
is under way on transport connectivity to develop transit
and economic corridors. The African Continental Free
Trade Agreement and the Trade Facilitation Agreement
of the World Trade Organization provide opportunities
for landlocked countries to link up to external markets
and global value chains. Landlocked developing
countries have also benefited from modest increases
in official development assistance to them since 2014,
and from increased aid for trade and South-South

A/74/PV.39

cooperation. This is progress to build on at a time when
landlocked developing countries continue to face major
challenges, and there is much more work to be done.
Trade integration remains low. It accounts for less
than 1 per cent of global exports. More than 80 per cent
of their exports are primary commodities and natural
resources. Infrastructure remains inadequate. Foreign
direct investment, which is often a critical driver for
building competitiveness, has continued to decline.
And like all countries, landlocked developing countries
face the increasingly severe impacts of the global
climate crisis.
Such challenges are even more severe and growth is
even more constrained for the 17 landlocked countries
that are also the least developed countries. They are
heavily dependent on official development assistance,
making it crucial for such aid to be increased and
predictable and for Governments to be more effective
in steering such aid to national priorities.
The midterm review is our chance to assess and
renew our work and forge greater coherence and
synergy among the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 20142024, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and other relevant
international frameworks. Development partners
need to work together to mobilize both domestic and
external resources and direct them to growth-inducing,
high priority areas.
Innovative financing for infrastructure has to be
scaled up. We should also support landlocked developing
countries in building up these countries’ private sectors
and enhancing the business environment. Enhancing
technical assistance and support for capacity-building
are crucial. And since any policy and decision must rely
on data, the strengthening of national statistics systems
is also a must.
The declaration the General Assembly will adopt
today (A/74/L.7) calls on us to help turn landlocked
developing countries into land-linked places of
prosperity and opportunity. Let us join forces to help
the world’s 32 landlocked developing countries achieve
sustainable transformations and a better standard of
living for the more than 500 million people who call
these countries home. The United Nations system,
reformed and repositioned, remains strongly committed
to supporting the Assembly’s efforts.

19-394333/30

A/74/PV.39

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/74/L.7, entitled “Political
Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the
Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024”. In order to ensure the smooth conduct
of proceedings, any delegation wishing to make
explanations of position is kindly encouraged to do so
in their statements to be delivered in the debate.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.7?
Draft resolution A/74/L.7 was adopted (resolution
74/15).
The President: I would like to extend my sincere
thanks to Mr. Jan Kickert, Permanent Representative
of Austria, and Ms. Doma Tshering, Permanent
Representative of Bhutan, who, as facilitators of the
informal consultations, demonstrated great ability
and patience in their conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on the draft resolution. I also
thank Member States on their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement thereon.
Before we begin with the list of speakers, I would
like to address important organizational matters
pertaining to the conduct of the plenary meetings.
As announced in The Journal, I would like to remind
all distinguished speakers that statements should be
limited to three minutes when speaking in their national
capacity and five minutes when speaking on behalf of
a group. As delegations will recall in resolution 72/313
of 17 September 2018, the General Assembly called for
strict adherence by each speaker to time limits in the
Assembly, in particular during high-level meetings.
Participants with longer statements are encouraged to
read a shorter version of their text and to submit their
full-length statements to the Secretariat for posting on
the PaperSmart portal.
Also, in accordance with resolution 72/313, the “all
protocols observed” principle is recommended, whereby
participants are encouraged to refrain from listing
standard protocol expressions during their statements.
Bearing in mind the time limit, I would like to appeal to
speakers to deliver their statement at a reasonable pace
so that interpretation into the official United Nations
languages may be provided properly. I appeal for the
cooperation of all speakers in observing the time limits
for statements so that all those inscribed on the list of
speakers could be heard in a timely manner.
4/30

05/12/2019

I now give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
At the outset, the Group would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening this
important midterm review. This is a crucial time for
landlocked developing countries, as they undertake
a comprehensive look at the progress achieved so far
towards attaining the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and the objectives of the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024, and, most importantly, mapping the
way forward towards accelerating implementation.
During the last five years, since the adoption of the
Vienna Programme of Action in 2014, it has become clear
that efforts have been made towards the Programme of
Action’s implementation. While these efforts are being
made, progress has fallen short of achieving the desired
objectives and targets. The 32 landlocked developing
countries continue to face special challenges due to
geographical remoteness, lack of direct access to the sea,
and isolation from world markets. These challenges are
exacerbated by inadequate infrastructure, cumbersome
border-crossing procedures, structural deficiencies and
limited capacities to deal with external shocks.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/74/383),
which reviewed the progress achieved on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action over
the last five years, indicates that a great deal remains
to be done for the landlocked developing countries
to achieve the objectives of the Vienna Programme
of Action and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Currently, one third of the population of the landlocked
developing countries is still living in poverty.
The Group underlines that infrastructure
development plays a key role in reducing the cost of
development for landlocked developing countries. It
also emphasizes that the development and maintenance
of transit-transport infrastructure, information and
communications technology and energy infrastructure
are crucial for landlocked developing countries to reduce
high trading costs, improve their competitiveness and
become fully integrated into the global market.
Despite the importance of trade for achieving
sustainable development, the participation of the
landlocked developing countries in global trade remains
19-39433

05/12/2019

quite marginal. The Group remains concerned with the
fact that landlocked developing countries account for
less than 1 per cent of global exports. Their share has
decreased from 1.19 per cent in 2014 to 0.98 per cent
in 2018. Many landlocked developing countries are
experiencing persistent trade deficits.
In addition to these challenges, the impact of
climate change and variability continue to undermine
the efforts of landlocked developing countries to
achieve sustainable development. Many of these
countries are in dry land regions, where the impacts
of climate change, desertification and land degradation
are more evident.
We all agree that these challenges are not
insurmountable. It is clear that we need to redouble our
efforts if the fundamental principle of leaving no one
behind, so central to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, is to be fulfilled. The Vienna Programme
of Action is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, and
its full implementation is fundamental for landlocked
developing countries to attain the SDGs.
It is encouraging that we have made a commitment
in the Political Declaration adopted minutes ago
(resolution 74/15) to coming together in durable and
effective partnerships between landlocked developing
countries and transit countries and development
partners, as well as with a range of stakeholders,
including civil society, the private sector, academia
and youth. We should live up to this commitment.
The Group of 77 and China would like to express its
deep appreciation to the Permanent Representatives of
Austria and Bhutan and their teams for their successful
roles as facilitators of the Political Declaration.
We reaffirm our commitment to the effective
implementation of the Vienna Declaration and
the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 and
encourage landlocked developing countries, transit
countries, their development partners, the United
Nations system and all other actors to implement the
actions that have been agreed upon in the Programme
in its six priority areas, namely, fundamental transitpolicy issues, infrastructure development and
maintenance, international trade and trade facilitation,
regional integration and cooperation, structural
economic transformation, and means of implementation
in a coordinated, coherent and expeditious manner.
The Programme and the call for action to accelerate the

A/74/PV.39

implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
as contained in the Political Declaration, outlines the
actions to be undertaken by all stakeholders. Let us
work together and do what is needed to achieve the
desired socioeconomic transformation of landlocked
developing countries. These goals are achievable, and
strong partnerships remain fundamental.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister of
Commerce, Industry and Trade of Eswatini.
Mr. Khumalo (Eswatini): With a population of
about 1.2 million people, a geographical landmass of
over 17,000 square metres and surrounded by South
Africa and Mozambique, the Kingdom of Eswatini
has placed structural economic transformation at the
core of its national economic agenda. In this regard,
international trade and trade facilitation, infrastructure
development and maintenance, regional integration and
cooperation, transit issues and resource mobilization
have been prioritized by the Government for the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 20142024, paving the way for sustainable economic growth.
Over and above the inherent limitations associated with
being landlocked, the Kingdom of Eswatini’s strategic
road map 2019-2022 identifies challenges facing the
country, including a widening fiscal deficit, declining
growth rates and our low ranking in ease-of-doingbusiness. To address these challenges, five key growth
sectors are given special attention for reform, namely,
education and information and communications
technologies, mining and energy, agriculture,
manufacturing and agroprocessing, and tourism.
Eswatini is implementing the Trade Facilitation
Agreement of the World Trade Organization, and our
memberships in various regional economic communities
put us in an advantageous position to address transit
bottlenecks that impede the movement of our goods
and services across borders. The move towards the
liberalization of trade in services in Southern African
Development Community, Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa, the Tripartite Free Trade Area and
the African Continental Free Trade Area will therefore
be fundamental for enhancing interconnectivity, the
lack of which remains an obstacle to the meaningful
trade integration to which my country aspires.
The seven common priority sectors that will be
liberalized in these regional economic blocs, namely,
communications, finance, business, transport, tourism,

19-394335/30

A/74/PV.39

energy and construction, give us hope for a strengthened
and resilient emergent regional cooperation on the
African continent. Our industrial and trade policies are
aimed at promoting value addition and beneficiation
of local primary products into high-value processed
products, thereby developing complete value chains
in key sectors of the domestic economy. The main
objective is product diversification and to increase the
contribution of exports to gross domestic product by
5 per cent. A major milestone in that area is the current
development and designation of two special economic
zones around our fairly new airport and a science and
technology park.
We recall that Eswatini currently ranks first in
Africa for cross-border trade, which is the result of a
number of trade-facilitation reforms that the country
has undertaken, including the adoption of an Eswatini
national trade-facilitation road map, which serves as a
guide for implementing our international and regional
trade-facilitation commitments.
The ambition of this road map is to facilitate
a modern, safe and secure trade-supply chain so
as to reduce trade costs and time by 30 per cent
by 2022. To deliver on this ambition, the Kingdom
has identified a total of seven strategic initiatives,
namely, institutional trade-facilitation arrangements,
a
trade-information
portal,
trade-facilitation
performance-measurement systems, compliance and
risk management, customs-to-customs cooperation, a
national single window — including coordinated border
management and business-process analysis — and
regional integration.
In conclusion, the implementation of our
obligations under the Vienna Programme of Action is
critical for economic growth and improved standards
of living. Technical and financial assistance, including
capacity-building support and the capitalization
of our financial-development institutions remain
necessary and key for the effective implementation of
these programmes.
Mr. Jooma (Malawi): Five years ago, the United
Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries met and adopted the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries
for the Decade 2014-2024, whose objective was
that of addressing challenges faced by landlocked
developing countries. We are meeting again today — at
the midpoint of the decade intended to be the time frame
6/30

05/12/2019

for implementing this noble Programme of Action. We
have clearly shown progress, but we must also be quick
to admit that we have fallen short of expectations. In
some countries, economic growth has declined, foreign
direct investment flows have dwindled, and shares of
global exports have also fallen. We have overcome
obstacles and faced emerging challenges, but, without
doubt, we have also seized emerging opportunities.
As we share experiences at this review meeting,
we must spend considerable time identifying ways
of accelerating the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action in its remaining five years. To
this end, I wish to express my profound gratitude to
the United Nations Office of the High Representative
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
States for supporting the convening of this meeting.
Malawi highly values the Vienna Programme of
Action. Its sole access to the sea is through Tanzania,
Mozambique and South Africa, resulting in high
transportation costs, which, when coupled with low
energy production, the high cost of information and
communication technologies and the impact of climate
change, erode the competitive edge of our exports and
make our imports very expensive.
That is why the Government of Malawi quickly
mainstreamed both the Vienna Programme of Action
and the Sustainable Development Goals in its national
strategy, as well as sectoral strategies, such as the
national transport master plan, which falls under my
Ministry. However, I want to underline the point that the
challenge of implementing these strategies remains the
unavailability of adequate resources. We are currently
rolling out a number of infrastructure projects in
transport, energy and information and communication
technologies and creating an environment for
private-sector development.
Opportunities are also available at the regional
level to realize the ambitions espoused in the
Vienna Programme of Action. The Programme for
Infrastructure Development in Africa, championed
by the African Union, and the Tripartite Transport
and Transit Facilitation Programme, supported by the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the
East African Community and the Southern African
Development Community, are both continental
initiatives to improve transit corridors and harmonize,
streamline and standardize rules and regulations
with a view to promoting the seamless movement of
19-39433

05/12/2019

freight and people and ultimately reducing the cost of
transportation and transiting.
As I near the conclusion of my statement, I want
to recall the fact that challenges facing landlocked
countries have a direct bearing on the aspiration of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to leave no
one behind. That is why, as we remind ourselves of the
roles given to us in the Vienna Programme of Action,
we should use this review meeting to also reflect on
the gaps we face and zero in on how to fill them. If we
all agree that landlocked development countries have
special and unique development needs, it should also
be easy to agree that such countries require special
resources to address their challenges.
Mr. Holte (Norway): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden, and my
own country, Norway.
Landlocked developing countries are among the
most vulnerable countries in the world. One third of
their population still lives in extreme poverty. The
mortality rate of children under the age of 5 stands at
6 per cent. Landlocked developing countries are also
highly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate
change, which manifests as drought, desertification
and the loss of biodiversity.
Landlocked developing countries face a unique
combination of obstacles relating to geographical
location, transport, infrastructure, border crossings,
dependency on commodities and low productivity.
However, these obstacles are not insurmountable,
and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 is a
recipe for overcoming them. Indeed, good progress has
already been made. The export sector as a whole has
become more diversified. The average proportion of
the population in landlocked developing countries with
access to electricity has increased from 49 to 56 per
cent. Some trade corridors in Africa, including the
Trans-Kalahari Corridor, have achieved the objectives
set out in the Vienna Programme of Action in relation
to improving transit conditions.
The Nordic countries recognize the challenges
that come with being landlocked and are partners in
overcoming these obstacles. We have some of the
highest levels of official development assistance in the
world, reaching the United Nations target of 0.7 per
cent of gross nation income, in the case of Denmark,

A/74/PV.39

and 1 per cent of gross nation income for Norway
and Sweden. Our official development assistance is
directed to the most vulnerable States. For example, my
own country has, as a consistent policy, increased the
percentage of our aid to the least developed countries,
from 48 per cent in 2016 to 53 per cent in 2018, and is
set to continue to increase it. A significant proportion
of this aid goes to landlocked States.
We call on other countries to increase their
financing to landlocked developing States in such areas
as climate-risk mitigation and disaster-risk reduction
and response, where more financing is needed. On
both these issues, landlocked developing countries are
hit hard by the effects of crises they have little or no
role in creating. While we work together as a global
community to reduce the threats of climate change, we
must also show solidarity with those hit the hardest by
its impacts and support them in building resilience.
The Nordic countries welcome the progress made
in attracting private investments and developing publicprivate partnerships in many landlocked developing
States. Important steps have also been taken to generate
additional national funds for development efforts. But
we still have some way to go and need to further step up
efforts to combat illicit financial flows.
Trade facilitation programmes can play an
important role in assisting landlocked developing
States increase their level of trade and are of great
importance to the Nordic countries. My own country,
Norway, is the biggest single donor to the World
Bank’s Trade Facilitation Support Programme, and we
truly believe that, in the long term, trade will provide
significant economic opportunities for landlocked
developing countries.
In closing, landlocked developing States face
numerous challenges, but none that cannot be overcome
with the right policies and partnerships. We, the Nordic
countries, will remain consistent partners of the
landlocked developing countries.
Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): Allow me to
express our appreciation to Paraguay as Chair of the
Group of Landlocked Developing Countries and to
High Representative ‘Utoikamanu and her team for
their committed efforts aimed at preparing this review,
and to Austria and Bhutan for facilitating the Political
Declaration (resolution 74/15).

19-394337/30

A/74/PV.39

Kazakhstan has always been at the forefront of
helping landlocked developing countries transcend
their geographical disadvantages. We therefore
convened the first United Nations conference on
landlocked developing countries in Almaty, in 2003,
and subsequently hosted the landlocked developing
countries ministerial meeting on trade and transport in
Astana last year to launch the preparatory process for
this review.
Let me share our brief assessment of the
achievements and challenges in priority areas of
the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024. With
respect to fundamental transit-policy issues, there have
been a large number of new accessions and ratifications
of international agreements related to transit transport,
including the Trade Facilitation Agreement of the World
Trade Organization (WTO) and the Customs Convention
on the International Transport of Goods under Cover of
TIR (Transports Internationaux Routiers) Carnets of
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
Kazakhstan has become a full member of the WTO,
ratified the Intergovernmental Agreement on Dry Ports
and actively negotiated regional-transit and transportfacilitation arrangements under the auspices of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Eurasian
Economic Union.
We have also made progress on connectivity and
transport-infrastructure
development.
Enhancing
transport infrastructure has a multiplier effect for
our growing economies. Kazakhstan aims to further
improve our transit and transportation potential and
develop the Eurasian multimodal transport hub. To this
end, we are implementing a national programme, known
as Nurly Zhol, to strengthen Eurasian integration and
ensure our country’s key role in China’s One Belt, One
Road initiative. As part of this programme, we have built
more than 2,500 kilometres of railroad, reconstructed
12,000 kilometres of highways, opened the Western
Europe-Western China automobile transit corridor,
built the Khorgos Gateway dry port on the border with
China and modernized the Caspian Sea ports of Aktau
and Kuryk. Today Kazakhstan’s 11 international transit
corridors — five of which are railway and six of which
are automobile — enable the transportation of goods
from Europe to Asia much faster than by sea and much
cheaper than by air transportation. In addition, our
11 airports recently adopted an open-skies regime.
8/30

05/12/2019

Landlocked developing countries have achieved
significant progress in enhancing digital and energy
connectivity, which is another key priority. New
technologies and increased access to information
and communications technologies, including through
public-private partnerships, is also of strategic
importance to Kazakhstan. My country is implementing
a national programme, known as Digital Kazakhstan,
to improve our quality of life through the progressive
development of the digital ecosystem.
International trade and trade facilitation play a
crucial role in improving the global competitiveness of
landlocked developing countries. The introduction of
information and communications technologies solutions
for e-commerce has opened up new horizons for these
countries. Working together with United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, Kazakhstan has
been elaborating an automated customs-administration
programme, known as ASTANA-1, and a single-window
mechanism for foreign trade operations.
Kazakhstan’s efforts were praised by the World
Bank in its Doing Business 2020 study, in which our
country was ranked twenty-fifth globally. Structural
economic transformation, another one of our priority
areas, is crucial to reducing the vulnerabilities
facing the landlocked developing countries in terms
of job creation, building local productive capacity
and reducing poverty and inequality. Kazakhstan
promotes structural economic transformation through
sustainable industries, modernized business procedures
and increased support to small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs). In the recent period, more than
1,200 new industrial enterprises have been established,
and 24 new manufacturing sectors have emerged with
breakthrough technologies.
Despite all the efforts that have been made, our
countries still experience difficulties in diversifying
export structures and enhancing trade capacities. We
realize that, in order to succeed in the remaining years
of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action, the landlocked developing countries need to
concentrate on several issues, such as developing and
upgrading international transport and transit corridors,
fully and effectively implementing agreements that
have already been signed, improving and harmonizing
our customs regulations, streamlining border-crossing
procedures by introducing paperless trade and a
single-window environment, integrating our SMEs into
regional and global markets, reducing our dependence
19-39433

05/12/2019

on raw materials, increasing the efficiency of grid and
transmission systems and the level of renewable-energy
consumption, making information and communications
technologies more affordable and advancing such new
technological drivers as the 5G network, the Internet of
things, cloud computing, artificial intelligence and big
data, and learning from each other’s experiences and
collecting and analysing disaggregated data to monitor
the progress.
A number of those measures were endorsed at the
recent consultative meeting of the Heads of State of
Central Asia, held in Tashkent. At that meeting, the
leaders of five Central Asian States, all of which are
landlocked, advocated strengthening coordination and
deepening regional cooperation aimed at expanding
their transport and transit capabilities, ensuring stable
access to seaports and world markets, developing
infrastructure and forming modern international
logistics. The International Think Tank for Landlocked
Developing Countries will be instrumental in all
these efforts.
Indeed, to implement the foregoing priorities and
overcome capacity constraints, we need the mobilization
of reliable long-term funds through South-South,
North-South and triangular-cooperation mechanisms.
We need to take advantage of new infrastructure
development funds and initiatives, such as the new
Silk Road Fund and infrastructure initiatives led by the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.
In addition to official development assistance, aid
for trade, remittances and private-sector investments are
also important sources for the mobilization of funds. In
this regard, I would like to underline Kazakhstan’s pilot
proposal to establish a United Nations regional centre
for the Sustainable Development Goals with a mandate
to assist the landlocked developing countries of Central
Asia and Afghanistan in such areas as investment,
support to small and medium-sized enterprises and the
development of our transit and export potential.
As the global Chair of the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries for 2020-2021, Kazakhstan
envisages building close cooperation with the United
Nations system and other relevant organizations,
financial institutions, development partners, transit
countries and the private sector to forge coherence
in achieving the goals of the Vienna Programme of
Action. All of these actions are integral to the 2030

A/74/PV.39

Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda and other global processes.
As a firm supporter of the multilateral trading
system, Kazakhstan is privileged to host the twelfth
Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization
in our capital city, Nur-Sultan, in June 2020. In addition,
we are planning to host a special landlocked developing
countries ministerial meeting at the margins of the
Conference. We urge all States Members and other
stakeholders to use these meetings to deliberate on the
critical issues that landlocked developing countries
are facing.
We also intend to initiate preparations for the
Almaty+20 review, which will coincide with the
10-year review of the Vienna Programme of Action.
Kazakhstan will coordinate the collective action of
landlocked developing countries, in close cooperation
with the least developed countries and small island
developing States, to combine each of their unique
synergies to form a solid negotiating bloc in all relevant
forums, so that our voices will be heard loud and clear. A
determined drive and resolute efforts will see a greater
momentum towards our aspirations for the Vienna
Programme of Action and the decade of action on the
Sustainable Development Goals declared in September.
Only then will our peoples have the peace, security,
economic stability and prosperity that they deserve.
Mr. Siphandone (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the President for his leadership and
for convening this meeting on the follow-up to the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries.
The Government of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic attaches great importance to the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
We have incorporated and implemented measures
with regard to its priority areas through our national
development plan and strategy, especially in the
areas of infrastructure, trade-facilitation and transittransport systems. As reflected in our midterm report,
we have made considerable progress to date, which
has contributed to accelerating our socioeconomic
development, improving the well-being of our peoples
and enhancing the regional connectivity of the country
and the integration of its economy into the regional and
global systems.

19-394339/30

A/74/PV.39

In terms of infrastructure development, the Lao
Government has adopted and introduced a policy aimed
at transforming the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
from a landlocked to a land-linked country. This idea
rests on the belief that the country can become an
inland transit route for countries in the region to use as
a trade and communications hub. To this end, the Lao
Government has heavily invested in the improvement
and development of its transport infrastructure and
services, particularly in its efforts to build and efficient
and reliable transport system for transit routes and
cross-border transport. Examples of that are the
development of economic corridors, the construction
of bridges connecting Thailand and Myanmar and the
introduction of six main railway projects under our
railway strategy plan for the period from 2016 to 2030,
including Lao-China railway cooperation through the
Belt and Road Initiative.
In terms of international trade and trade facilitation,
our policy is largely shaped by bilateral, regional
and international trade agreements, including via the
framework of the free trade zone of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the World Trade
Organization. Domestically, in 2018 we established a
national committee on trade facilitation with a mandate
to monitor, supervise and facilitate trade and business
operations in the country. Most recently, the Lao
Government deposited its instrument of ratification
of the Intergovernmental Agreement on Dry Ports
last month.
Despite the progress we have made, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic continues to encounter
many challenges in its implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action in terms of financial constraints,
inadequate logistics and facilities such as dry ports and
distribution centres, cumbersome customs regulations,
low levels of production capacity and technology and
insufficient human resources, as well as limited export
diversification and related competitiveness.
In conclusion, I want to reaffirm our efforts to
accelerate our achievement of the overarching goals
of the Vienna Programme of Action by continuing to
invest in areas in need and enhancing partnerships
with countries of transit, development partners and the
private sector to effectively implement the Programme
of Action in the next five years.
Ms. Saidmurodzoda (Tajikistan) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to take this opportunity to
10/30

05/12/2019

commend the efforts of Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative Fekitamoeloa Katoa ’Utoikamanu
and the Chair and other members of the Bureau of the
Group of Landlocked Developing Countries for their
active leadership and involvement in the preparation
and excellent organization of the midterm review
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024.
It is important to point out that landlocked
developing countries face specific problems that
put them at a disadvantage in terms of the time and
financial costs of transporting goods, since shipping
them via land is far more expensive than by sea. Like
other countries in Central Asia, Tajikistan lacks access
to ports. In that regard, freedom of transit, together with
the infrastructure and logistical support for shipping,
is important to their prospects for development. In
order to access seaports, Tajikistan is obliged to use
the territories of other countries for shipping. In order
to standardize and harmonize its procedures and rules,
Tajikistan has ratified nine international conventions
and agreements. In 2014, Tajikistan also became a
full-fledged member of the World Trade Organization,
whose rules provide for freedom of transit. In order to
facilitate export, import and transit operations, this
year we launched a pilot project for a single-window
portal and a trade portal.
The concept of expanding our institutional capacity
to develop trade and transport linkages is also reflected
in our 2030 national development strategy. One of
our development goals is about breaking out of our
communications dead end to become a transit State,
and we should point out that we have made efforts to
develop transport infrastructure. The Government has
attracted investments of more than $2 billion, as a result
of which more than 2,200 kilometres of roads and 240
bridges have been built or rehabilitated, six of which
are of regional importance and share a border with
Afghanistan. Eleven other investment projects totalling
more than $670 million are also being implemented.
With regard to the future development of transport
infrastructure under State programmes, we are looking
to attract major foreign investment. The implementation
of State investment projects in the area of transportation
has helped to increase the volume of trade traffic and
reduce the travel time from one region to another from
10 hours to four or five. One of the main goals of the
Vienna Programme of Action is to help countries like
Tajikistan overcome the difficulties related to their
19-39433

05/12/2019

isolation and dependence on raw materials in order to
enhance their participation in global trade.
In the years since Tajikistan gained independence,
we have seen a number of significant achievements.
Our gross domestic product annual growth is more than
7 per cent. With the adoption of a State programme for
promoting exports over imports for the period from
2016 to 2020, the volume of our exports has increased,
and the implementation of the Central Asia South
Asia CASA-1000 electricity transmission and trade
project has also helped increase regional trade. For the
purposes of integration and cooperation, Tajikistan
has signed and become a full party to multilateral
framework agreements that include the agreement
under the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
the Export Control Organization and the Central Asia
Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, all of
which have simplified the procedures for our drivers
transporting international goods and passengers in
the region. Following the adoption of the Vienna
Programme of Action, Tajikistan has made the task
of economic transformation central to its national
development plans, which is reflected in our 2030
national development strategy, and this year we also
declared industrialization our fourth priority area for
economic development.
Much has already been done to implement the
Vienna Programme of Action, but there remain various
unresolved issues, which others in this Hall have
already discussed, and which also concern the Republic
of Tajikistan. We believe there should be a special focus
on the development and expansion of effective shipping
systems and the development of transport, including
logistics, strengthened competitiveness, expanded
trade, regional cooperation, and the encouragement
of economic growth and sustainable development. To
that end, it will be essential to develop and implement
regional projects with the help of donors that can help to
ensure free, effective and economical access to the sea,
reduce transport and trading operating costs, develop
transport and transit corridors linking landlocked
developing countries in order to reduce the time
spent in transit corridors and at borders, devise mixed
transportation that ensures effective transfers from one
type of transport to another, and improve logistics by
establishing regional transport and logistics hubs.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that
Tajikistan has an open-door policy and that we are
ready to cooperate.

A/74/PV.39

Mr. Sougoumi (Chad) (spoke in French): Today,
five years after the adoption of the Vienna Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024, we are meeting at United Nations
Headquarters to conduct its midterm review, draw
lessons from past experience and identify opportunities
to step up its implementation in the next few years.
The Vienna Programme of Action is an important
10-year framework for global development designed to
surmount the structural obstacles faced by landlocked
developing countries by implementing measures in six
priority areas. It duly addresses the conditions, needs
and priorities of our countries and is fully aligned with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union’s Agenda 2063.
There is no need to underscore the fact that the
lack of direct sea access causes landlocked developing
countries to bear exorbitant transport costs, which
adversely affect their trade activities and undermine
their competitivity and development efforts. As one of
the least developed landlocked countries, Chad suffers
greatly from the structural constraints of being an
enclave. This isolation from outside is compounded by
internal communication difficulties that make access
to certain regions unreliable. The Government of Chad
has undertaken considerable efforts, particular in the
area of internal infrastructure. Chad also participates
in various bilateral, subregional and regional initiatives
aimed at intensifying road and rail interconnectedness
in Africa. Examples include a project to extend the
Cameroonian and Sudanese rail networks to Chad,
various infrastructure projects led by the Group of Five
for the Sahel and the Trans-Sahara Route project.
In the area of trade facilitation, since 2014 we have
been involved in various measures aimed at modernizing
our fiscal and customs administration systems,
including the World Bank-financed project to migrate
the automated customs system from SYDONIA++ to
SYDONIA World and the investment policy review
undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at the Chadian Government’s request,
with a view to achieving Sustainable Development
Goals 1, 2, 10 and 17. Furthermore, with the technical
assistance of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa, Chad is in the process of finalizing its
industrialization and diversification master plan. The
objective of this master plan is to industrialize our
economy to enable us to free ourselves from dependence
on oil, on the one hand, and to diversify our production

19-3943311/30

A/74/PV.39

05/12/2019

structure in order to better tackle the vulnerabilities
endured by an economy dominated by monoproduction
and very weak product contribution, so as to transition
progressively and irreversibly towards a diversified
and manufactured product-driven economy, on the
other hand.

by a steady fall in oil prices since 2015, have had an
adverse impact on my country’s economic and financial
situation, significantly reducing the State’s ability to
fully implement development programmes, such as
the 2017-2021 national development programme, the
Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda.

Within the framework of the regional economic
programme of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC), during the
extraordinary summit held in Yaoundé on 22 November,
the Heads of State set out a number of joint priorities,
including the connectivity of Chadian border cities
to the Cameroonian electricity grid and a fibre-optic
project designed to reduce telecommunication and
internet costs. In the area of subregional and regional
cooperation, we have seen progress with the rendering
effective of the free movement of people in the CEMAC
zone and the entry into force of the African Continental
Free Trade Area — a source of great hope for Chad,
which was among the first countries to sign and ratify
the relevant treaty.

Notwithstanding all of the aforementioned
difficulties, the Government of Chad remains more
committed than ever to countering poverty and
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. To this
end, Chad counts on the support of all its bilateral and
multilateral, public and private partners to support it
in implementing its 2017-2021 national development
programme — a five-year plan entitled “Vision 2030:
the Chad we want” — which is aimed at consolidating
the foundations of good governance and the rule
of law and creating the conditions for sustainable
development by, inter alia, developing a diversified and
competitive economy.

However, despite these advances, there is still a
great deal to be done to address the multiple challenges.
Chad is still encountering significant difficulties in
implementing the Vienna Programme of Action. The
persistence of conflict in our immediate neighbourhood
and the insecurity spawned by the Boko Haram terrorist
attacks continue to have negative repercussions on the
Chadian economy as a whole. All of our imports and
exports to and from Nigeria — one of Chad’s primary
financial partners — Libya and the Central African
Republic have been suspended, causing a vast loss of
revenue. Moreover, the interruption of improvements to
transport infrastructure in recent years, the remoteness
of our primary markets, ineffective logistics systems,
together with the application of various customs and
duties on the principal transit corridor, are all persistent
obstacles that broadly hinder external trade flows and
development activities.
In view of the challenges I have just mentioned,
the international community’s sustained commitment
to landlocked developing countries — particularly
those which, like Chad, are encountering economic and
security challenges — is more vital than ever. Indeed,
my country, which is fully engaged in the fight against
terrorism that is ravaging the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin, dedicates almost 30 per cent of its budgetary
revenue to shouldering the costs of security efforts.
These costs, coupled with budgetary difficulties caused
12/30

I would like to conclude by making a call to all our
bilateral and multilateral, public and private partners,
to step up their support for landlocked developing
countries so as to ensure achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, of which the Vienna Programme
of Action is an integral part.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
It is an honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Group of Landlocked Developing Countries.
I would like to begin by thanking the President
of the General Assembly for convening this extensive
High-level Mid-term Review on the Implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
being with us today and for his commitment to the
agenda for the landlocked developing countries. I
also extend my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Fekitamoeloa Katoa ‘Utoikamanu, High Representative
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing
States, for her dedication to and support for the cause of
the landlocked developing countries and for the efforts
that both she and her team invested in preparations for
the midterm review.
During intergovernmental negotiations on the
ambitious Political Declaration that we have just
adopted (resolution 74/15), the landlocked developing
countries, together with the transit countries and
19-39433

05/12/2019

A/74/PV.39

partners for development, reviewed and evaluated
our progress, obstacles, needs and above all the road
map towards achieving full compliance with the
priority areas of the Vienna Programme of Action. In
this regard, I would like to express my appreciation
and gratitude to the facilitators of the Political
Declaration — Her Excellency Ms. Doma Tshering,
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Bhutan,
and His Excellency Mr. Jan Kickert, Permanent
Representative of Austria — for their leadership
during negotiations and their active participation in the
preparations for this midterm review.

but, rather, for interconnection with the world. The
time is ripe for the international community to translate
into action the principle of not leaving anyone behind.
This is clearly the time for us to implement the call to
action and accelerate the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action.

During the first five years of the Vienna
Programme of Action, the landlocked developing
countries’ annual gross domestic product growth rate
per capita decreased, and the human development index
remained below the world average. Some progress has
been made in indicators related to health, education,
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, and in access to drinking water. Likewise, there
has been an increase in access to information and
communication technologies. Regional integration
has been strengthened, and there has been significant
progress in terms of the ratification of the World Trade
Organization Agreement on Trade Facilitation and
other relevant instruments at the regional and global
levels in the area of transport and transit.

I would like to start by thanking Austria and the
Kingdom of Bhutan for their efforts as co-facilitators
of the negotiations on the Political Declaration of the
High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024. We
also commend the Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for its
support throughout the preparatory process.

However, it is also clear that despite our collective
efforts, the progress made is not sufficient to meet
the goals of the Vienna Programme of Action. The
participation of landlocked developing countries
in global trade has decreased. We have not made
sufficient progress in diversifying our economies, and
our vulnerability to the negative effects of climate
change has not decreased. Our countries remain
disproportionately affected by desertification, soil
erosion, droughts and the retreat of glaciers. Sadly, a
third of our population still lives in extreme poverty.
In this context, it is important to stress that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes the
specific needs of landlocked developing countries and
underscores the need for support for the implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action as an integral part
of the Agenda.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that this
the time for all of us to unite our efforts through
transparent, lasting and effective partnerships so that
our geographic situation is not a reason for isolation

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.

While we review the progress achieved halfway
through the Vienna Programme of Action, we must also
assess the challenges ahead. Let us remind ourselves
that the international community has to continue to
support the landlocked developing countries on their
path towards sustainability and resilience.
Indeed, the European Consensus on Development
reconfirms the commitment of the European Union
to implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement, taking into
account the diverse challenges faced by the developing
countries, including the landlocked developing
countries (LLDCs).
Landlocked developing countries face specific
vulnerabilities: vulnerability to the effects of climate
change, lack of access to the sea and remoteness
and isolation from world markets, while high transit
costs and risks impose serious constraints on their
development, often preventing them from reaping the
full benefit of the trade and investment opportunities
created by globalization.
Mr. Amde
the Chair.

(Ethiopia),

Vice-President,

took

The EU and its member States provide more
than half of global official development assistance

19-3943313/30

A/74/PV.39

and remain by far the largest donor in the world. But
addressing these specific challenges requires action at
all relevant levels.
It has become clear that past financing patterns
will not be sufficient to meet the 2030 Agenda; it is
crucial to mobilize all available financing flows. For
that to happen, it is key that LLDCs develop a strategic
vision of how they plan to finance their sustainable
development objectives. That is why we are working
with the United Nations to help interested countries
develop integrated national financing frameworks.
Integrated national financing frameworks bring
together the various elements of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda at the country level and at the same
time facilitate nationally owned and Government-led
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). They lay out a financing strategy, helping
Governments to prioritize actions, manage risks and
make the most of diverse financing sources.
Trade infrastructure is crucial for the growth
performance of LLDCs. Existing gaps in infrastructure
networks and sector inefficiencies hinder economic
growth. Transport investment is needed to
enhance interconnectivity.
The EU remains focused on making better use
of all means of implementation, including capacitybuilding and mobilizing more domestic resources
and private investment. It is in that context that we
launched the External Investment Plan for Africa
and the European Neighbourhood. The Plan aims to
generate up to €44 billion of new investment — in
sectors with the greatest potential to drive decent jobs
and growth — from sustainable cities and agriculture
to energy, transport and digital infrastructure.
The EU also works on sustainable finance to help
investors identify and seize environmentally sustainable
investment opportunities, thereby connecting global
finance with local financing needs. We support
countries in addressing the hurdles that prevent
them from accessing international global markets
and attracting investments, including by building
pipelines of bankable projects. The Plan supports the
improvement of the investment climate and facilitates
public-private dialogue.
The EU is committed to promoting the LLDCs’
integration into the multilateral trading system.
Support for trade facilitation is an essential component
14/30

05/12/2019

of the EU’s development cooperation, and we support
this process through our Aid for Trade Strategy.
Regional integration enlarges market size, reduces
the cost of inputs, enhances competitiveness for the
member countries and helps attract new foreign direct
investment. Trade with regional partners will ensure an
increase in investors’ and consumers’ access to goods
and services and ensure that economies of scale can
be achieved.
The EU supports regional cooperation efforts
and welcomes the creation of networks of regional
renewable energy, as energy dependency is a major
source of economic vulnerability and a key concern for
many LLDCs. The promotion of access to sustainable,
renewable energy and energy efficiency remains crucial.
Finally, the EU is a firm believer in the fact
that economic development must be combined with
protection of the environment. Circular economies
help to close the loop of product lifecycles through
greater recycling and reuse, thereby increasing
product value. At the same time, they can contribute to
climate-neutral production and resource efficiency, and
foster innovation, economic growth and job creation.
Sustainable supply chains can ensure that LLDCs are
fully integrated in the global sustainability transition
to meet the SDGs and deliver on the Paris Agreement.
In closing, the EU and its member States would like
to reiterate our unwavering commitment to work with
our LLDC partners. We will continue our engagement
and concrete support for the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action.
Mr. Singye (Bhutan): I join other delegations in
thanking the President of the General Assembly for
convening today’s important meeting and endorse
the statements delivered on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries.
The Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024
constitutes an integral part of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and its timely and
effective implementation will greatly contribute to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Bhutan welcomes the midterm review and adoption of
the Political Declaration (resolution 74/15). My country
had the honour of co-facilitating the intergovernmental
negotiations of the Political Declaration with Austria,
with whom we were privileged to work. We thank all
19-39433

05/12/2019

delegations for their constructive engagement and the
United Nations Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for
its support.
Assessments on the performance of landlocked
developing countries have been mixed. It is clear that
more needs to be done and at a faster pace if these
countries are to achieve the objectives of the Vienna
Programme of Action in the five years that remain.
The midterm review should provide the momentum
required to fully implement the Vienna Programme
of Action by all stakeholders. As the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development has mentioned,
a new generation of policies and additional actions are
needed to achieve the goals of the Programme by 2024.
Structural
economic
transformation
and
productive capacity-building, including through skills
development, are key national priorities for Bhutan.
We seek to expand investments in tourism, organic
agriculture and cottage and small industries and
establish an entrepreneurship ecosystem to provide a
platform for innovation to generate jobs. In line with our
national objective of self-reliance, domestic resource
mobilization is accorded high priority. As a result of
prudent fiscal management, the Royal Government of
Bhutan is currently able to finance up to 64 per cent of
its development expenditure through domestic revenue.
Bhutan is also implementing the Bhutan for Life
programme, an innovative green financing mechanism
to augment its resource requirements for conservation
of the environment.
Bhutan will continue to undertake key initiatives in
the current national development plan cycle to address
challenges. As science, technology and innovation play
a catalytic role in advancing our national efforts, we
request development partners to help us build capacity
in these areas, as well as in e-commerce readiness
and local capability-building. We will continue
our efforts to strengthen regional and international
partnerships through North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation.
In conclusion, we join fellow landlocked
developing countries in calling for the reaffirmation
of global commitments and strengthening of global
partnerships to address the special needs of our
countries in accelerating the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action. We need to see renewed

A/74/PV.39

commitment and strengthened international solidarity
and partnership to strengthen the resilience and response
of landlocked developing countries, which are among
the most vulnerable to impacts from climate change.
We hope that today’s deliberations will promote
greater solidarity and provide impetus to deliver on the
hopes and aspirations of over half a billion people in
our 32 countries.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): We fully align ourselves
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
This is an important time for landlocked developing
countries as we undertake a comprehensive review
of the progress achieved in implementing the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 and look at what
remains to be done. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/74/113) shows one thing clearly — we are not
on track. As the Vienna Programme of Action is integral
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
accelerating its implementation is fundamental for the
landlocked developing countries to be able to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
As a landlocked country itself, Austria understands
well the challenges that landlocked developing countries
have to confront. It is for this reason that we hosted
the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries in Vienna in 2014, that we
co-chair the Group of Friends in New York and that we
accepted to take on the facilitation role, together with
Bhutan, for the consultations on the outcome document
(resolution 74/15). We are grateful that the high-level
Political Declaration was consensually agreed by all
Member States.
While physical distance and remoteness
cannot be erased, many of the challenges related
to landlockedness can be successfully overcome.
The support of development partners is crucial as a
complement to the efforts of landlocked developing
countries in this regard. Austrian official development
assistance to landlocked developing countries in 2017
amounted to €42.7 million. Half of Austria’s priority
countries fall within the landlocked developing
countries category. Most recently Austria has allocated
additional humanitarian funds totalling €1.4 million to
Ethiopia and Burkina Faso, where situations of conflict
exacerbated by the impact of climate change create dire
needs. There is no doubt that we need more resolve in

19-3943315/30

A/74/PV.39

accelerating the transition towards a climate-neutral,
circular and resilient economy and in strengthening our
commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change.
For Austria, regional cooperation and integration
is key to addressing the challenges of landlockedness.
We are an industrial country with a small domestic
market and depend on our export economy. For every
€10 we earn, €6 comes from exports. For us, the
positive impact of joining the European Union cannot
be stressed enough, as some 70 per cent of Austria’s
foreign trade is intraregional with other European
Union member States.
The private sector has a critical role to play in
the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action. The landlocked developing countries should
therefore look at what is needed to attract increased
and more diversified foreign direct investment. It is
our experience that, to fully leverage the impact of
the private sector, a stable, predictable and enabling
investment environment is needed. To this end, the
rule of law, good governance, respect for human rights,
gender equality, and accountable and transparent
institutions are essential factors for success.
In conclusion, as we continue on our path towards
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, focused
cooperation with the 32 landlocked developing
countries is more important than ever to turn their
landlockedness into “landlinkedness”. The Assembly
can continue to count on Austria in this regard.

05/12/2019

that they face. With the entry into force of the African
Continental Free Trade Area and the launch of the
Single African Air Transport Market, which are major
developments, a huge opportunity now exists with the
potential to facilitate trade and transit between coastal
and landlocked countries in Africa. These initiatives
should be seized upon as opportunities to advance
the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action. The capacity of African landlocked developing
countries to harness the benefits of these agreements
would undoubtedly benefit from the support of the
United Nations system and all stakeholders.
The report of the Secretary-General also
highlighted a number of challenges that landlocked
developing countries continue to encounter in their
quest to implement the Vienna Programme of Action.
While the volume of overseas development assistance
has increased from $24 billion in 2014 to $28 billion
in 2017, the report observes that the increase was
concentrated in only a few landlocked developing
countries. Official development assistance plays a
significant transformative role in the development
agenda of developing countries in general, but more so
in countries in special situations, such as landlocked
developing countries. The Gambia therefore calls on
the international community to increase its share of
official development assistance for the benefit of a
greater number of landlocked developing countries.

Mr. Yabou (Gambia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
on Landlocked Least Developed Countries 20142024 (A/74/113). I also thank Bhutan and Austria for
co-facilitating the negotiation process for the Political
Declaration we have just adopted (resolution 74/15). As
the report of the Secretary-General observed, progress
on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action has been somewhat mixed, hence the need for
more action by all stakeholders.

The capacity of landlocked developing countries
to harness the benefits of trade facilitation needs to
be enhanced. In addition, their capacity to generate
relevant statistical data for the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action should also be enhanced
through technical assistance from the United Nations
system, the international community and regional
partners. Greater regional cooperation, through trade
facilitation and investments in the joint development of
such infrastructure as roads, communication networks,
sustainable regional energy grids and other regional
initiatives between landlocked developing countries
and transit countries can optimize the benefits of trade
and commerce for all stakeholders.

Landlocked developing countries are countries in a
special situation, especially in terms of the challenges
they continue to face in meeting their transit and
transport needs. Africa alone has 16 members in the
landlocked developing countries category, and the
Gambia, as a coastal country, stands in solidarity with
them, as we collectively confront the unique challenges

In that regard, our Government recently opened
the Senegambia bridge, which has drastically reduced
the transit time for people and goods between Senegal
and the Gambia and the region at large. We are also
simplifying our border-crossing operations and
improving facilities at our port as a gateway for our
neighbours, including those that are landlocked. At

16/30

19-39433

05/12/2019

this juncture, we are also studying plans for having
dry ports in the interior of the country, with a view
to further facilitating the smooth flow of goods and
services within the region.
The Gambia stands ready to support regional
connectivity initiatives through an integrated approach
to simplified border-crossings management and our
regional transport corridors. We call on the international
community to partner with us and our neighbours
with a view to facilitating our regional integration
goals, which will in turn translate into benefits for our
landlocked countries.
Climate change is one of the major challenges for
landlocked developing countries, especially the absence
of resilience-building capacities in most of them. The
international community must redouble its efforts in
providing necessary support for resilience-building in
landlocked developing countries, as well as increase its
assistance in disaster-risk reduction, including disaster
preparedness, early warning and early action.
In conclusion, we call on the United Nations system,
the international community and regional organizations
to do more to enhance the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action. Transit and landlocked
developing countries must also engage in partnerships
in their mutual desire to advance the goals of the
Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Allow me to extend
my thanks to the organizers of this comprehensive
high-level mid-term review. I also wish to thank the
High Representative and her team for their continued
efforts and follow-up for the effective implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024.
Afghanistan accords great importance to the Vienna
Programme of Action, as it provides a critical and
comprehensive framework to address the unique
challenges that landlocked and developing countries
like Afghanistan face.
Regional connectivity and economic integration are
essential to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Focusing on such priority areas as
trade expansion, infrastructure development and
increased economic growth provides the foundation for
poverty reduction and sustainable development. As a
landlocked developing country that endures continued
security concerns, Afghanistan is faced with a number

A/74/PV.39

of challenges to the priority areas identified in the
Vienna Programme. The lack of access to regional and
international markets is a great challenge for the export
of Afghan goods. We understand the vulnerability of
solely depending on one country for the import and
export of our goods. Living in the complex world of
today and faced with the rise of geopolitics in the
region, the unpredictable closure of those trade routes
exposed one of our major weaknesses. Our traders were
subject to a highly unpredictable political environment,
not knowing whether their goods, which, given that
Afghanistan is an agrarian economy, are usually
seasonal fruits and vegetables, could be exported at the
right time.
In order to address the challenge, the first priority
in our recent economic development agenda was
to diversify our trade and connect Afghanistan to
markets outside of the region. To do so, not only did
we start reaching out to our central Asian neighbouring
countries, but we have also looked beyond our region,
to markets in Europe and in the countries of the Gulf
region. We invested in turning Afghanistan from a
landlocked country into a land-connected country.
We invested in establishing various trade and transit
routes, both to link Afghanistan to the markets beyond
the region and to build a transit route that serve the
South and Central Asian economies as well. The Lapis
Lazuli Transit, Trade and Transport Route agreement,
signed
between
Afghanistan,
Turkmenistan,
Azerbaijan, Turkey and Georgia, helps our traders to
reach the European market. Similarly, the Chabahar
port agreement between Afghanistan, India and Iran
provides us with another trading and transit route.
We also took an innovative approach in opening air
corridors. Afghanistan was recently able to open such
corridors with India, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and Indonesia, which was
an important step in increasing our export volume and
balancing our trade deficit.
Afghanistan has been strongly determined and
convinced that we are capable of transforming our
geographical location from a source of vulnerability
into a source of stability for greater connectivity and
economic integration. We should start looking into
the potential that landlocked countries provide. Our
unique geographical location can serve as the bridge
between regional markets. For instance, to the north
of Afghanistan, there is an energy-rich market while,
to our south, there is a great demand for energy.

19-3943317/30

A/74/PV.39

Afghanistan plays a crucial role in connecting those
markets for greater development and growth in the
region. The Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
gas pipeline and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project are among many
projects that help with the supply of gas and energy
from Central Asia through Afghanistan to markets in
India and Pakistan.
Therefore, despite many difficult odds, Afghanistan
has been able to make strides in incorporating the Vienna
Programme into the work of our economic development
agenda. We have been able to make progress over the
past three years, including in the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, which
works with our neighbours to solidify Afghanistan as
a regional hub for transit, trade and connectivity. We
must acknowledge that regional connectivity is not an
issue for discussion for purely economic reasons, but
that the discussion of the issue is also driven by various
regional political agendas. However, what is important
is that we have a greater understanding of its benefits
and start to focus on regional economic connectivity,
considering it not as a zero-sum game but rather a
shared gain for all those who participate.
There is a benefit to living in the twenty-first century:
the boom in technology and virtual connection. This
virtual connection has helped our nation to be linked
faster than our adjustments to the reality. Similarly, the
means available today make everything much easier
and faster. We are starting to realize that growth and
development are no longer beneficial to just a single
country, but rather to all. We are in a unique position to
think broadly for all of us and embrace the benefits of
regional connectivity in our shared market gains.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
(A/74/113), issued in June, showed promising results in
some sectors and also areas that require improvement,
specifically in relation to trade. We hope that the
midterm review and the Secretary-General’s report
lead to a clear understanding of the challenges still
being faced by the landlocked developing countries
and presents workable solutions to those challenges.
Working collaboratively is the best way to fulfil and
implement the Vienna Programme of Action, and
we look forward to an inclusive dialogue with and
participation from all Member States.
18/30

05/12/2019

We remain optimistic that the goals and targets laid
out in the Vienna Programme of Action will be realized
in the next five years. However, in order to achieve this
end, the full cooperation of the international community
is crucial, especially for those heavy infrastructure
projects that help transport linkages. Donors must
fulfil their commitments to the landlocked developing
countries, especially those in conflict and post-conflict
situations. With this support, countries like Afghanistan
will continue to work towards sustainable development
and lasting peace.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): We fully align ourselves
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
Let me begin my remarks by thanking and
acknowledging the excellent work carried out by the
Permanent Representatives of Austria and the Kingdom
of Bhutan as facilitators of the Political Declaration
adopted earlier today (resolution 74/15).
As we take stock of the progress on the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024, we must
recognize and salute the commitment of landlocked
developing countries to tackling the challenge of
structural economic transformation and to promoting
diversification, industrialization, sustained and
inclusive economic growth and the achievement of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as
their efforts aimed at achieving those ends. However,
we must also recognize that the structural challenges
facing landlocked developing countries cannot
be tackled alone. We cannot allow the benefits of
globalization and international finance to pass by our
landlocked developing country partners. Of additional
increasing concern is that these countries remain
highly vulnerable to the adverse and often devastating
impact of climate change. Addressing the challenges
faced by landlocked developing countries and transit
countries requires action by all of us, the international
community, working together in global partnership.
Ireland is proud of our development partnerships
with landlocked developing countries. In our recently
updated international development policy, we have
committed to strengthening, deepening and expanding
Ireland’s existing partnerships with these countries and
others. Development cooperation is only one part of
deepening our relations with our development partners.
At the core of this partnership is a commitment to
19-39433

05/12/2019

helping to promote inclusive economic growth and
trade and support initiatives that seek to foster trade
and investment.
The vulnerability of many landlocked developing
countries to climate change is of growing concern
and requires the urgent attention of the multilateral
system. With increasing desertification in the Sahel
and receding glaciers and land degradation in Central
Asia — to name but a few of the challenges — it is
clear that landlocked developing countries are among
the frontline countries threatened by climate change.
Just last week, as part of our updated development
policy, we launched in Dublin a new strategy for
cooperation with our African development partners.
Ireland’s Strategy for Africa to 2025 will see our country
strengthen political partnerships with African countries
and institutions. It will put in place frameworks to boost
trade and investment. Half of Ireland’s development
partners in Africa are landlocked developing countries,
and they will continue to be the focus of Ireland’s
assistance, albeit with a renewed vigour and approach
that focuses on trade and investment.
Openness and a focus on international trade form
a cornerstone of Ireland’s economic strategy. Ireland is
a country that has benefited greatly from international
trade. Trade can be an engine for economic growth,
and Ireland will step up our support for the rules-based
multilateral system, with the World Trade Organization
(WTO) at its core, to ensure that landlocked developing
countries can participate in and benefit fully from fully
free and open trade, including via the WTO’s Aid for
Trade initiative.
The formation of the African Continental Free
Trade Area is a very welcome development. Regional
integration has been central to the success of Ireland as
a small, open, trading and competitive economy, and it
is our hope that this Free Trade Area can provide the
same prosperity to Africa as European integration has
brought to Europe.
Let me conclude on a note of optimism. While the
challenges are great, it is our strong view that there is
political will to respond to those challenges and take
concrete actions to inject a renewed momentum into the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this important and
timely meeting to review the needs and challenges

A/74/PV.39

of landlocked developing countries. The Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 represents a
significant landmark in the recognition of the special
needs and problems of landlocked countries. The
implementation of the Vienna Programme aims to
bring about real and tangible impacts and include
the more than 500 million people in the landlocked
developing States, which is almost 7 per cent of the
world’s population, occupying around 12 per cent of
total world land mass.
While globalization is ever expanding and
generating significant benefits, they have yet to be
shared equitably. Landlocked developing countries have
yet to reap the full benefits offered by globalization.
In this context, I would like to highlight the following
points aimed at enhancing the ability of the landlocked
developing countries to become effective partners in
international development activities.
First, there is an urgent need to foster productive
capacities and structural economic transformation.
This target can be achieved by focusing on economic
diversification, information and communications
technology, energy and human capital development.
Secondly, we must move away from a projectbased problem-solving approach and towards
programme-based interventions. Thirdly, cooperation
beyond trade must be strengthened, including on
development projects in infrastructure, transport and
industry, with a view to intensifying industrialization
in the landlocked developing countries through
linkages with regional value and global value chains
and enhanced intraregional trade and special economic
zones. Fourthly, there is also a need to attract private
investment, including foreign direct investment.
Fifthly, we further encourage strengthening SouthSouth cooperation with the involvement of partners,
as well as cooperation among subregional and regional
organizations. Sixthly, official development assistance
remains key to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and should be aligned with the national priorities
and development strategies of the recipient countries.
Egypt has always been eager to strengthen its
relations with all developing countries based on
mutual respect and mutual interest. In this spirit, in
November, Egypt organized the fourth edition of the
Investment for Africa Forum, in Cairo. The Forum has
provided a unique pan-African platform that brings
together African Heads of State and Governments in

19-3943319/30

A/74/PV.39

an inclusive interaction with prominent regional and
international investors and international financial
institutions. The Forum this year confirmed Egypt’s
commitment to the Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
which aims to leverage our capacities and expertise to
realize tangible development results, with the ultimate
objectives of meeting the aspirations of the peoples of
Africa and putting Africa on the global investment map.
In this context, 13 deals worth some $3 billion were
signed at the conference. The Forum made seven
recommendations, including to call on international
financial institutions and investment funds to finance
infrastructure projects in Africa.
The entry into force of the African Continental
Free Trade Area will create new opportunities for
African countries with its focus on youth employment,
developing regional value chains and supporting the
creation of regional infrastructure, of which peace
and security focal points make up the greatest number.
In this regard, Egypt will host the Aswan Forum for
Sustainable Peace and Development this month.
Egypt also established the Egyptian Agency of
Partnership for Development as an institution for
promoting South-South cooperation with a view to
drawing upon the country’s comparative strengths
and technical expertise for the benefit of the South,
in particular in Africa, especially the least developed
countries and the landlocked developing countries.
Meanwhile, several Egyptian companies took a leading
role in directing investments to the infrastructure sector,
particularly telecommunications and construction in
landlocked developing countries.
Finally, Egypt welcomes the Political Declaration
adopted at this high-level midterm review (resolution
74/15) and remains committed to continuing to
strengthen and preserve the interests of the developing
world, including least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries, small island developing States
and African countries, in the light of the mounting
challenges that developing countries face, which call
for unity and solidarity.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the State of Palestine on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
The Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 points
out a clear direction for the international community to
20/30

05/12/2019

follow in support of the efforts of landlocked developing
countries to address their unique challenges. After five
years of implementation, the Vienna Programme of
Action has seen some achievements, but its progress
has not been balanced. The international community
should continue to promote the full implementation
of the Vienna Programme and support landlocked
developing countries in their efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
First, international development and cooperation
should be deepened to create a favourable development
environment for landlocked developing countries.
North-South cooperation should be adhered to
as the main channel. Developed countries should
actively honour their official development assistance
commitments, while developing countries in general
should actively conduct South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation. The United Nations
should continue to support the efforts of the
landlocked developing countries themselves to realize
sustainable development.
Secondly, we must jointly build an open
world economy. There is a need to firmly defend
multilateralism,
oppose
unilateralism
and
protectionism, maintain the multilateral trade system,
implement the Trade Facilitation Agreement and help
landlocked developing countries better integrate into
the world trade system.
Thirdly, actions must be taken to implement
the Vienna Programme of Action and build a global
partnership of interconnectivity. The international
community must prioritize action and strengthen
connectivity and cooperation between landlocked
developing countries and transit countries, help
landlocked developing countries address their
geographical constraints and promote these countries’
better integration into regional and global supply
chains, so as to facilitate their all-around economic and
social advancement.
As the largest developing country, China has always
supported the development of landlocked developing
countries. Under the Belt and Road Initiative, China
is actively engaging in practical cooperation with
them. China will continue to support the connectivity
of landlocked developing countries in infrastructure,
trade, digital industry, energy and other areas. It
will also to create space for cooperation that features
openness, mutual benefit, win-win opportunities and
19-39433

05/12/2019

equality to jointly realize sustainable development and
build a community with a shared future for humankind.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to congratulate representatives of
Austria and Bhutan for their effective facilitation of
the negotiations on the Political Declaration that we
adopted earlier (resolution 74/15). We are also grateful
to the Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for its
valuable support in the preparatory process.
Today’s comprehensive high-level midterm review
of the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024 provides an important opportunity
to reaffirm the support of the international community
for the landlocked developing countries — a group
of States Members of the United Nations that face
a spectrum of similar constraints and challenges
of a geographic, commercial and environmental
nature — in their efforts towards achieving sustainable
development. As indicated in the relevant report of
the Secretary-General (A/74/113), it is encouraging
that in the first half of the decade 2014-2019
significant progress has been registered in most of
the landlocked developing countries, especially in
terms of socioeconomic development. However, these
advancements are still insufficient, and there is an
evident need to increase the efforts in the main areas
of the Vienna Programme of Action, namely, access to
the seas, trade, infrastructure, regional cooperation,
structural economic transformation and international
support, in order for the landlocked developing
countries to accelerate towards the full realization of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). From a
strategic perspective, priority should be given to four
lines of action.
First, regional integration must be advanced.
Neighbouring transit countries are key to landlocked
developing countries’ exports and constitute potential
end-markets for their products. Regional integration
processes may improve the quality and cost-effectiveness
of transport infrastructures, trade facilities and market
mechanisms, thereby stimulating domestic investments
in landlocked developing countries and attracting
foreign direct investments.

A/74/PV.39

Secondly, the access of landlocked developing
countries to electricity and renewable energy sources
must be improved. Access to energy is a prerequisite
for any meaningful sustainable development strategy,
and renewable energy is increasingly indispensable.
Italy has consolidated experience in strengthening the
capabilities of the landlocked developing countries
in the field of energy access from renewable sources,
particularly in Africa, with active involvement of the
most relevant actors of the Italian private sector. As
an example, I would mention the project carried out
by Italy in Zambia, within the framework of the World
Bank Group’s Scaling Solar programme and with the
active engagement of the Italian energy company Enel.
Similar initiatives are in place in other landlocked
developing countries in Africa, such as Ethiopia, in the
framework of national programmes aimed at energy
diversification and the construction of solar plants.
Thirdly, a greater role of the private sector must
be promoted. The growth of a development-oriented
domestic private sector and the attraction of international
investors are largely dependent on the establishment in
the landlocked developing countries of a favourable
normative framework, which includes protecting and
reinforcing property rights, strengthening the rule
of law and democratic multilevel participation, and
granting equitable access to economic opportunities
to all vulnerable categories, in particular women and
youth. It is also important to support the capacity of the
landlocked developing countries in managing complex
investment-related negotiations. In this respect, I would
like to recall that Italy has been the initial sponsor
of the Investment Support Programme for the Least
Developed Countries, promoted by the Office of the
High Representative and the International Development
Law Organization, to provide legal and professional
assistance for investment-related negotiations and
dispute settlement, which is relevant in that context, as
17 of the 32 landlocked developing countries are also
classified as least developed countries.
Fourthly, we must invest in human capital. Investing
in education and training is a fundamental element of
any long-term strategy for sustainable development.
Increased levels of education would facilitate the
required increase in labour productivity and create new
possibilities for the people of landlocked developing
countries, especially those in the most vulnerable
categories, to tap into the opportunities afforded by
an increasingly globalized economy. Italy devotes

19-3943321/30

A/74/PV.39

special attention to cooperation programmes in this
field, especially in Africa, where half of the landlocked
developing countries are located.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy’s longterm commitment to partnering with the landlocked
developing countries, both bilaterally and through the
European Union, towards the successful implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action and the full
achievement of the SDGs.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would first like to
commend the Permanent Representatives of Austria
and of Bhutan, the two facilitators of the informal
consultations, for their excellent work. I also thank
the Permanent Representative of Paraguay for his
leadership as Chair of the Group of Landlocked
Developing Countries.
There is great cause for celebration today. I am
inspired by what I have heard this morning. As we have
heard this morning, while much remains to be done and
there are challenges, there is also ample work being
done. It is great that we are all in this Hall to share our
views, our approaches and best practices and discuss
how we do things together and partner with each other.
Canada values our relationships with our landlocked
developing country partners. We are committed to
strengthening cooperation with them in their efforts
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
in line with their national development strategies
and priorities. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development provides an unprecedented opportunity
for us to work together towards our common goals of
peace, prosperity and sustainable development.
Global development progress has indeed been
uneven to date, especially for countries in special
situations, including some of the landlocked developing
countries. In the face of severe structural impediments
to sustainable development and remoteness from
world markets, landlocked developing countries are
sometimes at risk of being left behind. The adverse
effects of climate change, particularly land degradation
and drought, threaten to compound these challenges.
At the same time, as we have heard this morning, there
are opportunities for landlocked developing countries
to harness new technologies and the digital economy
in support of sustainable development. Recognizing
that different States face different challenges and that
there is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all approach,
Canada seeks to respond to the needs, opportunities
22/30

05/12/2019

and priorities of our partners while taking into account
their specific contexts.
(spoke in French)
For instance, Canada is working with Ethiopia to
increase agricultural productivity, improve nutrition
and promote employment and livelihood opportunities,
particularly for women. Canada also supports the
Productive Safety Net Programme in Ethiopia to
help the country meet the needs of the most foodinsecure households and improve their livelihoods.
In Afghanistan, Canada’s development assistance
focuses on health, education, the rights of women and
girls as well as on increasing economic opportunities
for women. Canada also provides support to help
strengthen the resilience of populations affected by
crises. We support policies and programmes within
Mali to improve access to reproductive, maternal and
child health-care services and primary education.
Canada’s assistance also contributes to peace and
security and economic growth through the support it
provides to agricultural production and the economic
empowerment of women in rural areas.
(spoke in English)
Canada is also working with partners to mobilize
additional financing for sustainable development,
in recognition that we must harness public, private,
domestic and international sources of funding — all
sources of funding — in order to achieve the global
goals. We are expanding our development finance
toolkit and establishing new innovative partnerships
that catalyse private capital for the SDGs. The Highlevel Dialogue on Financing for Development that
was held in this Hall in September demonstrated that
there is interest in increasing the share of new forms
of development finance available to least developed
countries and landlocked developing countries.
Canada recognizes the infrastructure needs of
landlocked developing countries in terms of driving
growth and supports global efforts aimed at increasing
private-sector investments in infrastructure through
the Group of Seven, the Group of 20, the United
Nations and multilateral development banks. Our
support for the Closing the Investment Gap Initiative,
developed at the United Nations through the Group of
Friends of Financing for Development and the World
Bank Group’s Global Infrastructure Hub, helps develop
critical infrastructure projects around the world,
including in landlocked developing countries.
19-39433

05/12/2019

Landlocked developing countries are important
economic partners for Canada, and we recognize that
their greater integration into world trade and global
value chains is vital to increasing their competitiveness
and ensuring their economic development. We applaud
the efforts made by landlocked developing countries,
with the support of their development partners and
transit countries, to implement the Trade Facilitation
Agreement and adopt measures to simplify trade
regulations, documents and procedures. In order
to promote economic growth in the world’s poorest
countries, Canada has extended duty-free treatment
to imports from least developed countries since
1983 through its Least Developed Country Tariff.
Many landlocked developing countries benefit from
these measures.
Promoting economic security is one of Canada’s
five priorities for the Security Council. If elected for
the 2021-2022 term, Canada would continue to work
to align public and private capital with the SDGs and
develop new and innovative ways to increase investment
in developing countries, including landlocked
developing countries. Canada is listening carefully to
the interests and concerns expressed by the landlocked
developing countries, and we look forward to continued
collaboration with them. Together we can accelerate
the pace of implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action and the 2030 Agenda in order to advance
sustainable development and leave no one behind.
Mr. Kafwaya (Zambia): It is my honour and privilege
to be speaking on the occasion of the comprehensive
high-level midterm review on the implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024.
Zambia remains very committed to the ideals
and of the Vienna Programme of Action and its
implementation. Our country is implementing it,
together with other national and global initiatives, such
as Zambia’s seventh national development plan and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. One
example of our commitment to the Programme of Action
was our hosting in 2015 of the high-level meeting on
the follow-up to the second United Nations Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries, at which His
Excellency Mr. Edgar Chagwa Lungu, President of the
Republic of Zambia, officiated.
In Zambia, we have made progress in the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of

A/74/PV.39

Action at the country level. This progress has been
supported by the overwhelming will of the Zambian
people, development partners and regional economic
communities. We remain indebted to those who have
supported this progress.
I would now like to share some of the progress
that we have made at the national level. In terms of
fundamental transit and policy issues, the Zambian
Government has launched a new transport policy with
a view to transforming the country into a regional
transport and logistics hub, which is to be achieved
through the development of transport corridors in the
Southern Africa subregion. In this vein, Zambia has
been working with its neighbouring countries and
other stakeholders on the domestication of agreed legal
frameworks, transit rules and policies.
In terms of infrastructure development and
rehabilitation, Zambia has observed the importance of
developing infrastructure. The country has therefore
made significant investments in both the development
and rehabilitation of infrastructure in renewable
energy, water and sanitation systems, information
and communication technologies and transport so as
to facilitate meaningful development. With regard to
structural transformation, the Government has planned
to diversify the country’s economy beyond mining
to embrace agriculture, tourism and manufacturing
and to move towards value addition in mining and
the processing of precious and semi-precious stones.
Furthermore, we have developed our first-ever
industrial policy, which is aimed at improving our
productive capacity and promoting the production and
consumption of local goods.
Zambia therefore welcomes the Political
Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the
Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024 just adopted (resolution 74/15) and looks
forward to continued and expanded support from our
development partners and developing transit countries,
as well as regional and international organizations and
other stakeholders.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Allow me first to congratulate
the President of the General Assembly on the holding
of this high-level meeting, which will provide us with
an opportunity to take stock of the progress to integrate
landlocked countries into global economies.

19-3943323/30

A/74/PV.39

I align myself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
In view of their specific geographical remoteness,
landlocked developing countries face specific
challenges. These challenges are exacerbated by the
inadequacy of their infrastructure, connectivity and
corridor facilities to overcome structural deficiencies,
as well as other limitations on their capacity to join
world trade. It is worrisome to note that progress in
priority areas of the Vienna Programme of Action
remains mixed and that one third of the populations of
landlocked developing countries continues to live in
poverty, as these countries still account for less than
1 per cent of the global merchandise trade. In order to
overcome these shortcomings, there is a need to make
progress on structural and economic transformation in
the global financial and connectivity architecture.
As a transit country, Pakistan has made significant
steps and concerted efforts towards providing assistance
to landlocked developing countries. Our AfghanistanPakistan Transit Trade Agreement, which was signed
in 2010 with the aim of providing the necessary
development means to landlocked Afghanistan, has
contributed a great deal in this regard. The volume of
trade from this corridor in 2018 alone was $5.5 billion.
The opening of the Torkham crossing for commercial
traffic on a 24/7 basis has added another tangible
dimension to the close cooperation that exists between
Pakistan and Afghanistan.
One of the reasons we joined the China’s Belt
and Road Initiative is our understanding that it fully
complements and contributes to the goals and objectives
set out in the Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It is underpinned
by connectivity and cooperation in reshaping trade,
investment and infrastructure development in Asia,
Africa and Europe. The scale and scope of the Initiative
is enormous, and it stands out as the most significant
initiative of our times for promoting transnational
connectivity, enhancing trade and investment and
facilitating cooperation to fully utilize the economic
potential of participating countries.
The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is a
central part of the Belt and Road Initiative network and
is an all-inclusive economic corridor for the region.
It is the fastest-growing and most effective of all the
projects in the Belt and Road Initiative. The China24/30

05/12/2019

Pakistan Economic Corridor is expected to bring huge
economic and development benefits to both countries,
and other countries in the region. By promoting
regional connectivity, enhancing trade and investment
and stimulating global growth, the China-Pakistan
Economic Corridor is expected to help improve the
lives of an estimated 3 billion people in China, South
Asia, Central Asia and beyond.
Our energy-connectivity project, the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade
Project, will further our efforts aimed at connectivity
with the landlocked countries of Central Asia. Our
participation in the South Asian Free Trade Area, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Economic
Cooperation Organization is proof of Pakistan’s
commitment to the development of landlocked countries
in our region in line with the Vienna Programme
of Action.
In conclusion, I would reiterate that Pakistan stands
ready to support landlocked developing countries, as we
understand that the Vienna Programme of Action is an
integral part of the 2030 Agenda. Its full implementation
is fundamental if we are to leave no one behind and
reach those who are furthest behind first.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the Permanent Observer
of the State of Palestine of behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
It is an honour for Indonesia to participate in
today’s meeting. We consider the midterm review to
be an opportunity to reinvigorate political momentum
and strengthen international cooperation to support
the development of landlocked developing countries.
Moreover, Indonesia welcomes the adoption of resolution
74/15, entitled “Political Declaration of the High-level
Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024”, and expresses
its appreciation to the Permanent Representatives
of Bhutan and Austria for their valuable leadership
throughout the intergovernmental consultations.
The world today is characterized by the growing
interdependence in trade, finance and technology, as
well as the increasingly uneven distribution of wealth
and knowledge within and among countries. While
some progress has been achieved by the landlocked
developing countries to advance their economies and
development, this group of countries continues to
19-39433

05/12/2019

face specific constraints and challenges, including
poverty, low productivity, limited economic resources,
deficiencies in physical infrastructure and inadequate
market access. We welcome development in such
areas as the deepening of regional integration and
cooperation, the high rate of acceptance of the World
Trade Organization Trade Facilitation Agreement and
improvements in the quality of infrastructure and
access to energy and information and communication
technologies. Progress has also been recorded in the
areas of health, education, gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls.
Unfortunately, limited progress has been
experienced in other areas. One third of the
population of landlocked developing countries is
still living in extreme poverty, while the prevalence
of undernourishment has increased and the share of
landlocked developing countries in global merchandise
trade remains very small — decreasing, in fact, to only
0.98 per cent in 2018.
It is imperative to strengthen partnerships and
collaboration and muster support and assistance in
order to transform landlocked developing countries
into “landlinked” countries. Indonesia stands ready
to work with the United Nations and the international
community to achieve this objective through, inter
alia, bridging the financing gap for transportation and
infrastructure and enhancing capacity to participate in
the global supply chain. Moreover, it is important to
address the means of implementation in relation to the
needs of landlocked developing countries. Although
significant efforts in domestic resources mobilization
have been made, enormous financing gaps persist.
The international community must provide enhanced
resources to these countries in the form, for example,
of official development assistance, foreign direct
investment and South-South and triangular cooperation.
They should also continue to provide technical
assistance and capacity development support, based on
the needs and priorities of the respective LLDCs. Such
support can be in areas such as economic diversification,
the promotion of innovation and technology and the
strengthening of resource mobilization, including
obtaining access to available financing.
We all have the shared duty to leave no one behind.
Indonesia reiterates that the Vienna Programme of
Action is the global commitment to which we are all
dedicated. We must continue our support for LLDCs in
accelerating its implementation.

A/74/PV.39

Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Cuba
wishes to express its appreciation for the convening
of this high-level meeting to follow up on and propose
actions in relation to the provisions of the Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024.
The timely and effective implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action is critical to fully achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Both
development programmes must be pursued in unison,
as the delays in their implementation have an impact on
our aspirations for sustainability and resilience. In that
regard, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the Vienna Programme of Action, while regretting that
significant challenges and objectives remain to be
achieved for the sustainable development of landlocked
developing countries.
Cuba recognizes the particular needs and challenges
faced by landlocked developing countries, arising from
their circumstances and geographical limitations,
which negatively affect their sustainable development.
To that end, we urge the international community, in
particular the United Nations development system,
to give special attention to the six priority areas of
the Vienna Programme of Action in a coordinated,
coherent and effective manner. We must work to
strengthen the means of implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action, in particular with regard to
financing, technology transfer, capacity-building and
the promotion of partnerships.
We must also promote a new, just and balanced
international economic order. Developed countries must
honour their historic responsibilities and international
commitments, including regarding official development
assistance, as well as more ambitious targets for
climate-change mitigation.
Cuba supports the universal right to development
based on mutual respect and recognition of common
but differentiated responsibilities, including the special
vulnerabilities of landlocked developing countries.
On that basis, and in line with the principle of
solidarity and close fraternal ties with developing
peoples that Cuba has always advocated, we reaffirm
our strong commitment to South-South cooperation as
a means of contributing to the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action.

19-3943325/30

A/74/PV.39

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Tijjani Muhammad-Bande,
President of the General Assembly, for prioritizing the
needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within the
Assembly’s agenda. We also thank Ms. Fekitamoeloa
Katoa Utoikamanu, High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, and
her Office for the continuous efforts to mobilize
international support for the implementation of
programmes and initiatives for Landlocked Developing
Countries in partnership with the relevant agencies and
bodies of the United Nations, civil society, academia
and other relevant stakeholders.
The high-level midterm review on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024 is an important milestone to assess the
progress and identify the gaps and challenges ahead of
the second, decisive five-year period for the realization
of the Programme’s objectives.
The implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action should be seen in the broader context of
the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as its interlinkage with other
strategic framework documents, such as the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030. Addressing the specific challenges faced
by landlocked developing countries is essential to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. As
a landlocked developing country, Armenia strongly
advocates regional and subregional cooperation and
connectivity through trade and transport. In the
development of regional connectivity, we are guided by
the principles of inclusivity, transparency and equal and
non-discriminatory partnership. Connectivity plays
a crucial role in promoting cross-border cooperation
and connecting people divided by conflicts and crises,
thereby promoting confidence and trust.
Despite the volatile situation in our region, Armenia
continues to develop its transit potential as a corridor
between Europe and Asia. The North-South highway
project, which is currently under way, will connect the
Persian Gulf with the ports of the Black Sea.
The Government of Armenia prioritizes development
of information and communications technologies (ICT)
as an important tool to lower costs and facilitate access
26/30

05/12/2019

to foreign markets, thus contributing to an increase in
foreign trade. With a very high Internet penetration
rate and a rapidly growing ICT industry, Armenia has
ensured open and affordable Internet access throughout
the country.
I would like to stress that unilateral coercive
measures are detrimental to the sustainable development
of landlocked countries and their effective integration
into the global markets. The continuing land blockade
of Armenia’s borders by its neighbours from the west
and the east multiplies the challenges arising from being
a landlocked country. The attempts to isolate Armenia
from regional economic cooperation and transport
corridors violate the principles of international law and
are contrary to the aims of the Convention on Transit
Trade of Land-locked States, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the norms of the
multilateral trading system.
The land blockade directly contradicts the letter and
spirit of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
impeding the realization of economic and social rights
and economic participation, thus negatively affecting
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. The construction of regional transport corridors,
circumventing a particular country, not only does not
promote regional connectivity and cooperation but
solidifies the dividing lines. It is therefore crucial that
the international community, international financial
organizations and other development actors conduct a
thorough and careful assessment of regional transport
infrastructure projects.
Armenia attaches special importance to inclusive
regional cooperation between landlocked and transit
countries as an essential prerequisite for removing
political barriers to the free movement of people, goods
and services and the realization of economic and social
rights and the right to development.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia’s
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action in cooperation with
the United Nations and our international partners.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Ecuador associates itself with the statement
read out by the observer of the State of Palestine
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Ecuador
reiterates its support and underlines the need to step up
cooperation commitments towards the 32 Landlocked
19-39433

05/12/2019

Developing Countries around the world on their path
to development.
We appreciate the presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, contained in document A/74/113,
on progress in the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024, which focuses on
a review of achievements and outstanding challenges
over the first five years. While we welcome the fact that
the real gross domestic product (GDP) of landlocked
developing countries (LLDCs) rose to 4.5 per cent in
2017 and is expected to remain at that level until 2020,
the difference in GDP growth among these countries
is of concern. It is also worrying that, overall, their
share of world exports declined by 18 per cent between
2014 and 2019, as did employment rates, falling from
approximately 27 per cent in 2015 to 25.5 per cent
in 2017.
In our region, and according to the most recent
report of the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean on the issue, we welcome the fact that
efforts have been made to improve the transport and
connectivity infrastructure of landlocked developing
countries. International cooperation in various areas,
support for disaster-resistant infrastructure, initiatives
to close digital and innovation gaps and access to
financial resources are vital to support the structural
transformation of such countries.
Globally, we note with concern that, owing to such
challenges, between 2014 and 2018 the average ranking
of landlocked developing countries on the Human
Development Index of the United Nations Development
Programme was 20 per cent below the world average.
As a developing country, my Government shares
several challenges with Governments of other
Member States, namely, ending poverty, hunger,
combating inequalities, building peaceful, just
and inclusive societies, protecting human rights,
promoting sustained and inclusive economic growth
and achieving sustainable development in its three
dimensions — economic, social and environmental.
We must therefore note the actions of various
national and international actors that led to the
political, economic and social destabilization plot faced
by my Government between 3 and 14 October in order
to bring about a coup d’état. There were blocked roads
and highways, assaults, looting, damage to public and
private facilities of various productive and Government

A/74/PV.39

sectors, significant violence against law enforcement,
such as attacks, kidnappings and aggression, attacks on
the independent media and even restrictions on relief
personnel carrying out humanitarian work, as in the
case of the Red Cross. The damage to facilities and
the initial estimated losses of these evil actions are
estimated to be several billion dollars, particularly for
those small and medium-sized entrepreneurs whose
means of production were affected.
In reiterating our full respect for international
law, including the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, my Government reaffirms its commitment to
democracy, good governance, justice and the rule of
law and to the responsible role of the State in promoting
social protection measures to achieve a just, balanced,
tolerant, open and socially inclusive world.
We emphasize our duty to build peaceful societies,
in which frank and open dialogue, respect and
tolerance are the tools to resolve disputes and with
Governments that are responsible and accountable to
their constituents.
Ms. Ward (Botswana): This meeting comes
at an opportune time for us to examine and reflect
on our achievements and challenges in our efforts
to implement the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024. As clearly set out in the background papers
prepared by the Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, our
countries are still faced with challenges emanating
from being landlocked. Such challenges have been ably
articulated by speakers before me. In the interest of
time, I will not repeat what has already been said.
Botswana has made and continues to make efforts to
address these challenges. Allow me to share Botswana’s
national efforts aimed at improving interconnectivity
and competitiveness. Let me first reiterate that
Botswana’s national development priorities are growth
and economic resilience, economic diversification,
employment creation and poverty alleviation. Botswana
has put in place policies and programmes to achieve
these objectives, including, among others, our national
development plan and Vision 2036.
Furthermore,
infrastructure
development,
including information and communications technology,
transport and energy infrastructure, has been afforded
more prominence in the development of our National

19-3943327/30

A/74/PV.39

Development Plan 11. To that end, Botswana is also
actively pursuing strategies for regional cooperation on
infrastructure development and integration as a means
of creating more active trade routes and expanding
market access. Botswana, together with Namibia and
South Africa, has developed a Trans Kalahari Corridor,
which is a highway aimed at facilitating the faster
and cheaper movement of goods between the three
countries. Botswana has also signed a memorandum of
understanding for the development of the North-South
Corridor, which will further link Botswana to other
trading partners in the north and the south.
Botswana and Zambia are in the process of
constructing the Kazungula Bridge, which is a joint
project between the two countries aimed at further
facilitating movements of goods and persons along the
North-South Corridor as well as to facilitate trade.
In relation to the infrastructural development
projects mentioned above, Botswana further envisages
the development of the trans-Kalahari railway to
Namibia. The railway will also link to Zambia via the
Kazungula road and rail bridge. These projects are
expected to reduce transport costs and link Botswana
to regional and global markets.
Botswana attaches great importance to the
implementation of the World Trade Organization Trade
Facilitation Agreement, as attested to by the fact that
the country was one of the first to ratify the Agreement
and to present notifications of all categorizations
of its provisions. Botswana is undertaking reforms
to facilitate the implementation of the Agreement.
Botswana is grateful for the assistance of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, which
has enabled us to develop a national trade facilitation
roadmap as well as training for the members of the
national trade facilitation committee.
As I conclude, allow me to share the fact that
Botswana has completed the review of its national trade
policy and national export strategy, which are intended
to contribute to, inter alia, economic and export
diversification, improved global competitiveness,
private-sector
development,
citizen
economic
empowerment and poverty eradication. Those policies
were reviewed through the assistance of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the
Commonwealth secretariat, respectively.
Finally, allow me to express my Government’s
appreciation to other development partners and
28/30

05/12/2019

international organizations for their continued support
and to emphasize that we would not have done all the
above without their assistance. We also fully support the
Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review
on the Implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action adopted this morning (resolution 74/15) and
thank the co-facilitators for their tireless efforts.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by recognizing the importance of
convening the midterm comprehensive review of the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024 and welcoming the adoption of the Political
Declaration by consensus at the beginning of this
meeting (resolution 74/15).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Five years since the adoption of the Vienna
Programme of Action, with its six priority areas
addressing the cross-cutting challenges and specificities
of the 32 landlocked developing countries, progress
has undoubtedly been made. However, the holistic
approach, building on the intrinsic linkage with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, requires
significant additional efforts to effectively address
their disadvantages and constraints. The special needs
of landlocked developing countries and the challenges
arising from their lack of access to the sea constitute
serious impediments to their full development and, in
particular, to their integration into global trade.
The first five-year period of the Vienna Programme
of Action highlights the fact that the eradication
of poverty and disaster-risk reduction related to
the devastating effects of climate change remain
unavoidable priorities and that accelerating the pace
of those efforts is increasingly indispensable. The
need to implement actions in specific areas, such as
the mobilization of financial resources, the generation
of reliable and periodical data as a basis for policy
formulation, technical assistance and capacity-building
support in various fields for those 30-odd countries,
is fundamental for leveraging the Vienna Programme
of Action.
In my delegation’s view, it is also important to
recognize that all countries face challenges at different
levels, in particular with regard to establishing a coherent
and consistent development-financing framework that
provides for the coordination and combining of actors,
19-39433

05/12/2019

instruments and modes of financing. We welcome the
reference in the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action
to the importance for the international community to
increase its support in the form of official development
assistance, South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation, as well as foreign direct investment for
the advancement of the Vienna Programme of Action
(A/74/113, para. 107).
For Panama, as a developing country, quality
infrastructure and connectivity play a key role in
achieving development and remain a challenge for
developing countries. It is therefore crucial to establish
strategic alliances that enable greater public and private
investment in infrastructure with the aim of closing
the gaps within and among countries. Accordingly,
the year 2020 will offer the opportunity to strengthen
the dialogue on sustainable transport, which is of vital
importance to countries in special situations, and the
discussion of the impact of climate change and the
cross-cutting actions required to address each of those
challenges and make the most of opportunities.
I conclude by expressing my Government’s
commitment to showing solidarity and joining the
collective efforts to effectively implement the Political
Declaration and Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries. Ensuring the
resilience of this group of countries must be a firm
commitment of all.
Mr. Kakanur (India): We associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by the observer of the State of
Palestine on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We would also like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Bhutan and Austria, for their
leadership and dynamism in the facilitating the
negotiations on the Political Declaration adopted earlier
(resolution 74/15).
Today’s meeting provides a useful occasion for
Member States to deliberate on the challenges faced by
landlocked developing countries, strategize on concrete
actions and share best practices that would help unlock
the potential of these countries.
Despite the remarkable socioeconomic progress
the world has witnessed over the past few decades,
the geographic remoteness of landlocked developing
countries, compounded by weak transit, transport
and customs infrastructure, resource and capacity

A/74/PV.39

constraints and limited access to technology, has
prevented the effective integration of landlocked
developing countries into the global economic and
supply-chain system. The implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 is integral to
the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the commitment of the international
community to leaving no one behind, including the
landlocked developing countries. As a transit country
and as a fellow developing country, India remains fully
committed to offering its support and experience to
landlocked developing countries.
India has established the Bangladesh-BhutanIndia-Nepal (BBIN) initiative to strengthen economic
cooperation and the transport connectivity of
landlocked Nepal and Bhutan and to give the BBIN
countries greater access to global supply chains. The
motor-vehicles agreement among the BBIN countries
will promote the continuation of multimodal cargo
movement, which will help reduce costs. Cooperation
under the BBIN initiative is also being discussed in the
areas of power, water resource management, inlandwaterways connectivity and rail connectivity.
The India-Afghanistan direct air-freight corridor,
established in 2017, provides Afghan nationals, including
the country’s farming and trading communities, with
quick, direct access to the Indian markets for health
services and education and for marketing their produce
and commodities. India is also working closely with
Afghanistan and Iran to develop the Chabahar port.
Linking Chabahar to the Persian Gulf and Central
Asia through the International North-South Transport
Corridor is another project on which India is working
closely with Iran and other partners.
India’s two latest initiatives, namely, the International
Solar Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster Resilient
Infrastructure, are aimed at assisting developing
countries, least developed countries and landlocked
developing countries gain access to affordable solar
energy and develop disaster-resilient infrastructure,
respectively. These initiatives will help successfully
implement the 2030 Agenda, the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.
In 2017, in the spirit of South-South cooperation,
India set up the $150 million India-United
Nations Development Partnership Fund to support

19-3943329/30

A/74/PV.39

Southern-owned, Southern-led and demand-driven
transformational projects aimed at fulfilling the
Sustainable Development Goals in developing, least
developed and landlocked developing countries. In
approximately two years, the Fund has been able to
develop 38 projects in 36 partner countries.
Let me once again reassure the Assembly of India’s
strong support and steadfast commitment to continuing
to share its development experience and expertise with
landlocked developing countries in order to overcome
the challenges they face and achieve the 2030 Agenda.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on the list for this meeting. We will hear the
remaining speakers this afternoon.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before adjourning, I would
like to draw the attention of members to the date of
recess of the current session. Members will recall
that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September, the
General Assembly decided that the seventy-fourth
session would recess on Monday, 16 December (see
A/74/PV.2). However, in view of the work that remains
to be completed for this part of the session, I would like
to propose to the Assembly that it postpone the date of
recess to Tuesday, 24 December.

30/30

05/12/2019

May I take it that the Assembly agrees to postpone
the date of recess of the seventy-fourth session to
Tuesday, 24 December 2019?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Fifth Committee.
Members will recall that, at its 2nd plenary meeting,
on 20 September 2019, the General Assembly approved
the recommendation of the General Committee that
the Fifth Committee would complete its work on
Friday, 13 December. However, the President has
been informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee
that the Committee requests an extension of its work
to Tuesday, 24 December, as such an extension would
facilitate a comprehensive consideration of the agenda
items before the Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
extend the work of the Fifth Committee until Tuesday,
24 December 2019?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

19-39433
