General Assembly-Twenty-eighth S(•s~ion

50

3131 (XXVIII). Report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2994 (XXVII), 2997
(XXVII) and 3000 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its first session, 51
Reaffirming that the quality of human life must constitute the central concern of the United Nations Environment Programme and that therefore the enhancement of the total human habitat and the study of
environmental problems having an immediate impact
on man should be given the highest priority in the
over-all programme,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the work of its first session;
2. Endorses the decisions adopted by the Governing Council,s~ in particular the criteria and the priorities as contained in decision 1 (I) of 22 Jur~ 1973.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3132 (XXVIII). Fund of the United Nations
Environ1ncnt Pro~raintne

The General Assembly,
Recalling section HI of its resolution 2997 (XXVII)
of 15 December ] 972 by which it established the Fund
of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Noting the statement by the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme concerning the current status of the Fund and his appeal for
early contributions,a;:i
Expressing its appreciation to the Governments
which have so far contributed or pledged contributions,
Appeals to Governments to extend their continuing
support to the Fund of the United Nations Environment Programme in order to make the Programme
fully operational.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

Also recalling principle 7 of the Declaration of the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 54 held at Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972,
Taking note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on
the work of its first session, 55 held from 12 to 22 June
1973, in which the subjects of oceans and genetic resources are among programme priorities,
Noting the Convention on the Prevention of Marine
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and other Matters,
concluded on 29 December 1972, and the recently
concluded International Convention for the Prevention
of Pollution from Ships, l 973,
I. Emphasizes the need for protecting and conserving the total living resources of ocean space through
concerted environmental action;
2. Stresses that both national and international action
is needed to preserve and enhance the quality of ocean
life and to protect the resources of the marine environment;
3. Underlines the fact that a number of the world's
important living ocean resources are at present threatened by depletion for a variety of reasons, not the
least of which is overfishing in certain areas of the
world's seas and oceans;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to consider and decide upon making a detailed survey of the living
marine resources of the world's sea, and oceans threatened with depletion, to he carried out by the United
Nations Environment Progrnmmc in co--opcration with
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and to be submitted to the Governing Council
at its third session;
'
5. Further requests the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Progra~me to continue
to direct special attention to the question of environmental protection of the seas and oceans, in particular
its living marine resources, and to report thereon. as
well as on the implementation of the present rcsolu-tion. to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
6. Emphasizes the importance of the task of the
Third United Nation,; Conference on the Law of the
Sea in rdati,111 to the preservation of the marine environment, taking into account recommendation 92. of
the Action Plan for the Human Environment",; as
approved by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment.
2199th plenary meeting
13 De,cmber /973

3133 (XXVIII). Protection of the marine
environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVII) and 2996
(XXVII) of 15 December 1972,
Recalling further its resolutions 3000 (XXVII) and
3002 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, as well as its
resolutions 2750 C (XXV) of 17 December 1970 and
3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973,
51 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 25 ( A/9025).
52 fbid., annex I.
5~ Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Second Committee, 1563rd
meeting, paras. 2-15.

3167 (XXV]ll). llnitrd Nations Revolvin~ Fund
for Natural Rei-011rt'f'!'l Exploralio11
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council, contained in resolution 1762
(LIV) of 18 May 1973, that the General Assembly
M See R,·port of 1/1(' United Nations Conference on rhe
Human En,,ironment ( United Nations publication, Sales No.:
F.73.JJA.14). chap. I.
55 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twt'nty-cighth
Session, Sui'plcmc11t No. 25 ( A.19025 ).
56 See R1,port of th,, U11iu·d Nations Confcrenc,, on tlzl'
Human Environment (United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.73.ll.A.14), chap. II.

51

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Se~ond Committee

should decide, at its twenty-eighth session, to establish
a United Nations revolving fund for natural resources
exploration, as well as the relevant documents prepared by the Secretary-General, 57
Recognizing the need to extend and intensify the
activities of the United Nations system to meet the
need for increased natural resources exploration in
developing countries, to accelerate their economic development,
Bearing in mind the need to ensure the revolving nature of the fund derived from the self-help principles
for the mutual benefit of the developing countries,
Noting the essential importance of voluntary contributions to the revolving fund at the initial stage,
which are to be made without prejudice to the growth
of resources of the United Nations Development Programme,
1. Decides to establish a United Nations Revolving
Fund for Natural Resources Exploration as a trust
fund, placed in the charge of the Secretary-General
and administered on his behalf by the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme and based
on the principles and objectives contained in paragraph 1 of Economic and Social Council resolution
1762 (LIV);
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and taking due account of
the views of the appropriate organs and agencies of
the United Nations system, to prepare operational procedures and administrative arrangements of the Revolving Fund for approval by the Governing Council
of the Programme at its eighteenth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts aimed at exploring possible sources of financial
assistance to the: Revolving Fund and to organize, if
necessary, pledgmg conferences for the Fund;
4. Invites the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to co-operate with the Revolvi?g Fund and, initially, to participate in the preparation of the procedural arrangements to be carried out
under paragraph 2 above;
5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to receive contributions to the Revolving Fund, as far as possible in
convertible currency;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with
the Secretary-General, to start operational activities of
t~e Revolving Fund in . 197 4, as soon as the preparation of the above-mentioned procedural arrangements
has been completed.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973
3168 (XXVIII). The role of modern science and
technology in the development of nations
and the need to strengthen econ~mic, technical and scientific co-operation among
States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2658 (XXV) of 7
December 1970 on the role of modem science and
technology in the development of nations and the need
to strengthen economic, technical and scientific cooperation among States,
117 See E/C.2/282.

Recognizing, in the light of the conclusions of the
first biennial over-all review and appraisal of progress
in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 58 that the application of science and
technology to development constitutes one of the main
factors for the final implementation of the goals of the
Strategy,
Having in mind the increased level of activities and
greater attention being given to this subject by the
various agencies and organizations of the United Nations system and, in particular, the useful work of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in the field of ,the transfer of technology to developing countries,
Convinced that at this stage it is imperative to concentrate the efforts of the United Nations and the
organizations of the United Nations system towards
the efficient utilization of modern science and technology to contribute to meeting the fundamental needs
of the developing countries,
1. Takes note of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1826 (LV) of 10 August 19,..,3;
2. End, rses the views expressed by the Economic
and Social Council in that resolution to the effect that
it i~ necessary to initiate new actions to intensify international co-operation permitting all countries, in particular developing countries, to benefit from the achievemen_ts of modern science and technology for the accelcra~1on of their economic and social progress by
assisting in the creation of an indigenous capacity for
scientific and technological growth;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give priority, through the Committee on Science and
!echnology for Development, to consideration of the
issues related to the role of modern science and technology in the development of nations and the need to
strengthen economic, technical and scientific co-operation among States;
4. Endorses further the idea of the need for the
el~boration of a United Nations policy in the field of
science and technology, and notes that the Economic
and Social Council will consider the advisability of
convening a United Nations conference on science and
technology in the light of its resolution 1826 (LV);
5. Requests the Secretary-General to extend to the
Committee on Science and Technology for Development ell t~e necessa!Y assistance in the implementation
of the actions provided for by Economic and Social
Council resolution 1826 (LV);
.6. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session,
thro~gh the Eco_nomic and Social Council, a report on
the 1mplementat1on of the present resolution.
2203rd plenary meeting
17 December 1973
3169 (XXVIII). Special measures related to the
particular needs of the land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 63 (III) of 19 May 1972 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop5s See resolution 317 6 (XXVIII).
