S/PV.8248

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8248th meeting

Tuesday, 8 May 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Córdova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Melki
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alfassam
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 2 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/416)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-13835 (E)
*1813835*

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 2 May 2018 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2018/416)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/416, which contains the text of a letter
dated 2 May 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the fifty-third report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Let me begin by thanking the Council
and its members for their continued attention to
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As I outlined in my report to the Secretary General
(S/2018/416, annex), despite some positive steps taken
by the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, which I wholeheartedly
welcome and support, the pace of real reform remains
slow and our common goal of irreversible stability for
the country has not yet been fully achieved.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina took an important step towards becoming
a candidate country of the European Union when the
2/22

08/05/2018

authorities handed over 20,000 pages of responses to
the European Commission’s questionnaire in February
during President Juncker and Commissioner Hahn’s
visit to Sarajevo. The country also managed to adopt
several strategies and a package of excise tax changes,
which unlocked funding from the International
Monetary Fund, especially for road construction.
Those important developments demonstrate that,
when political leaders have a common goal, they
make the necessary compromises and find a solution.
Unfortunately, such achievements have been few, as
many of the most prominent elected officials remain
disproportionately focused on nationalistic and divisive
issues. At the same time, the authorities and relevant
entities at the State level are repeatedly challenged and
undermined in a way that runs contrary to the logic of
integration within European structures.
As I have reported in the past, irresponsible and
inflammatory rhetoric challenging fundamental aspects
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina is
not new. We have witnessed the worrisome escalation
of such statements in the past six months. As I made
clear in my report to the Secretary-General, I am
deeply concerned about the more recent readiness
among some politicians to refer to the possibility of a
renewed conflict, including controversial statements by
senior Bosniak politicians suggesting that a rearming
effort is under way to respond in preparation for a
hypothetical war scenario. Those comments followed
controversy earlier in the reporting period about the
large-scale purchase of long-barrel, military type
weapons by Republika Srpska police and media
exposure of nationalist extremist groups. Accordingly,
there is a general trend of armament under way, and
that is a reason for deep concern. I will report on that
issue in November.
Inflammatory rhetoric has also continued to be
used by some senior officials from Republika Srpska
denying the statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
advocating for eventual secession. Public comments
were also made glorifying convicted war criminals
and calling for the return of a Republika Srpska army.
Certain Croat officials have mused over the territorial
reorganization of the country and threatened the
dissolution of the State if the current electoral issues
are not resolved to their satisfaction. All public figures
must choose their words carefully and responsibly.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a single and multi-ethnic
sovereign State consisting of two entities, in which
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

all citizens — the three constituent peoples and
others — live and work together, and, above all, elected
officials have a responsibility to contribute to peace
and reconciliation. It is within such a general political
climate that Bosnia and Herzegovina is entering
another election cycle, with the Central Electoral
Commission expected today to announce the next poll
for October 2018.
Six months ago, I briefed the Council (see
S/PV.8089) on the risk of a deeper political crisis that
could follow October 2018 elections should the parties
fail to agree before then on the rules regulating the
indirect election of delegates to one of the Houses
of Parliament — the House of Peoples. Following a
decision by the Constitutional Court in 2017 deleting
provisions of the election law regarding that issue, the
State-level Parliament needs to adopt amendments to
the law. Otherwise, the process of forming authorities
after elections could prove extremely difficult, or even
impossible. The European Union and the United States
are currently working to facilitate an agreement between
the main political parties concerning that issue, and my
Office supports them in that effort. But the ultimate
responsibility lies with political leaders. A range of
possible solutions exists, which could accommodate
a compromise, if the main parties are willing to step
back from maximalist demands and negotiate in good
faith, but time is short. As I speak, the Central Election
Commission has announced the holding of general
elections on 7 October 2018, although there is no
solution to the issue of the House of Peoples has been
found in terms of the election law.
Another area of concern in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is the deterioration in the rule of law. Prominent elected
officials continue to ignore and reject the final and
binding decisions of State-level courts, and corruption
is prevalent in the political system. Those two elements
converged in a recent case concerning the State-level
judiciary. In July 2017, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional several
provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal
Procedure Code. As the deadline of six months has
passed without the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament
correcting the issue, the Court could soon rule on
non-enforcement, thereby leaving the Bosnia and
Herzegovina judiciary without the tools necessary
to combat organized crime and corruption. It is
unfortunate that some political parties object to the
adoption of amendments in line with international

S/PV. 8248

standards. It is also very telling that the parties that
oppose the latter are the same ones challenging the
State-level institutions in the current arrangement of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I also need to highlight once again the fact
that the citizens of Mostar continue to be deprived
of the basic democratic right to elect their local
representatives — which they have been unable to do
for nearly a decade — owing to the failure of the parties
in the Parliament to implement a decision of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court related to the
Mostar electoral system. I am, however, encouraged by
the fact that representatives of several political parties
in Mostar have begun meetings at their own initiative
in Mostar, in what appears to be a sincere attempt
to finally resolve that issue after 10 years. I urge the
parties to reach a compromise that would enable the
citizens of Mostar to enjoy the same democratic right
to elect their local leaders, which the citizens in the rest
of the country enjoy.
Additionally, I recall another long-standing
pending Constitutional Court decision and a related
decision of the High Representative, which concern the
constitutional equality of Serbs within the Federation
and which still need to be reflected in three of the
cantonal Constitutions after more than 15 years. That
means that Serbs are not equal and do not enjoy the
same rights in those three cantons. They are not even
mentioned in the three cantons’ Constitutions, which is
really outrageous after 15 years. In that regard, there
is also a Constitutional Court decision that has not
been respected.
In conclusion, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina requires the continued attention and
unified effort of the international community. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made enormous strides since the
end of hostilities in 1995 in building its institutions and
the establishment of security and normalcy. But we
must not take that progress for granted. Although the
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain committed
to integration with the European Union, that has not
yet had an effect on the day-to-day political climate,
in which some political figures are all too ready to
use irresponsible rhetoric and seem predominantly
concerned with maintaining their positions. The risk is
that that divisiveness and a sense of unease about the
future of the country will slowly seep into the fabric
of society. As we all know, many people have left over
the past five years, including more than 100,000 young

18-138353/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

people, because of that insecurity. We should not forget
the risks of nationalism and extremism on all sides,
combined with a growing sense of socioeconomic
stagnation in the country. It is for that reason that
I believe that the international community needs
to urgently increase its efforts aimed at promoting
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
region. The United Nations, along with others, is well
placed to play a prominent role in such efforts.
Beyond that, there needs to be a change in the way
in which politics are conducted within the country. That
change needs to come from the politicians themselves,
but, as an international community — individually and
collectively — we have an interest in encouraging that
change. To begin with, in the current environment, we
need to maintain all of the tools at our disposal to prevent
any further deterioration of the situation. I am thinking
here about the civilian and military executive mandates.
I also believe that we should be ready to be more
prescriptive about the reforms that are needed to take
the country forward, and more ready to respond against
words and actions by leading political figures when
they risk further destabilizing the political and security
environment. Lastly, I appeal to everyone as part of the
international community to be united in our approach
and coordinated in our efforts. After all, we share the
same goal: a sovereign, united and decentralized — but
also stable and functional — Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
believe that we all want to see Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a shining example of tolerance and trust where the
traditional common life of all cultures, nations and
citizens is possible.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his
enlightening briefing and precise commentary on the
latest developments.
More than 20 years after a murderous conflict
and the Dayton Peace Agreement, signed in Paris,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a turning point in its
history. Indeed, we are awaiting the announcement
of parliamentary elections for October. The elected
authorities will have the task of paving the way towards
European integration in the years to come. I would
4/22

08/05/2018

like to underscore three points that merit our special
attention before that crucial election deadline.
First, unity in the country is most essential. The
comments by political leaders on the division of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the glorification of war criminals and
anything that contributes to a resurgence of violence are
irresponsible behaviours. We urge all political actors to
refrain from stoking hatred and stirring up the ghosts
of the past. Priority must be given to strengthening
the country’s central institutions as a prerequisite for
building up the rule of law. We therefore call for respect
for the decisions of the institutions mentioned in the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, in particular
the Constitutional Court. Res judicata decisions must
be implemented as soon as possible in a spirit of
compromise, including on electoral matters.
Secondly, I would like to address reforms. Given that
resolution 2384 (2017) was adopted in November 2017,
France calls on the political parties to agree on a reform
of the electoral law, which is a necessary precursor to
the implementation of the election results. Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political stability is at stake. In addition
to electoral reform, we regret the slowdown of reforms
during 2017. The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are calling more than ever for the implementation of
social and economic reforms that will contribute to
the country’s development and regional integration.
Judicial reforms are also expected, at a time when
Europe is attaching the utmost importance to fighting
corruption and organized crime. The enlargement
package published by the European Commission on
17 April focuses precisely on the reforms that are
needed in the socioeconomic and rule-of-law areas.
Thirdly, despite a fragile situation and the numerous
challenges, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a horizon
towards which to move: European integration. France
associates itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union. We are pleased to see
that Bosnia and Herzegovina is unanimous on European
integration. It is not only the institutions — from
the Presidency to the cantons and entities — that are
calling for an integration process into the European
Union, but, above all, the women and men of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. They are the ones who want to join
the Europe of the peoples that we are building, day after
day. The European Union will continue to support the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that respect,
the European Union military Operation Althea will
continue its work by adapting, as closely as possible,
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

to the developments in the security situation on the
ground in order to enable the Bosnian security forces
to act autonomously.
I mentioned at the outset that we are at a turning
point in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such
a moment requires political courage — the courage
to face situations that some say are unsolvable and
challenges that are perceived as insurmountable.
As at every turning point in its history, Bosnia and
Herzegovina can count on the support of France.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first open meeting of the Security Council
under the presidency of Poland, I am pleased to reaffirm
the full support of my delegation and wish you, Madam
President, every success in your endeavours. We would
also like to thank you, Madam, for your kind words on
the Peruvian presidency. We appreciate the convening of
this debate, as well as the important briefing delivered
by High Representative Valentin Inzko.
Peru recognizes the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
validity of the 1995 General Framework Agreement
for Peace. It is an agreement that, with the support of
the international community, lays the foundation for
stability and the maintenance of peace in the country,
and has important implications for the region. We note
with concern the limited progress on the implementation
of the 5+2 agenda required to close the Office of the
High Representative and consolidate the State in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In view of that, and given the
forthcoming general elections scheduled for October,
we would like to highlight the need to make progress on
two lines of action that we believe are essential to build
sustainable peace.
First, I will speak on the rule of law and
institution-building. We appreciate the efforts to
comply with the decisions of the Constitutional Court
to amend the regulatory framework of the various levels
of Government. However, we are concerned about the
lack of action on the legislative developments required
to reform the electoral law and the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We believe that those are necessary to ensure
inclusive elections and effectively fight corruption
and organized crime. There are also concerns about
violations of the law on the temporary prohibition
of the disposal of State property and the continued
existence of provisions on the celebration of the Day

S/PV. 8248

of the Republic of Serbia. We believe that the decisions
of the Constitutional Court must be fully implemented.
Secondly, I will address political dialogue,
moderation and agreement. We believe that sustaining
peace requires building a common vision of the future
by and for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
understood as values of their society. Peru encourages
greater engagement of women and youth in the national
political process, including in the upcoming general
elections. We consider it urgent to overcome the
paralysis of the Parliamentary Assembly, which has
been impeding the necessary reforms to guarantee the
smooth running of the State.
We are particularly concerned about belligerent
rhetoric, which is exacerbated by the election campaign,
questioning of the State authority, secessionist threats
and increased arms purchases by law enforcement.
Such actions increase the feeling of instability.
Political leaders have the primary responsibility of
building sustainable peace. That involves rejecting
hate speech and the glorification of war criminals
and, to the contrary, setting an example of moderation
and commitment to the complex and delicate process
of reconciliation.
In conclusion, we would like to underline the
importance of full cooperation between the parties
and the High Representative and the European Union
Operation Althea, to whom we would like to reiterate
Peru’s full support in the implementation of their
respective mandates.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We congratulate
the Republic of Poland most warmly for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and cordially
wish you, Madam President, great success in all your
endeavours, especially during your stewardship of this
main organ dedicated to ensuring global peace and
security. We also commend you, Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka and your team for choosing very timely and
critical issues for consideration on this month’s agenda.
We look forward to the deliberations resulting in greater
awareness and action.
We thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for
his briefing and update on the recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ambassador Miloš Vukašinović, to the Chamber.
Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to the territorial

18-138355/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country. We have witnessed substantial progress
in the country in different fields; however, there are a
number of issues that remain unresolved.
The country is preparing for it general elections
in October. As such, the efforts of all parties must
be focused on the earliest possible adoption of the
election law. We call on the leaders of the two entities
to implement the Peace Agreement and observe all
provisions and procedures that are integral components
of that settlement, including the rulings of the
Constitutional Court.
We very much welcome the meeting held in March
between the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia. The political will
of the leaders of neighbouring countries is the most
effective instrument available to promote dialogue and
trust among the parties. My delegation welcomes the
positive ongoing dialogue among the Governments,
including regular high-level contacts, and we sincerely
encourage the parties to carry them forward.
Unfortunately, there has been in an increase in
political tensions inside the country, accompanied
by provocative and aggressive rhetoric by certain
representatives of the parties. That type of
communication obviously affects negatively the political
climate before the elections, overall stability and
security, as well as the social and economic dimensions
that impact the quality of life of the local population. In
that regard, we encourage all political actors, as well as
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to resolve
all disputes. We believe that should be done through
the established legal processes, constructive dialogue
and within the existing constitutional framework. We
urge all the parties to act in accordance with the Peace
Agreement, and also to abide by their commitment to
cooperate fully with all the institutions involved in the
implementation of this peace settlement.
My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to call on all parties to resolve pending
issues, which present a challenge to respect for human
rights and for democratic institutions, inter alia by
ensuring further implementation of the adopted reforms
with a sharp focus on good governance and the rule of
law. That must also include combating corruption and
organized crime and preventing terrorism and violent
extremism. At the same time, we need to address any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary required for
6/22

08/05/2018

its de-politicization, impartiality and independence,
including the prosecution of war crimes.
On other tracks, efforts must also be focused
on greater fiscal responsibility and sustainability,
strengthening the Parliamentary Assembly and
developing media and broadcasting communication.
The question of returning refugees and displaced
persons, together with the issues related to their
resettlement, should be addressed as well. We also
would like to underline that the engagement of civil
society organizations and the participation of women
and youth are critical for building intercommunal trust
and confidence.
Finally, we encourage the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome narrow political interests and
to make meaningful progress towards implementing
commitments on economic and governance reforms.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month.
I would like to thank the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his very frank update
on the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
greatly appreciate the work of the Office of the High
Representative to help the country to achieve greater
peace and prosperity and to strengthen security and
stability in the region.
The United States affirms its strong support
for the mandate of the High Representative as the
final authority under the Dayton Peace Accords on
the civilian implementation of the agreement. We
thank him for his dedicated service and express our
firm commitment to uphold the Dayton Accords,
maintaining the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and promoting continued
Euro-Atlantic integration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s commitment to EuroAtlantic values remains critical. Both NATO and the
European Union (EU) have indicated that their doors
remain open if Bosnia and Herzegovina fulfils its
responsibilities under the Dayton Peace Accords, and
if the country is willing to do the hard work to meet
its standards for membership. The United States urges
further progress towards integration with both NATO
and the EU, which will require stronger political resolve
and dedication.
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

We commend the continued work of the EU-led
Operation Althea and of NATO to promote security
and capacity-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
recognize the authorities’ handover of answers to the
European Commission questionnaire in February and
view it as an important step towards the country’s
integration with Europe. Nonetheless, the United
States is concerned about the recent uptick in divisive,
nationalist rhetoric in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
threatens to exacerbate divisions and conflict, the
exact opposite of what the Dayton Peace Accords and
subsequent reform efforts set out to achieve. We urge
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to embrace key
political, socioeconomic and electoral reforms and
work to enhance the rule of law, tackle corruption and
improve the overall political climate in the country for
the benefit of all its citizens.
Looking ahead to the general elections in October,
we urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt and implement
electoral reforms, especially those addressing the socalled Ljubić ruling. Those reforms are vital to the
holding of free, fair and transparent elections, and to
maintaining the stability that the country has worked so
hard to achieve. Without those reforms it may be much
more difficult to form a Government after the elections,
which will complicate efforts to build a secure stable
and prosperous future for the country. We share many
of the concerns voiced by the High Representative in
his report on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2017/922,
annex), including those actions that could weaken the
rule of law, such as destabilizing rhetoric from political
leaders that allude to a break-up of the State and
hypothetical comments about future war. The Council
must remain alert to actions and rhetoric that seek to
undermine and threaten the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its two entities
and three constituent peoples.
The United States looks forward to a time
when Bosnia and Herzegovina’s status satisfies the
objectives and conditions for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative, as established by the Peace
Implementation Council. When that day comes, we
will be able to say with confidence that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has fully implemented its responsibilities
under the Dayton Peace Accords and is irreversibly
on course for European integration. Until then, we
encourage the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the international community, to support
the reforms needed to reach that milestone and to

S/PV. 8248

maintain their commitment to the Office of the High
Representative as it works to ensure the success of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report concerning the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/416, annex). We would like to affirm our
support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would like to welcome the positive developments
demonstrated by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
reporting period, including the progress on the country’s
European Union (EU) accession process. We believe
that progress is testament to the country’s commitment
to the EU integration process, with a far-reaching,
long-term and positive contribution to the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We are
also encouraged by the continued exchange of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders of the countries
in the region, which, in our view, would strengthen
good neighbourly relations and enhance cooperation
in the Western Balkans. In that regard, the trilateral
meeting undertaken by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia
is commendable. We encourage the continuation of
such high-level engagement in future.
We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that undermine the political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, we
take note of the divisive rhetoric and actions that continue
to challenge the constitutional order and integrity of
the State-level judiciary system in the country. In that
regard, we call upon all authorities and political leaders
to fully respect the decision of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respecting the rule
of law and the authority of State institutions, which
are established under the Dayton Peace Accords, is
fundamental for the State-building process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is therefore important that all
parties refrain from any provocative statements or
actions that could undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, cohesion and constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
We also take note of the continued disagreement
concerning changes to the electoral law in Bosnia and

18-138357/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Herzegovina. We believe that this issue must be handled
very wisely, as it has the potential to affect not only the
formation of Government after the next election cycle
but also the continuity and stability of the country. It is
our hope that the ruling of the Constitutional Court on
reviewing the country’s election law will be implemented
in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. We also encourage parties
to undertake serious political dialogue to address the
differences surrounding the issue of electoral reform,
which would be particularly relevant considering that a
general election will be held this year.
In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his Office in discharging
their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We call on
the parties to extend the cooperation that is vital to the
work of the High Representative. We also recognize the
essential role played by the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in
maintaining safety and stability in the country.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Madam, we wish
you the best of luck during your presidency, and you
can count on our full support in your work this month.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Peru
for its excellent stewardship of the Council in April,
both here in New York and during the Council’s visits
abroad in April.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.
Like others before me, I thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his briefing and his work.
Today I will focus on three issues: first, the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, secondly, the rule
of law and thirdly, the country’s future prospects.
With regard to my first point, about the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, since the Dayton
Peace Agreement was signed, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have worked hard to create a peaceful and
prosperous country and have done so with the strong
support of the international community. While progress
has been made, we share the High Representative’s
concerns about the current political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The divisive speech and actions of
political leaders are negatively affecting the country’s
governance, cohesiveness and reforms. In the present
8/22

08/05/2018

circumstances, we believe that the High Representative
and his Office remain essential.
That brings me to my second point, one that our
Peruvian colleague also highlighted just now, which
is that we are concerned about attempts to undermine
the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Attempts to
delay necessary amendments to the criminal procedure
code and the law establishing the Intelligence and
Security Agency are hindering the fight against
corruption and the sharing of intelligence, including
with international partners. We call on the Council
of Ministers and Parliament to pass the required
amendments without delay.
My third and final point relates to the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support its Euro-Atlantic
integration as a means to ensure the future prosperity
and security of its people and the region. It is crucial
that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders step
up their implementation of the reforms needed to
make progress towards that integration. Ensuring that
electoral reforms are in place should be the first step. A
constitutional crisis in October must be avoided.
In conclusion, in January the Secretary-General
urged European leaders to show that the continent can
live up to its ideals of shared prosperity and peaceful
coexistence. The general elections in October in Bosnia
and Herzegovina create an opportunity for its political
leaders to show their commitment to those ideals. We
strongly encourage them to grasp that opportunity and
put future before past, reform before stagnation and
unity before divisiveness.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to congratulate you, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and to wish you success in your duties.
We have carefully studied the report of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/416), which was once again issued belatedly and
just before the start of today’s meeting. We would once
again like to point out the importance of complying
with the time frame for submitting it to the Council.
We are compelled to note that like its predecessors, the
text has a certain anti-Serbian tone, suffers from biased
and politicized conclusions and does not provide an
objective picture of the situation in the country.
Republika Srpska is once again being blamed for
literally all of the current difficulties afflicting the
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

process of achieving the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, which is
particularly surprising, for the major political crisis that
has overtaken the Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As before, the selection of evidence
in support of the report’s assertions is unbalanced
and frequently based on unverified information. As a
result, the real situation in the country is distorted and
false impressions are created. That applies particularly
to the celebration on 9 January of Republika Srpska
Day, which took place in accordance with a law
enacted in October 2016 that the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not object to at the
time. The report’s concerns about the modernization
of automatic weapons that the Republika Srpska police
are equipped with are also difficult to understand.
The process is being conducted in full compliance
with the laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has
been acknowledged, incidentally, by the Europeanled force responsible for security in the country. For
some reason, the report does not mention the fact that
similar replacement programmes for outdated police
weapons are also being carried out in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Federation.
We were baffled by the so-called concern expressed
in the new report about the March pilgrimage tour
to Orthodox and historic sites in Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina by the Night Wolves multinational
motorcycle club, which is dragged in inappropriate
references to unilateral United States sanctions and
Ukrainian issues. The Night Wolves always coordinate
their events with law-enforcement bodies and have
been conducting regular tours of European countries,
with purely humanitarian intentions, for several years
now. The primary aim is to pay tribute to the memory
of our great forebears who defeated fascism during
the Second World War. By the way, Victory Day is
celebrated in Europe today and tomorrow in Russia and
the countries of the former Soviet Union.
We call on the High Representative to focus his
efforts on implementing the 5+2 plan, which should
have remained his top priority. Regrettably, in practice
he has focused on other issues that have nothing to do
with his mandate. It is strange to hear his say publicly
that there should be less Dayton and more Brussels
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an overly free
interpretation of his mandate, to put it mildly. The result
is that we have an obvious impasse in implementing the
5+2 plan.

S/PV. 8248

In that regard, we support the principle of
transferring all responsibility for the current processes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the local authorities and
further reducing the budget and personnel of the Office
of the High Representative with the aim of closing it
in accordance with the existing conditions and criteria.
We see no reason for any executive role for the Office.
The time for this special instrument is over.
In the Bosnian leadership’s view, the current internal
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is experiencing the
worst systemic political crisis of the post-Dayton period
both at the State level and in the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, reaching a point of paralysis in the
normal functioning of Government bodies. At its heart
is a rupture in relations of trust and cooperation among
the three constituent peoples of the Federation whose
depth is worse than at any time since the end of the
period of armed conflict. There are serious fears for the
inviolability of one of the key, foundational premises
of the Dayton Agreement — equality. That is a major
concern, since we believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has no viable alternative to the Dayton framework.
The Dayton algorithm is also fully applicable to
the most serious practical problem, which is reform of
the Federation’s election laws. The key event in Bosnia
and Herzegovina this year is the upcoming general
elections in October. That expression of the people’s
will should be fair, free and independent, including
free from foreign interference, and should reflect the
interests of all the country’s peoples.
The role of the international community in internal
Bosnian affairs needs particular attention. The main
function of foreign participation should be to encourage
the processes of genuine national reconciliation and the
strengthening of mutual understanding and cooperation
among all the peoples living in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the past few months, unfortunately, we have seen our
partners take a number of steps aimed at interfering
directly in the work of the Bosnian authorities, of
which the most revealing is the pressure that has been
put on the Bosnia and Herzegovina High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council to change decisions that do not
meet certain external expectations. Regrettably, with
regard to reform of the election laws, the international
mediators also deliberately favour one side, which
cannot contribute to establishing the necessary climate
of trust.

18-138359/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The activity of the semi-clandestine so-called Bern
process in Sarajevo initiated by a group of States last
year is not part of any coordinated efforts. As far as
we know, the agenda of that closed diplomatic club
includes issues related to broad constitutional reform of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which come under the Dayton
Agreement. By the way, representatives from the
Office of the High Representative took part in the work
on that so-called process, but we were not officially
informed. There is no information about it in the report.
It is hardly likely that this kind of factionalism in the
international community can benefit the common goals
of strengthening peace, stability and security in the
country and the region. We must be united if we truly
want that for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the context of procedural issues, apart from the
importance of submitting the report on time, we would
also like to draw attention to the extract it contains
from the final communiqué of the December meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
in Sarajevo, which was not adopted by consensus.
In future, we would request that in such cases it be
compulsory for the reports to include the relevant
references to the particular positions of the States
members of the Steering Board. We would also like to
propose to Council members and anyone else who wants
to that they study the alternative report on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina prepared by Republika
Srpska. It contains useful information on a number of
issues, including the outside funding for a number of
media outlets in Bosnia and Herzegovina that position
themselves as so-called independent sources.
Russia intends to continue to consistently contribute
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which still has significant
positive potential, and to strengthen its constructive
bilateral cooperation with the country. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has every chance of becoming a place for
successful political, economic and cultural cooperation
for the broadest possible range of participants. We hope
that those chances can become a reality through our
joint efforts.
Mr. Djedje (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
Poland’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May, and to assure you of
Côte d’Ivoire’s support, as we had already begun
to do yesterday during our important discussion on
children and armed conflict. In any case, we wish you
10/22

08/05/2018

every success for the month of May. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
the quality of his briefing on the situation in that country.
In speaking for the first time on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, I would like to inform the
High Representative that he has the full support of
Côte d’Ivoire for his mandate in implementing the
Dayton Peace Agreement of 14 December 1995. That
Agreement has been the cornerstone of the work of the
international community in providing the country with
a multiethnic, multi-faith and multicultural framework.
Like the High Representative, my country is pleased
to note that Bosnia and Herzegovina has submitted to the
European Commission the answers to the questionnaire
necessary for the review of its candidacy for membership
in the European Union. That act demonstrates, if it
were needed, the Bosnian authorities’ ability to make
the necessary efforts and essential reforms, particularly
in the areas of the rule of law, fundamental rights and
judicial independence, in order to complete the cycle
of political and socioeconomic change in their country.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Bosnian authorities have adopted the necessary
legislative measures to resume cooperation with the
International Monetary Fund.
Despite the hopes raised by the points that I have
just highlighted, Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned
about the ongoing political tensions in the country,
which, if we are not careful, could undermine the
gains of the Dayton Agreement. My delegation is
particularly concerned about the statements of the
leaders of Republika Srpska calling for secession
from Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire calls on all political actors in the country to
focus on development priorities, particularly economic
and social, and to refrain from being drawn into the
rhetoric of division, which could threaten the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also urge all
stakeholders to redouble their efforts and to undertake
the fundamental reforms to ensure that the elections to
be held in October are fully democratic.
My delegation remains deeply concerned that the
Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina has not dealt
with the shortcomings of several provisions of the
criminal procedure code to combat organized crime and
corruption. In that regard, we encourage the Parliament
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertake the appropriate
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

reforms with a view to tackling the economic, social
and security challenges facing the country today. My
country also urges the political authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to guarantee for their citizens the
establishment of the rule of law in order to prevent
situations of impunity in a country in search of national
reconciliation and in which all communities are called
on to live together in peace and harmony.
We encourage the international community to
remain alert with respect to the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which remains fragile. The Security
Council must be aware at all times of any difficulties
that the High Representative may face in the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord, which
is key not just to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability
but to that of the Balkan region as a whole. We call
on all Bosnian political groups to reject dangerous
rhetoric and to use dialogue in order to find peaceful
solutions to the differences between the country’s
different communities. We also encourage Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s neighbours to combine their efforts to
promote lasting peace there.
Finally, like other countries, Côte d’Ivoire would
like to express its commitment to the unity, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a fully functional and independent State.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As active members of the Group of Friends
for Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality, we
are very pleased to see you presiding over the Security
Council for the month of May, Madam President, and to
congratulate you on convening this important meeting.
I would also like to salute Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for a very active and successful presidency during the
month of April. We thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
report on the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/416, annex).
Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement
in 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made significant
progress towards peacebuilding and achieving an
equitable economy and sustainable development
for all its citizens. Indeed, according to Mr. Inzko’s
report, significant progress has been made over the
past six months with respect to the country’s plans to
join the European Union and NATO. A foreign policy
strategy has also been agreed for the next five years,

S/PV. 8248

as has a strategy for developing and implementating
plans to strengthen the country’s economy, reform its
institutions and reduce unemployment. In particular,
we would like to highlight the trilateral meeting in
March between the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
and its counterparts from its neighbours Croatia and
Serbia, which we understand will be repeated in the
near future. All these developments are signs that there
is a common vision for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Equatorial Guinea hopes that this important vision
and progress can be maintained and strengthened
so that it can help to foster lasting national unity,
which will cement Bosnia and Herzegovina’s role
in the Balkans, Europe and the world. That is why
we would like to express our deep concern about the
continuing divisive and inflammatory rhetoric of
political leaders from all political groups, and on many
occasions for ethnic reasons. Such behaviour puts
all the aforementioned achievements in jeopardy and
hinders the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
the preparations for the elections scheduled for October
and the process of institutional reforms needed to
facilitate peaceful elections, ensure that the results of
the elections are implemented, support decision-making
in State institutions to protect and strengthen the rule of
law, secure lasting peace and development and continue
efforts to contain and eliminate crime, corruption,
violent extremism and terrorism.
I would like to express our appreciation for the
commitment of the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina and emphasize our support for his
mandate and efforts to assist in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. We also appreciate the work
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
supporting and facilitating all of these processes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the work of the High
Representative and the United Nations country team.
We share the High Representative’s view that
elected officials have a responsibility to contribute to
peace and reconciliation. October’s elections will be a
turning point in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I would like to see the political and ethnic divisions
between Serbs, Bosnians and Croats set aside before
the election season and national interests taking
precedence over any other self-interest, for the benefit
of the country and the people, including refugees and
displaced persons. Equatorial Guinea stands ready
to work with the international community to achieve

18-1383511/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on taking up the presidency of the Security
Council, and we wish you every success. I also wish
to thank High Representative Inzko and his team for
their objective and detailed reports and their continued
efforts to support the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have the United Kingdom’s full and
constant support.
I would agree with my French colleague that
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains at a crossroads today.
In the six months since we last met (see S/PV.8089),
there has been some small, incremental progress in
terms of reform and in reaching at least two significant
milestones. And yet the vestiges of division continue
to mar that progress and to prevent Bosnia and
Herzegovina from reaching the potential its citizens
deserve. I will briefly touch on those two milestones.
First, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) issued its final judgments in
November and transferred responsibility to the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals
at the end of the year. We recognize the Tribunal’s
achievements, including the first instance conviction of
former wartime commander Ratko Mladić of genocide
and crimes against humanity. Although Mladić’s
conviction will not bring back the thousands who
lost their lives, it demonstrates that the architects of
suffering will be held to account, giving others around
the world hope that there can be justice for appalling
human rights abuses.
The Tribunal has accumulated a wealth of practical
knowledge and experience over the 24 years it has
been operating, and it is important that the lessons
learned are shared with other international criminal
courts and tribunals. It has done ground-breaking work
to investigate, prosecute and convict perpetrators of
wartime sexual violence. I would like to echo the report
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in welcoming
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s initiatives to integrate
women and peace and security in counter-terrorism
and countering violent-extremism issues through the
development of national and local action plans. The
United Kingdom encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina
to continue and intensify its efforts on this positive
12/22

08/05/2018

trajectory. It is a matter for regret that some political
leaders have disputed the rulings of the Tribunal and
the decisions of domestic war crimes chambers in the
region and have even made inflammatory remarks
about a return to conflict. I agree with my American
colleague that we should condemn such rhetoric, which
privileges the pursuit of political advantage ahead of
the pursuit of justice for victims and a peaceful future
for all.
Secondly, Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted its
European Union (EU) questionnaire earlier this year. We
commend that achievement, which is not insignificant
given the complexities of the system being assessed.
But we have been disappointed to see only limited
commitment to the difficult but essential reforms that
underlie the political commitment to becoming an EU
member State. Now that the questionnaire has been
submitted, Bosnia and Herzegovina must demonstrate
its commitment to upholding the rule of law and
implementing agreed reforms. Among these, as my
Dutch colleague has already highlighted today, there is
an urgent need to amend the provisions of the criminal
procedure code on special investigative measures in
order to comply with the Constitutional Court decision
of June 2017 and align with international standards.
Failure to do so would seriously undermine the fight
against corruption and organized crime and put
international cooperation and the security of partner
countries in jeopardy.
As the High Representative noted, 2018 will also
be a significant year for Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
elections expected in October. However, amendments
to the electoral law are necessary so that the results
of those elections can be implemented. If political
leaders fail to agree to those amendments, the entire
country will be exposed to an unnecessary and
serious risk. Political leaders must demonstrate their
ability to compromise on a solution without further
delay and move towards European standards. As
elections approach, we see an opportunity for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to focus on the future, not the past.
Divisive nationalist rhetoric demeans those who use it
and does a disservice to the people and the country as
a whole. The United Kingdom encourages the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to demonstrate
to their people and the European Union that they are
committed to building a better and more secure future
for them and their children.
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The consequences of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
divisive politics are easy to see. Huge numbers of
young people leave every year in search of the political
stability and employment opportunities that they are
denied at home. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
deserve better. As a long-standing friend of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the United Kingdom will continue to
stand in solidarity alongside those who want a better,
more prosperous and stable future for the country even
as it pursues Euro-Atlantic integration.
The United Kingdom’s hosting of the Western
Balkans Summit of the Berlin Process in London this
summer is a signal of that solidarity and commitment.
We also remain committed to Operation Althea and the
High Representative, including the use of Bonn powers,
if the situation requires, until stability and security are
firmly entrenched.
Ms. Córdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to Mr. Valentin Inzko,
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his report (S/2018/416, annex).
We commend the positive political and economic
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the
previous review period, in particular the adoption of
special tax laws and the approval on 9 February of
the second disbursement of funds under the Extended
Fund Facility. We also welcome the trilateral meeting
held in March between the Presidencies of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. We highlight the
approval of the State budget for 2018 and the foreign
policy strategy for the next five years, as well as the
progress made in the fight against money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. Those efforts demonstrate
the commitment of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continuing to undertake the reforms
needed to promote the country’s stability and contribute
to the initiatives aimed at achieving the development
and stability they desire. We therefore encourage them
to focus on those aspects and to intensify their efforts
to implement the 5+2 agenda as a prerequisite for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Despite the progress that has been made, challenges
remain in the political environment. The elections will
take place in October and we believe it is important that
political leaders take consensual action on electoral
changes so that the elections can be properly conducted.
In that connection, we call on Council members to
work together in an inclusive environment, respecting

S/PV. 8248

the Dayton Agreement, which continues to be the legal
basis and benchmark for stability and the peaceful
settlement of differences between the parties. Those
challenges could ultimately destabilize the country
and threaten the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore urge all political
leaders to put the interests of their people before their
ethnic political interests.
Bolivia would like to reiterate its commitment to
the full respect of the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
regard, we stress that in order to preserve those elements,
its Constitution and the decisions of the judiciary with
regard to the rule of law must be respected. We also
call on political leaders and all parties to refrain from
using nationalist rhetoric that foments divisions in the
country. We hope that Operation Althea and the Office
of the High Representative will continue to cooperate
closely and will play a constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina within
the framework of their mandate.
Lastly, we stress that we encourage the entire
population of Bosnia and Herzegovina to live together
in harmony, overcoming the divisions of the past and
putting shared development first. In that regard, we urge
the international community to address the concerns
of all stakeholders with an impartial and equitable
approach, in the interests of lasting stability.
Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, the delegation of Kuwait would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. We wish you every
success and would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Peru for its success during its
presidency for the month of April.
I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his very useful briefing and his most recent report
(S/2018/416, annex) on the implementation of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Peace Agreement. We would
like to assure him of our full support for his work in
implementing his mandate and his efforts to help the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina deal with their
many challenges.
We welcome the positive developments that have
occurred, including the implementation of various
commitments such as Euro-Atlantic integration,
the response to the European questionnaire and the

18-1383513/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

adoption of a fiscal law, which will be finalized as
soon as the International Monetary Fund concludes
its consideration of the law. All these efforts will help
the country implement the necessary reforms that will
enable it to join the European Union.
Two decades after its signing, the Framework Peace
Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina remains the
cornerstone of the country’s institutional stability and
a stable framework for ensuring lasting peace. We are
concerned about the fact that the report cites a number
of challenges related to the peace agreement during the
period covered, particularly statements inciting hatred
and divisive rhetoric. We urge all of the country’s
political leaders to prioritize the national interests of
the Bosnian people and to reject narrow ethnic interests
that undermine stability and unity. In that regard, we
urge all political leaders to place national interests
above any other consideration and to rise above narrow
political and ethnic interests that would undermine the
chances for progress and stability, and we call them
to engage in serious political consultations to discuss
reforms proposed to the electoral law and the Criminal
Procedural Code in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to
avoid a potential serious political crisis in the country.
These developments are taking place at the same
time that we are seeing limited progress towards the
implementation of the 5+2 plan, which has hindered
the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
in particular with regard to the registration of military
assets, as mentioned in the report (S/2018/416,
annex). Kuwait fully supports the Office of the High
Representative, in accordance with the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, and calls on the High Representative to step
up his efforts to ensure the full implementation of the
5+2 plan.
Lastly, Kuwait would like to reaffirm the importance
of respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its Constitution and all the
decisions issued by the courts, which should be upheld
by all the parties concerned in order to strengthen
stability in the country. We call on all stakeholders
to tackle the challenges they are facing and to pool
their efforts to ensure the full implementation of the
5+2 plan.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Let me begin by joining
others in congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
14/22

08/05/2018

month of May. We look forward to working closely with
you, Madam, and your team in the coming weeks. Let me
also express my appreciation for the clear and insightful
briefing presented today by the High Representative,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. He can rely on Sweden’s full and
continued support for his important efforts in support
of Bosnia and Herzegovina going forward.
Sweden aligns itself with a statement to be delivered
later on behalf of the European Union (EU).
In October of last year, the Council of the European
Union reiterated, once again, its unequivocal commitment
to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU perspective. Central to
that perspective is its commitment to the EU integration
process and the reform agenda. Unfortunately, the pace
of reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina has stalled since
last year, yielding only very modest results. It is now
crucial that adequate reform of the electoral law take
place in order for elections to happen in October and for
their results to be implemented. We regret that, so far,
there seems to be no real desire to reach a compromise
on that issue.
The implementation of the reform agenda must
be stepped up urgently to put necessary reforms
back on track, with an emphasis on the rule of law
and socioeconomic development. That is essential
for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as high
unemployment and widespread corruption are
contributing to a worrying trend of young, educated
people leaving the country.
The security situation on the ground remains
relatively calm and stable; nonetheless, there are
worrying developments. The recurring use of separatist,
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric threatens the integrity
and unity of the country. We call on all parties to refrain
from engaging in ethnically motivated disputes and
agendas. Political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
must live up to their responsibility in that regard.
Sweden believes that a credible EU perspective,
based on conditionality and progress on own merits, is
one of the most powerful drivers for peace, stability and
prosperity in the Western Balkans. The future of the
region is closely interconnected with the future of the
rest of Europe. Joint challenges require joint solutions.
Therefore, we must strengthen our cooperation to meet
common challenges, such as organized crime, terrorism
and migration.
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

To move forward, the focus of our efforts should
be on the future and not on the past, both within
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in its relations with its
neighbours. Regional cooperation and reconciliation
are crucial for stability and progress in the region
and beyond. We support the Regional Cooperation
Council in its important work to strengthen good
neighbourly relations in the Western Balkans. To build
peaceful mutual understanding between the countries
of the region, cultural and social differences among
communities must be bridged, not least among children
and youth.
It is also essential to recognize and address the
scars of war for survivors. In that regard, sexual and
gender-based violence committed during the war must
be addressed. We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
national action plan on women and peace and security,
which should be implemented in an inclusive manner.
We acknowledge the need for discussions on the
reconfiguration of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We remain supportive of the idea of
phasing out the international presence in due course,
when the situation on the ground allows for it. However,
we do not believe that the current situation is sufficiently
stable for a drawing down at the present time.
Since the end of the war in 1995, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, supported by the international
community, not least the European Union, has been
on a journey to build a better future for all its people.
We will continue to support those efforts as Bosnia
and Herzegovina works towards realizing its European
perspective and building a country of prosperity, peace,
stability and equality for all.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I wish to congratulate Poland on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
China also wishes to thank High Representative Inzko
for his briefing.
China respects the sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the future of
their country. We support the peaceful coexistence of
different ethnicities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
their search for common development.
We welcome the efforts made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in promoting national reconciliation

S/PV. 8248

and economic and social development. We hope
that the country’s different ethnicities will be fully
and actively engaged in consolidating the progress
made in the political process and in society building,
seek consensus through dialogue and consultation,
resolve their differences by peaceful means and fully
implement the Dayton Peace Accord, so as to promote
greater development in all areas, which will enable
the different peoples of the country to truly enjoy the
peace dividend.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country in
the Balkans. Stable development and ethnic harmony
are in the common interests of the international
community and the countries of the region. The
international community should take a balanced and
prudent approach and pay special attention to and
accommodate the views of all the parties concerned,
so as to play a constructive role in helping the country
achieve national reconciliation and long-term stability
and development.
China welcomes the effort by High Representative
Inzko to advance the country’s political process. We
hope that, within the purview of his mandate, he will
play an active role in promoting the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We hope that the
European Union-led peacekeeping force will continue
to strengthen communication and cooperation with the
parties concerned and help the country achieve lasting
peace and stability.
China is ready to play its part, together with the rest
of the international community, in helping the country
truly achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Poland.
At the outset, let me thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing and state Poland’s strong support
for his Office, which we see as the guarantor of stability
of the post-Dayton achievements. We take note of his
report (S/2018/416, annex), which was presented today
before the Security Council, and share many concerns
expressed therein.
Since the very beginning, Poland has been actively
engaged in bringing about peace to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In 1991, Tadeusz Mazowiccki, the first
non-communist Polish Prime Minister, was appointed
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia. His reports on human

18-1383515/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

rights violations in the former Yugoslavia, containing,
inter alia, references to the Srebrenica massacre, played
a key role in the decision-making process regarding the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today we remain
vitally interested in the integrity and prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a volatile world, nothing
can be taken for granted, and today’s achievements
can easily dissipate if insufficient attention is given to
creating conditions for a sustainable future.
In that context, let me convey Poland’s belief that
staying on the path to European and Euro-Atlantic
integration remains the best hope for the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to enjoy quality of life in a stable
framework of shared values. Those values, however,
need to be put in practice in a consistent manner, which
requires effort and commitment, as well as a sense of
responsibility, on the part of governing elites. In that
regard, we must note with concern worrisome trends
that are undermining the achievements of the past 25
years. Divisive and destructive rhetoric is still being
heard from leading political figures, and the authority
of the legal framework and judicial institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to be openly flouted
in one part of the country in stark contravention of
international agreements.
Inclusivity, equality and participatory democracy
are at the core of European values. The rule of law
and its entrenchment are part of the conditions set
out in the European Union Western Balkans strategy.
Nevertheless, the decisions of both the European
Court of Human Rights and the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the electoral
law remain unenforced after many years, while recent
developments regarding the Criminal Procedure Code
threaten to cripple the State in combating organized
crime and corruption. Inclusivity and equal opportunity
for all take on particular importance with regard to
young people and women. Their participation in public
life and a sense of common destiny are essential for
the integrity of the social fabric. Access to quality
education and equal opportunities in the labour market
and public life are the most reliable foundations for
building future prosperity.
Let me conclude by stating once again Poland’s
interest in the European and Euro-Atlantic future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and our commitment to assist
with our experience.
16/22

08/05/2018

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Madam, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and wish you and your delegation every success.
We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his
fifty-third report (S/2018/416, annex) on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from
22 October 2017 to 21 April 2018.
Bosnia and Herzegovina further intensified its
efforts during the reporting period in the implementation
of the reform agenda and continued dynamic work in
implementing the socioeconomic reforms necessary for
integration into the European Union (EU). As a result
of continued and synchronized efforts at all levels to
finalize the answers to a comprehensive questionnaire
of the European Commission, the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina provided the answers to more than
3,000 questions, relating to the compatibility of the
country’s economic, legal and social systems with EU
standards, to the European Commission’s President,
Jean-Claude Juncker, on 28 February, thereby
reflecting its readiness to join the European Union. We
look forward to receiving the opinion of the European
Commission based on the answers to the questionnaire,
which we hope will be forthcoming soon. Pending the
results of the Commission’s analysis of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s readiness for accession to the EU, we
will continue the implementation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement.
We thank the European Union and its States members
for their strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
European path. For its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to work towards improvement in all areas,
including reforms, strengthening the rule of law and
good governance, thereby emphasizing the unwavering
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s membership
in the European Union.
One of the main priorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s foreign policy is the advancement of
friendly and constructive cooperation among the
countries of the region on issues of mutual interest.
That is why Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to pay
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

special attention to strengthening cooperation with
countries in the region. The countries of the Western
Balkans continue to hold regular meetings at the
highest levels that are generating a positive political
atmosphere. A recent significant meeting took place
on the 6 March, when members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina hosted a successful trilateral
meeting with President Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović of
Croatia and President Aleksandar Vučić of Serbia.
We recognize the Government of Bulgaria, which
holds the presidency of the Council of European Union
for the period from January to June of this year, for
organizing the summit of the EU and Western Balkans
leaders to be held in Sofia next week. That will be the
first summit of the EU and Western Balkans leaders
since the one held in Thessaloniki in 2003. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will actively participate in the summit in
Sofia. The Western Balkans Cooperation, within the
framework of the Berlin process, remains a crucial
driver for the integration of the region into the European
Union, as well as for cooperation and stability within
the region of the Western Balkans. We look forward to
actively participating in the upcoming summit, which
is expected to be held in London in July.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has intensified its efforts
in strengthening the rule of law in the following
key areas. During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan and the
strategy for prevention and combating terrorism for
the period from 2015 to 2020 is being implemented.
The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
continue to prosecute individuals involved in fighting
on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
facilitating the recruitment of terrorist fighters. It is
important to emphasize that the strategy, together with
security measures, includes preventive activities for
deradicalization undertaken by national stakeholders,
such as religious communities, educational institutions,
civil society organizations and the media.
Moreover, during the reporting period, Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s rule of law and security institutions
made progress in combating organized crime, human
trafficking, drugs, corruption and money laundering.
The action plan to address Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
deficiencies in anti-money-laundering regulations
has been implemented, and, in February, Bosnia and
Herzegovina was removed from the Financial Action

S/PV. 8248

Task Force’s list of high-risk third countries with
structural deficiencies in anti-money-laundering and
counter-terrorist financing.
With regard to processing war crimes before
domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that
fighting impunity is vital for Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a complex and multinational State. In that context,
implementing the national strategy for processing war
crimes, regardless of the national or religious origin of
perpetrators and victims, is essential for reconciliation
and long-term stability.
With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to stress that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy, like others in the region, has been affected by
global economic fluctuations. However, we are making
progress in establishing a functioning market economy
and furthering our economic growth. Economic growth
has been at 2.5 per cent on average annually over the
past five years. The number of registered unemployed
persons in 2017 dropped by 6.9 per cent, as compared
to a decline of 3.9 per cent in 2016. Nevertheless, the
youth unemployment rate is still over 50 per cent. Job
creation for youth and the creation of a legal framework
to improve the business environment will remain
priorities in the economic reform programme in the
upcoming period.
The international migrant crisis continues to pose
a substantial challenge to the States of the region and
their economies. During the second half of 2017, Bosnia
and Herzegovina experienced a significant increase
in refugees and migrants, most of whom crossed the
border in an irregular manner. Arrivals have continued
this year, which temporarily exceeded Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s accommodation capacity in January.
In that context, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities have undertaken a set of comprehensive
measures, including in the humanitarian and security
areas. Bosnia and Herzegovina is implementing its
strategy in the area of migration and asylum, along
with its plan of action for the period of 2016-2020. The
document has specified the Bosnia and Herzegovina
policy in the area of migration and asylum in accordance
with the highest European and international standards.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has in place a migration
coordination body led by the Ministry of Security,
which has been closely reviewing the evolving context
of the refugee and migrant situation in the country

18-1383517/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and planning further action in coordination with the
Council of Ministers.
The European Union-led Operation Althea has been
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for many years. It is
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has had respectable and fruitful cooperation with
Operation Althea, particularly in the capacitybuilding and training of the armed forces of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We wish the new Commander of the
European Union Force, Major General Martin Dorfer,
every success in further strengthening cooperation
with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute to
international peace and security by providing its military
and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Presently, we have 42 personnel serving in
United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for its
citizens. At the same time, we would also like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania and Liechtenstein align themselves with
this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin lnzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union’s
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.
I recall my delegation stating a year ago (see
S/PV.8089) that 2016 had been a very good year for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, both in terms of reforms and
progress towards European integration. Unfortunately,
the same cannot be said for 2017. Early electoral
campaigning, divisive rhetoric and delayed, if not
stalled, reforms have too often occupied the main
headlines. But 2018 does not have to continue that cycle.
Recent developments — ranging from the submission
of the replies to the EU Commission questionnaire, the
adoption of excise legislation or the removal of Bosnia
18/22

08/05/2018

and Herzegovina from the list of countries under the
Grey List of the Financial Action Task Force — show
that results can be obtained if Government coalition
partners focus on improving the lives of citizens and
delivering reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made clear its desire to
become a member of the European Union. That strategic
commitment from the country’s institutions and leaders
should be followed up by concrete reforms, for which
there is substantial EU support. Strengthening the rule
of law and fighting corruption and organized crime are
key for advancing the socioeconomic situation in the
country and EU rapprochement.
We are now approaching the end of the current
legislature. The implementation of the reform agenda has
delivered mixed results. Elections have been officially
announced today to be held on 7 October. Official
election campaigning will start. The real question for
the election campaign is what new proposals on putting
into action the reform agenda the new Government
will put forward after the October elections. That is
an opportunity political leaders should seize to show
both their citizens and EU member States their concrete
proposals to take forward reforms and improve the lives
of citizens.
Bosnia and Herzegovina today still has a gross
domestic product per capita lower than in the 1980s.
The percentage of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s citizens
born in the country and living abroad is the highest in
Europe, including the Western Balkans. Emigration of
talented young people continues unabated. That brain
drain puts a mortgage on the country’s future.
(spoke in French)
It has often been said that to govern is to write
prose, and to conduct an election campaign is to
declaim poetry. What the election campaign needs,
however, is prose that looks to the future and puts
forward a political agenda for concrete progress. The
glorification of war criminals found guilty by an
international court, playing the secessionist card or
glossing over rearmament, all such rhetoric from the
past simply has no place in the electoral campaign
of a European country aspiring to join the European
Union. Despite a relatively calm security situation, in
that politically charged context, the European Union
maintains its firm support for the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea and the mandate
given to it by the Council.
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

(spoke in English)
The conduct of elections also entails the proper
implementation of its results. Unless political leaders
break the current impasse on electoral reform, there
is a real risk that the elections will fail to produce a
Government, and a Government is essential to take
forward reforms. There is nothing inevitable about a
political crisis after the elections. Politicians in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have the responsibility to prevent
one. To date, we have witnessed from all sides little
willingness for cross-party compromise. To ensure
the proper implementation of recent rulings by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must find a
compromise without further delay.
While acknowledging that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina lists Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs as constituent peoples, along with others, the
European Union reiterates that the principles of
equality of all citizens and non-discrimination shall be
fully warranted. The most pressing issue is to find a
solution that will enable the formation of the Federation
House of Peoples and political institutions linked to it
as required by 2016 and 2017 Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court decisions. The issue of local
elections in Mostar requires full attention as well.
The European Union considers that electoral
reforms should be approached in a spirit of consensus
and dialogue as an important matter, thereby also
calling on Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights recommendations in order to move the country
towards European standards, improving democratic
processes for future elections.
The EU, together with our international partners,
including the United States, has worked extensively
through facilitation efforts to resolve the current
electoral impasse, and we will continue to do so. The
onus, however, remains on the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take ownership for political reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to show the international
community, and the EU member States in particular,
that it can organize its political life effectively and in a
spirit of compromise — a prerequisite for any country
aspiring to become a member of the EU.
The election of the members of the Presidency
will be addressed after the October elections. While

S/PV. 8248

electoral campaigning will play a major part in the
political scene of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the coming
months, we urge other actors, chiefly the rule-of-law
institutions, to continue taking forward reforms, and
for judges, prosecutors and law enforcement officials
to continue adjudicating, prosecuting and investigating
with full determination. In that context, we expect
appropriate amendments to the Criminal Procedure
Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina to be adopted as a
matter of priority. The amendments should be in line
with international standards and should not undermine
the ability of institutions to tackle serious organized
crime, corruption and other rule of law challenges. In
addition, the European Union calls on the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to step up efforts regarding
the functioning and the independence of the judiciary,
strengthening migration and border management,
fighting corruption and organized crime, as well
as countering terrorism and violent extremism and
preventing radicalization.
The adoption, in February, of the strategy for
the Western Balkans demonstrates our renewed
commitment to the Western Balkans. On 17 May, the
European Union’s leaders will hold a summit in Sofia
together with all our Western Balkans partners. Fifteen
years after the Thessaloniki Summit, the door to the
European Union remains open. It is for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seize the opportunity offered and to
fulfil the conditions to reach its European goal.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s resolve to move
forward towards European integration needs to translate
into an election campaign that allows for honest
reflection on the challenges ahead and the reforms
required to address them. That means an election
campaign that does not dwell on what happened a
quarter of a century ago, but that puts forward concrete
proposals for its citizens to decide where the country
sees its own future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia welcomes this
discussion. Following the statement by the observer of
the European Union (EU), I shall make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Let me start by welcoming the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, and by

18-1383519/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

thanking him for his report (S/2017/922, annex) and
briefing today.
The period ahead of us will be of key importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. With that in mind, we need
to emphasize once again that a stable, peaceful and
united Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on the genuine
institutional equality of its three constituent peoples
and all citizens, is a generator of stability for SouthEastern Europe and beyond. Against that background,
the full implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
was, and still is, the anchor of stability and peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Dayton Peace Agreement codified the
fundamental principle upon which Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands: there are three constituent peoples
who are equal owners of sovereignty and political
legitimacy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbs, Croats
and Bosniaks should be equal in every respect, including
exercising the same responsibility in safeguarding the
functionality and stability of this multi-ethnic and
multi-religious country The Dayton Peace Agreement
provides a pivotal institutional and constitutional
framework for that.
Croatia was among the first States to recognize the
independence and the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the hardest of times during the
aggression of the Slobodan Milošević regime and the
Yugoslav People’s Army in the first half of the 1990s.
Croatia played a crucial role in the birth and survival
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as an independent State.
That is an established historical fact. We must look
towards the future, but history should not be forgotten:
during the war in the 1990s Croatia sheltered hundreds
of thousands of refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina
and provided humanitarian assistance in many ways,
from logistics and equipment, to medical care. Upon the
request from the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in accordance with our bilateral agreements,
Croatia provided decisive military assistance, thereby
preventing the fall of the city of Bihać and a repetition
of the Srebrenica genocide. In a word, Croatia played a
pivotal role in ending the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and enabling the Dayton Peace Agreement.
As a signatory of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears special responsibility for the well-being
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains unequivocally
committed to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, as well
20/22

08/05/2018

as to the equality of its three constituent peoples with
full respect towards the rights of the others. Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s integration in the European Union and
NATO remains our strategic goal.
Today Croatia provides Bosnia and Herzegovina
with strong assistance in education, health care and
basic services. Our trade exchange amounts to almost
€2 billion per year, making Croatia the first trade
partner of Bosnia and Herzegovina in terms of imports
into the country, and the second regarding exports from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Croatia is also the leading
foreign investor, with over €1 billion in investments
in the real sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That all
points towards one conclusion: for Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is much more than a neighbour. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is our partner, and we wholeheartedly
support it in building a better future for all its citizens.
As an EU and NATO member State, Croatia will
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
EU membership ambition, while extending our full
political support and technical expertise and assistance.
Advancement in that process is of the utmost
importance — not only because it is the best investment
in the country’s future, but because it is also a way to
help to overcome difficult burdens of the past.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s road towards the
European Union is of the highest order, but it is
burdened with many hurdles. In that regard, Croatia
would like to echo the European Parliament’s
resolutions on the progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in 2015 and 2016, which point out that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be a successful candidate for EU
membership until appropriate institutional conditions
have been established based on the principles of
federalism, decentralization and legitimate and
proportionate representation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fast approaching general
elections in October 2018. This period is crucial for
delivering results of inter-party dialogue for electoral
reform. The urgent adoption of that reform, following
the rulings by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Ljubić case and in the case of the
city of Mostar, is not just necessary but of paramount
importance for the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the post-election implementation of electoral
results. That reform should ensure proportionate and
legitimate representation of the constituent peoples
at all levels of Government, enforcing in particular
18-13835

08/05/2018

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

specific electoral provisions on the Federation House
of Peoples, as well as the election of members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, an
overarching electoral reform is needed in order to keep
the pillars of the peoples’ equality alive and preserve
the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As mentioned in the EU statement, the election
of the members of the Presidency will be addressed
after the October elections. Let me add to that: it
could and should be addressed even sooner — as soon
as possible — with all due urgency. That will depend
primarily on the genuine readiness of all parties
concerned, and Croatia strongly supports efforts in
that regard.
What Bosnia and Herzegovina needs today is not
the inflammatory rhetoric of certain political groups,
but the wisdom to embrace the fundamental principles
and political features of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which are deeply rooted in the country’s complex
history and essential for its prosperous future. The
country’s Central Election Commission has called for
the October general elections. The holding of elections
and the implementation of their results, including
proper functioning of the institutions, is an essential
democratic requirement for any country. Therefore, the
political leaders should be aware of the responsibility
they carry for the future of their homeland. People
today, especially the young, are voting with their
feet. Political apathy will only add to the sense of
despondency caused by the socioeconomic situation, as
the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina is still falling
short of the expectations of its citizens. Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserves a better future.
In conclusion, we sincerely hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find the strength and the prudence
to overcome the present political impasse and proceed
more efficiently on the path of EU and NATO
integration. For that, a comprehensive electoral process
in October is indispensable. Croatia will continue
to advocate a sharp and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
levels. Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves our constant
attention and assistance in order to unleash its full and
untapped potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): Regional stability and
the development of overall cooperation in the Western

S/PV. 8248

Balkans have been long-standing foreign-policy
priorities of Serbia. The pursuit of those goals has
long been reflected in the activities of my country, as
we believe that that is the best way to bring about a
politically stable and economically dynamic region.
The joint projects we undertake are therefore of
paramount importance in our endeavours to provide
realistic prospects for a better future for Serbia and its
neighbours. We are convinced that Serbia’s goodwill
is acknowledged and recognized, and have therefore
always been ready and willing to invest additional
efforts to achieve more in that regard. To achieve those
goals, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a crucial and reliable
partner in our joint march along the same road.
Serbia’s ties with Bosnia and Herzegovina are deeprooted and manifold. In 1995, the milestone Dayton
Peace Agreement was signed, ending a protracted
and bitter war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Serbia is a
guarantor of the Agreement and continues to believe
that it is very important. It provides a basis for peace
and stability and is key to the promotion of the allimportant goal of genuine reconciliation and mutual
trust and confidence. However, we are still called upon
to continue to invest our best efforts in its achievement,
notwithstanding occasional discordant tones heard in
the region that remind us of events of the tragic past.
Detrimental to the efforts that we have all elected to
promote, they often burden the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, create unnecessary problems
among the country’s entities and constituent peoples
and affect the situation in the entire region.
Serbia has been a staunch and consistent supporter
of the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Western Balkans’ recent past is indicative of their
importance to peace and stability and the creation of
sustainable confidence. Respect for such principles is a
sine qua non in relations with neighbours. Based on the
provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia has
been firmly and genuinely committed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Serbia believes that potential differences in the
positions of the entities on important issues, both
with regard to jurisdiction and election law, as well as
other issues, belong in the realm of internal questions
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and supports genuine
and open dialogue, which it believes is conducive to
implementable solutions acceptable to all. All sides
are called upon to work towards building mutual
confidence and respect.

18-1383521/22

S/PV.8248

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Serbia supports an unimpeded election cycle in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Transparency, good faith
and responsibility will help much in that regard. They
will also help the country’s joint institutions function
more effectively and make a greater contribution to
its reform processes. One-sided acts, exchanges of
heated, negative messages and the recycling of old
divisions and problems and the creation of new ones are
contrary to the true interests of all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Serbia is convinced that political dialogue at all
levels with Bosnia and Herzegovina is of particular
importance for the development of all-round relations.
Officials of the two countries took part in many
meetings — bilateral and multilateral — in the
preceding period. One very important meeting was the
trilateral meeting among the members of the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Presidents of Croatia
and Serbia in Mostar on 6 March.
Economic cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina and continued efforts by the two
countries to constantly develop it have had a positive
impact on overall bilateral relations. Over the past
10 years, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
doubled their trade exchange. We are also well aware
of the importance of strengthening regional efforts
in order to bring people together and link economies.
Such efforts will continue to be bolstered in no small
measure by regular discussions of concrete projects in
the areas of infrastructure, energy, tourism, free trade
and, in particular, the modernization of roads and rail
road corridors.
We are joined in our common endeavours with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and by our common aspirations
to join the European Union (EU). The European Union

22/22

08/05/2018

may face multiple challenges and be in the process of
consolidation, but we are emboldened by the fact that
our efforts are appreciated and accorded the attention
that we in the region expect. The fact that the European
Union’s policy of enlargement to the Western Balkans
is a continuous and stable process that provides for the
admission of new members, perhaps even before 2025,
is also evinced by documents it adopted recently. Their
message is constructive and encouraging and grist
to the mill of the region’s reforms and development
of mutual cooperation. The processes of reform and
cooperation are of great importance for my country,
widely seen as a viable candidate for EU membership
in 2025, for Bosnia and Herzegovina and for some of
Serbia’s other neighbouring countries. While carrying
out its own reform processes, Serbia looks forward
to each and every success Bosnia and Herzegovina
achieves and is willing to share its own experiences and
help Bosnia and Herzegovina in its progress towards
European integration.
The people of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
are very close. After all, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
particular Republika Srpska, is home to a large number
of Serbs. For the sake of a better future, Serbia is ready
to cooperate extensively with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its entities. Through common will and joint efforts,
we can make our relations catalytic to the processes
of regional rapprochement and good-neighbourliness.
Developing the region, employing its considerable
economic potential, linking its infrastructure and
ensuring better communications and movement will
help us meet the justified expectations of our citizens.
We should address unanswered questions about the
past. However, we must do so in stride and not allow
them to affect our present interests and achievements.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-13835
