United Nations

A/RES/60/34

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 41

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 30 November 2005
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/60/L.24 and Add.1)]

60/34. Public administration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling all pertinent resolutions, in particular its resolution 59/55 of
2 December 2004 on public administration and development,
Acknowledging the tenth anniversary of the resumed fiftieth session of the
General Assembly, on public administration and development, held in April 1996,
Recognizing the important role played by public administration with respect to
the planning and provision of public services and the positive contribution it can
make to the creation of an enabling environment to promote sustainable
development,
Emphasizing the need to improve
accountability of public administration,

the

efficiency,

transparency

and

Reiterating that efficient, accountable, effective and transparent public
administration, at both the national and international levels, has a key role to play in
the implementation of the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals,
Noting that the capacities of public institutions and human resources will play
a vital role in the ability of Member States to effectively achieve the Millennium
Development Goals,
Acknowledging, further, that measures that increase participatory and
transparent governance will help Member States to build and strengthen state
capacity to address development and other challenges,
Stressing the importance of participatory public administration responsive to
the needs of the people, and good governance,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 1

2.
Emphasizes that good governance and transparent and accountable public
administration at the national and international levels will contribute to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
_______________
1

05-48958

A/60/114.

A/RES/60/34

3.
Recognizes the importance of the efforts of Governments to foster public
participation in governance and development processes through cooperating with all
stakeholders in their societies, including the private sector, civil society and nongovernmental organizations;
Stresses that national efforts to improve governance, public
4.
administration and institutional and managerial capacities are essential to enable
Member States to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals, and encourages Member States to increase
their efforts in this regard;
Encourages the international community to increase support for national
5.
efforts, including those of developing countries, in public administration, including
through North-South cooperation, South-South cooperation and public-private
partnership to, inter alia, provide financial, educational, material and technical
support and cooperation as appropriate;
Requests all Member States to abide by the principles of proper
6.
management of public affairs and public property, fairness, responsibility and
equality before the law and the need to safeguard integrity and foster a culture of
transparency, accountability and rejection of corruption at all levels and in all its
forms, consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption, 2 and in
that regard urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider enacting laws
to accomplish those ends;
Agrees that the United Nations should promote innovation in government
7.
and public administration, and stresses the importance of making more effective use
of United Nations Public Service Day and the United Nations Public Service Awards
in the process of revitalizing public administration by building a culture of
innovation, partnership and responsiveness;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to facilitate, through the
8.
United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and Finance, the
dissemination of information, knowledge and valuable practices in public
administration;
Stresses the valuable contribution that the Global Forum on Reinventing
9.
Government has made to the exchange of lessons learned in public administration
reform;
10. Takes note with appreciation of the Seoul Declaration on Participatory
and Transparent Governance, which was adopted by the participants in the sixth
Global Forum on Reinventing Government, held in Seoul from 24 to 27 May 2005; 3
11. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of the Republic of Korea
for hosting the sixth Global Forum on Reinventing Government;
12. Emphasizes the importance of the seventh Global Forum on Reinventing
Government, to be hosted by the United Nations in 2007, which will highlight the
importance of improving public administration in order to achieve the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals;

_______________
2
3

2

Resolution 58/4, annex.
A/60/391, annex.

A/RES/60/34

13. Urges the United Nations to maximize the effectiveness of its activities
in the field of public administration and development by strengthening partnerships
with other international and regional organizations, as appropriate, and by
promoting the use of information and communications technology as a tool for
development;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution and the result of the
seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government, to be held in 2007.
58th plenary meeting
30 November 2005

3
