SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1914’”

MEETING:

22 APRIL 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. .. ... .. ... .... .. ... ... ... .. ... ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution384(1975)(S/12011)
... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... ... .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l914)

S/PV. 1914

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1914th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 22 April 1976, at 10.30.a.m.
President:

Mr. HUANG

Japan and contained in document
S/12057. As I
indicated at the close of the last meeting, it is my hope
that this morning the Council will be in a position to
vote on the draft resolution and thus conclude the
present phase of its consideration of the situation in
Timor.

Hua (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. Mr. RfOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
Since last year the delegation of Panama has been
following the development
of events in East Timor
with particular interest. We were informed of all the
Council’s debates on’the subject, and as a Member
of the United Nations we welcomed resolution 384
(1975). We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General
prepared in accordance with that
resolution. We have also listened with special attention
to the’statements made here on the subject.

agenda (S/Agenda/l914)

of the agenda

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/l201 1)
The meeting

was called to order at 11.45 a.m.
Adoption

4. For us the item is of the most particular importance. We see the essence of the problem as being
contained in the principle of non-intervention
and the
free self-determination
of peoples. For us Latin
Americans this is a sacred concept never to be violated.
No argument could ever justify the interference of one
people in affairs which are purely within the internal
competence of another. In the case of East Timor it
is for its people, according to the wishes of the majority,
to decide on its political future. This fact has been
recognized and indeed enshrined by the international
community.
I would say that this is something which
nobody honestly dares to question.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General ‘in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
In accordance with the decisions taken earlier [1908th
and 1910th to 1912th meetings], I shall now invite the
representatives of Australia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Mozambique,
the Philippines,
Portugal and Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

5. Now, the question which is before the Council is
how to fulfil effectively this supreme aspiration of the
people of East Timor. The picture continues to be
complex and rather confused. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
recognized this in his
report, where he stated that “any accurate assessment of the situation as a whole remains elusive”
[S/12011, annex, para. 371. We read in the same paragraph of the report-which,
as we see it, is the most
trustworthy source for an evaluation of the various
aspects of this delicate matter-that
there has been a
favourable evolution. In assessing this evolution, the
result of the mission entrusted by the SecretaryGeneral to Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, we believe that
what would be most constructive and sensible for the
Council at this time would be to prolong the mandate
given to the Secretary-General
under paragraph 5 of
resolution 384 (1975).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anwar Sani
(Indonesia) and Mr. da Costa Lobe (Portugal) took
places at the Council table and Mr. Harry (Australia),
Mr. Camara (Guinea),
Mr. Fernandes
(GuineaBissau), Mr. Singh (Malaysia),
Mr. Lobe (Mozambique), Mr. Yango (Philippines)
and Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
ttranslation
from Chinese):
The Council has before it ‘in document S/12056 the draft
resolution
submitted
by Guyana and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which was introduced at our last
meeting by the representative of Guyana. I should like
also to draw attention to the amendment to the draft
resolution submitted this morning by the delegation of
1

.

\

‘Z . Ilir..

6. In stating this point of view my.delegation trusts
that all the parties to the conflict will co-operate with,
the Secretary-General so as to make available to the
people of Timor all the means and resources necessary
so that in the shortest time possible it can exercise
its right to self-determination free from outside
pressures. In this connexion it seems to us most
encouraging that the representative of Indonesia stated
in this chamber [2909rh meeting] that the armed volunteers operating in East Timor had started to leave that
Territory in February and that shortly all of them
would have left. This would of course be in compliance
with the obligations arising out of General Assembly
resolution 1514(XV) of 14December 1960.The international community would applaud this action by Indonesia, just as it censures Member States which, acting
against history and the binding provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, persist in maintaining
colonial enclaves within other States.

Timor-it is worth pointing out in this connexion that
our delegation, would be pleased if in that paragraph
it were placed on record in some way that the Council
takes note of the fact that Indonesia, according to its
own statements, has started to withdraw the volunteers
who invaded East Timor in 1975; thirdly, the continuation of the mandate given the Secretary-General in
resolution 384 (1975); fourthly, a request to the Secretary+General that he report to the Council on the
progress of his negotiations under that resolution; and.
fifthly, an appeal to all States and other parties directly
concerned in the conflict to co-operate fully with the
United Nations to achieve a solution which will ensure
the self-determination of the people of Timor and the
peaceful settlement of the existing problems.
10. We should like to emphasize that the delegation
of Panama believes that it is our collective obligation,
each State in so far as it is able, to assist in restoring
peace in Timor so that that people, which deserves a
better fate, may be able to choose a course corresponding to its own national interests; without any
interference by foreign forces. It will be up to the
United Nations to see to it that that goal is achieved
in a completely effective manner.

7. Panamanians are very sensitive to any kind of
intervention, because we have been and still are victims
of a foreign military presence. So we feel all the more
sympathy for the struggle of any people fighting for
its right to self-determination. For 73 years a foreign
Power has remained on Panamanian territory. Panama
is divided by a colonial enclave and lacks the right to
exercise its attributes of effective sovereignty over a
significant part of its own national territory. But we
Panamanians, who know of the progress of mankind
towards just and equitable solutions, trust that, with
the support of Latin America and the major part of the
family of nations, over Panama too the sun of justice
will shine.

11. Lastly, my delegation wishes to express its warm
appreciation of the work done by the Secretary-General
through the mission of Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi and
his efficient group of advisers. We call upon them to
continue to render their valuable co-operation for the
benefit of world peace and the,economic, political and
social development of our brothers in East Timor.
12. Mr. KANAZAWA (Japan): During the informal
consultations which my delegation held with a number
of delegations in an attempt to produce a draft resolution acceptable to all Council members, we emphasized
the need for the Council to take a realistic and constructive decision reflecting the current evolving situation
in the Territory and safeguarding the right of the
people of East Timor to self-determination. My
delegation is gratified, therefore, to note that most of
the basic courses of action we had suggested in our
statement to the Council [191&h meeting] have been
incorporated in the draft resolution in document
S/12056.

8. On the basis of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes we have for 12 long years endeavoured, so far in vain, to obtain the conclusion of
a new treaty with the United States which, within a
time-limit not exceeding the year 2000, will restore to
Panama effective sovereignty over the strip of land
known throughout the world as the Panama Canal
Zone, a colonial enclave which, as I have already said,
prevents territorial integration and the full exercise of
Panamanian sovereignty over the entire territory of the
Republic. As was stated in. an editorial in The New
York Times on 17April 1976, what is called the Panama
Canal Zone “is not and never has been” sovereign
territory of the United States. It is our belief that the
United States will become daily more aware of the
lessons to be learned from the history we have been
living throug:i recently. It must definitely realize that
the era of foreign intervention and occupation is
coming to an end.

13. However, in the view of my delegation, operative
paragraph 2 still does not fully reflect the developments
which have occurred in the Territory since the adoption of resolution 384 (1975). 4s we are all aware, the
representative of the “Provisional Government” of
East Timor stated that “the Provisional Government
decided to allow volunteers to return to their places
of origin. This return had already started in February,
and it continued in March” 11908th meeting,
para. 164). That statement was confirmed by the representative of Indonesia, who stated that the armed
volunteers “are already leaving the Territory, and it
is expected that the process will be completed within
a short time” [1909rh meeting, para. II]. My delega-

9. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted yesterday by the representative of
Guyana. In the comments I just made, I expressed our
approval of the following: first, respect for the territorial integrity of East Timor and the right of its people
to self-determination; secondly, an appeal for the withdrawal of foreign forces from the Territory of East
2

tion considers that the Council should duly take these
developments
into account in formulating
a draft
resolution regarding the withdrawal of Indonesian
forces from the Territory.

One thing is certain, however, and that is that when the
problem-was
raised in the General Assembly my
delegation, not wanting to be an accomplice to any
manmuvre and failing to find in General Assembly
resolution 3485 (XXX) of 12 December
1975 the
minimum it had the right to expect in so intolerably
serious a situation, was obliged to vote against that
resolution. I personally had occasion at the time to
explain the position of my Government.
Thus what
was true yesterday is more than ever true today,
because, in spite of that resolution, which is after all
favourable to Indonesia, the troops of that friendly
country have not yet withdrawn from East Timor.
19. The position of my Government
arises from a
number of considerations.
At the time when the
General Assembly was to discuss the report of the
Committee of 24,’ a first new element was injected
into the situation, radically changing it. I refer to the
proclamation
of the independence of East Timor by
progressive
and nationalist
forces headed by
FRETILIN
[Frente Revoluciondria
Timor Leste Independente].
A second and more serious factor was
subsequently introduced:
the announcement
of the
invasion of Timor by Indonesian troops. Convinced
that it was not the task of the United Nations to
distinguish
good independence
from bad independence and that it should condemn military aggression
of whatever kind and from whatever quarter, my delegation felt entitled to expect an energetic attitude on
the part of the General Assembly with a view to the
strict application of the principles of the Declaration
annexed to resolution 1514 (XV). It was the absence
of these elements from the text which obliged Benin to
cast a negative vote in the Assembly, as I have
mentioned.

14. One of the main objectives of the draft resolution that will emerge from our debate must be to secure
the continued implementation
of resolution 384 (1975)
by the Government
of Indonesia;
Therefore,
my
delegation considers that the Council, while acknowledging the partial withdrawal of Indonesian forces,
should call upon the Government
of Indonesia to
complete the withdrawal of all its remaining forces
from East Timor without further delay.
15. Since operative paragraph 2 does not adequately
take into account either the evolving situation or the
goodwill of the Government of Indonesia, my delegation submits an amendment for the Council’s consideration. ‘Our amendment [S/!2057] would insert the
word “remaining”
between the words “its”
and
“forces”. Therefore the paragraph would read:
“Culls upun the Government of Indonesia to withdraw without further delay all its remaining forces
from the Territory”:
16. I hope that this amendment
will obtain wide
acceptance in the Council. I believe its adoption would
facilitate the continued co-operation of the Govemmerit of Indonesia in implementing
the resolution to
be’ adopted by the Council. Its adoption would, I
believe, also make it possible for some delegations,
including my own, to support the draft resolution in
document S/ 12056.

20. Today, several months after adoption of resolution 384 (1975), how does the situation stand? The least
one can say is that fundamentally
there has been no
satisfactory development.
Sufficient proof of this is
the report of the Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General,
which, in spite of his concern for
balance and objectivity, nevertheless makes clear the
existence of shadowy elements and which should lead
us to raise a number of questions. As we read it, it
becomes clear there is still doubt about Indonesia’s
good faith and its genuine willingness to withdraw its
troops from a Territory that has ever been recognized as belonging to it. Permit me at this stage to pay
a well deserved tribute to the Secretary-General
and
especially to his Special Representative
for their
efforts to bring the mission to a successful conclusion
in spite of the numerous difficulties
encountered.
Certainly that mission is not over, but the question
that arises is whether it is still necessary to continue
it. This is an open question, because until certain
obstacles are removed, my delegation will find it very
difficult to endorse its continuation. However that may
be, the mission cannot be renewed unless the foreign
occupation forces withdraw from the island and until
it is left to the Timorese, and only to them, to’settle
their own problems among themselves.

17. Mr. PAQUI‘(Benin)
(interpretutionfvom
French):
Mr. President, since I have already had occasion to
congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency, it only remains for me to express to you the
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing the Council
discussing this delicate matter- under your high
authority. As a representative of the great people of
China, the friends of the’ people of Benin, and given
your standing in the Asian region, there can be no
doubt that you are well placed to understand the
problem before us and to lead our debate to a successful conclusion in keeping with the true interests of the
people of East Timor and of that people alone.
18. Benin was not yet a member of the Council when
that body first took up the ‘grave crisis caused by
Indonesian military intervention
in East Timor, an
intervention
which was and remains a most serious
threat to peace and security in Asia. In other words,
Benin is not familiar with the process which led to the
adoption of resolution 384 (1975). Although my delegation wishes to congratulate the sponsors of that resolution, we regret that, as a result of compromises,
not
to say concessions, they missed the true objectives
they ought to have aimed at in that resolution and
disappointed
quite a number of other delegations.
3

21. Faced with a question such as that of East Timor,
the Organization should explore the question of what
should now happen to small colonial Territories in
the light of the growth of the expansionist and
annexationist ambitions of neighbouring countries. The
Organization should raise the question of whether it
is not now time to review certain provisions of the
famous Declaration annexed to resolution 1514 (XV),
in order to preserve the rights to selfdetermination
and independence of people in such Territories who
express the wish to exercise such rights. In my delegation’s view, this is the core of the various problems
that have been facing the United Nations for some
years now. Examples are so familiar and alive in our
memories that there is no need to recall them here.
In any case, my delegation would very much appreciate
it if this suggestion were taken into account by the
Secretary-General in his report to the next session of
the General Assembly. There is hardly any need
to stress that, while everyone talks about and recognizes the right of colonial peoples to self-determination, not everyone interprets it in the same way. To
put it another way, the letter remains while imperceptibly the spirit gradually seeps away, and if we are
not careful there will be none left at all.

particularly his first statement [f908th meering]; in
which he said that his Government still regards itself
as the administering Power. That position would Thave
been welcomed if Portugal itself had not left Timor,
or at least if it had not been supplanted by a new
colonial Power, resulting in its no longer being in a
position to pursue the policy which it claims it is
following. Furthermore,’ in. my delegation’s opinion,
once FRETILIN
had proclaimed independence,
whether or not that proclamation was unilateral,
Portugal’s role as administering Power should have
ceased ipso fucro. Now, the United Nations did not
find it necessary to consider the problem from that
standpoint, although legally Portugal might have
believed that it had the right to proclaim its will as
administering Power. If the Council wishes to continue to recognize that Portugal does have that right,
can it-a question the representative of Portugal so
rightly raised-make available to that country the
means to face up to the force of aggression and to
bring the decolonization of Timor to a successful
conclusion? In the situation of uncertainty, we prefer
to endorse the fait accompli created in Timor by
FRETILIN .

22. The Military Revolutionary Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin notes with some bitterness
the dangerous trend that has been emerging before
the indifferent eyes of the United Nations. We remain
faithful to the spirit and letter of the Declaration
annexed to resolution 1514 (XV), and we cannot but
condemn most vigorously the annexationist and
expansionist ambitions emerging. My Government,
committed to its revolutionary struggle and determined
to fight colonialism, neo-colonialism and imperialism
in all their forms, cannot tolerate any former colonies
today revealing themselves as colonialist and expansionist at the expense of new States.

25. In the light of all the present negotiations and
arrangements, there is a great temptation to say that
Indonesia, far from wishing to withdraw its troops
from Timor, wants to continue there the game of
international imperialism and to impose a fait accompli
in that island. As one representative so rightly put it,
in engaging in this adventure Indonesia has chosen,
volunrarily or unwittingly, to play the game of imperialism, for which the presence of a progressive rt!gime
in that protected zone constitutes a danger and a threat
to peace. My delegation has in the past condemned
those great Powers that wanted to claim the right to be
world policemen. We equally vigorously condemn
today this tendency of Indonesia to take the place of
the traditional policemen.

23. My delegation has followed with particularly
close attention the statements made in the Council.
Some of them have undoubtedly helped members of
the Council in their search for ajust solution in keeping
with the Charter. We have heard the supporters and
the opponents of the act of aggression committed by
Indonesia, and we might have listened even to the
supporters with a great deal of sympathy. But the
argument that my delegation cannot possibly accept is
the argument that would regard as a humanitarian
act Indonesia’s military invasion of East Timor. What
my delegation cannot tolerate is the tendency to
maintain that Indonesia thought it had to occupy
Timor in order to prevent chaos and introduce order
into the country after independence. That claim is an
insult to the intelligence of the people of Timor, and
I do not think that even those who are called members
of the Provisional Government would want to endorse
the claim.
1 :
24. a.My delegation has listened sympathetically also
to the statements of the representative of Portugal,

26. In his statement the representative of Indonesia
attempted to prove to us that his Government had no
territorial claims on Timor nor any expansionist ambitions. But how can we describe the present situation
which Indonesia is imposing on the people ofTimor?
In any case, it is difficult not to share his view that
the solution of the problem should be based on the
wishes of the people of the Territory. Why, then,
once those wishes had been expressed, did Indonesia find it necessary to use force to impose a.solution
of its own? Without going into detail, my delegation
considers that the statement of the, representative of
Indonesia raises many morequestions than itanswers.
For example, I quote following part of his statement:
“One should not forget that the people consider
themselves already”-1
emphasize the word
“already”-“
Indonesians and their territory an
integral part of Indonesia. In their view, the c~allfor
withdrawal is unjust, for why should Indonesiansbe
requested to leave what they already consider
4

other words, there can be no question of putting the
cart before the horse, particularly if that is done by
force. Furthermore, if we have ventured to say this to
Indonesia, it is because my country considers it a
friendly country and among friends certain truths
should be told, however unpalatable they may be. In
this particular case, Indonesia is wrong on all counts,
and it would be dishonest for my delegation not to
say so and instead to proffer it bouquets.

Indonesian territory, especially if the people of the
Territory themselves wish them to remain?”
[1909th meeting,

para. IO.]

27. Indonesia has had a long history of struggling
for independence, and it is certainly better placed than
anyone else to say what is the will of a people forced
to take a decision on its future under the threat of
rifles and bayonets, not to mention bombers. Please,
let us not try to lull the Council’s vigilance by honeyed
words and red herrings. How and by what process was
the people of Timor consulted and how did it manifest
its wish for the Indonesians to remain? What objective
evidence have we that that people had already officially
decided to become independent in total integration with
the Republic of Indonesia? In any case, if that did
happen, it happened without the knowledge of the
Security Council and the United Nations. In those
circumstances, let no one try to stain the Organization
by attempting to involve it in the final phase of East
Timor’s decolonization. If the Organization had a role
to play, it would have been immediately after the
alleged flight of the Portuguese and not after Indonesia
had committed aggression in the Territory and established a whole system favourable to it.

30. Coming finally to the draft resolution submitted
by Guyana and the United Republic of Tanzania, my
delegation takes pleasure in the effective participation
of the parties principally concerned in the debate,
which is constructive behaviour and evidence that it
is possible to reach a satisfactory solution that takes
account of the interests of all the populations of
Timor-and I should like to make that absolutely
clear: “of all the populations of Timor”, without
distinction. My delegation appreciates the effort made
to avoid introducing partisan considerations into this
text. However, Benin cannot give it its endorsement
for the obvious reasons that we have already explained.
I do not think it is taking sides to say what we have
said to Indonesia; neither is it taking sides to remedy
today the weaknesses of resolution 384 (1975) and to
firmly condemn Indonesian military aggression against
the young republic of Timor. Nor is it partisan to
call for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
Indonesian troops from East Timor. To ask for anything else would be to be guilty of acquiescence and,
wittingly or unwittingly, to endorse the act committed
by Indonesia in flagrant violation of all the principles
of international law. Thus my delegation has some very
serious reservations about this draft resolution in its
present form. Those reservations are accentuated by
the fact that the amendment submitted by Japan
introduces elements of confusion. Indeed, after four
months of appealing to Indonesia to withdraw its
troops immediately, we are obliged to acknowledge
that practically nothing has been done to give effect
to paragraph 2 of resolution 384 (1975). At the present
stage, to seek a watered-down formula, not to speak
of sugaring the pill, makes it impossible to accord
sufficient credibility to the actions of the Council.
Further, it is tantamount to accepting without verification the assertion that the so-called Indonesian volunteers have indeed begun to withdraw from Timor.
But what about FRETILIN’s statement which asserts
the contrary, that the Indonesian military occupation
of East Timor is not only continuing but is even being
intensified? In spite of the efforts of the sponsors,
this draft resolution, in the view of my delegation, is
not balanced and once again bypasses the true objectives. That is why Benin will not participate in the vote
on this draft, and that is the least that my delegation
can do.

28. My delegation’s concern at Indonesia’s attitude
towards this problem is particularly great because that
fraternal country, a founding member of the nonaligned movement, is not doing this kind of thing for
the fist time. A glance at the records of the Council
shows us that in the case of the South Moluccas
Indonesia operated in the same way. That question is
still pending before the Council, which as composed
at that time seemed to accepted the fait accompli. But
Indonesia should understand that today conditions are
different and that the General Assembly and the
Security Council of 1976 cannot afford to close their
eyes to acts of aggression and to reprehensible expansionist and annexationist ambitions. That is why it
would be to Indonesia’s advantage to break its ties as
soon as possible with those whose game it is playing,
if it wants to retain the place and the position of
respectability that it deserves in the non-aligned
movement. It must contemplate, therefore, the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its troops
from Timor, whether or not they are called “volunteers”. That is the only way to create conditions
favourable for the free expression of the will of the
people of Timor.
29. Before concluding, 1 should like to address the
representative of Indonesia in particular and say to
him that, while defending the principles dear to the
Organization, my Government is in no way opposed
to desires for integration. But it considers that such
integration must be the result of consultations with the
people in accordance with the sacred principle of the
right of all peoples to self-determination. The aftirmation of that right should‘be a prerequisite, and integration could only be a final step, once the United Nations
had taken note of such a wish freely expressed. In

31. We venture to hope, however, that the Council
will not lose sight of its obligations and responsibilities
in the field of the maintenance of peace and security.
It is at any rate desirable, in spite of the tacit endorse5

ment given to Indonesia by certain great Powers, that
those Powers should make a point ,of putting serious
pressures on Indonesia to give up its machiavellian
plan to place before the United Nations a new fait
accompli in respect of East Timor. Finally, my delegation would like to issue a friendly appeal to Indonesia
and to ask that its future actions in Timor be dictated
by the spirit of Bandung rather than by strategic,
economic and, hence, selfish interests.
32.

the people of Timor may enjoy conditions propitious for
the exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination and independence.
37. We have always attached particular importance
to the role which the Secretary-General can play in the
settlement of the problems before the Organization.
It is in this spirit that we have taken note with interest
of the report submitted
by the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 384 (1975). While expressing to
the Secretary-General
and to his Special Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi,. our appreciation for
the efforts they have made to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to them by the Council, we cannot fail to
note that despite their efforts the results achieved are
insufficient to assure the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 384 (1975). We regret this fact,
which can only delay solution of the situation in East
Timor.

Mr.

DATCU
(Romania)
(interpretation
from
The essential points of reference for the
delegation of Romania in considering this agenda item
are contained in General Assembly resolution 3485
(XXX), which emphasizes the inalienable right of all
peoples to self-determination
and independence
in
conformity with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The delegation of Romania voted in favour of that
resolution, in consistency with the position of principle
of our country, which has always supported the
struggle of peoples to exercise their right to independence and freedom and freely to choose their political
status.

French):

38. We consider that what is necessary at this time
is to continue the efforts, including those made within
United Nations framework, to arrive through negotiation at a peaceful solution to the situation in Timor.
It seems to us that on this aspect there are no basic
differences among the parties concerned.

33. We consider that the objectives contained in the
aforementioned
resolution and reaffirmed in resolution 384 (1975) provide the necessary framework for
a just solution to the situation in East Timor. Indeed,
to arrive at such a solution it is essential that the people
of Timor be able to enjoy their right to self-determination and freely decide their own fate, without any
foreign interference.

39. We support the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 7 and 8 of his report that
he should continue implementation
of resolution 384
(1975) and that the consultations between the parties
concerned and his Special Representative should continue, it being understood that the Council will be
informed of any new development.
40. In this spirit, the delegation of Romania remains
in favour of any action likely to contribute to establishing favourable conditions for the people of East
Timor to enjoy its inalienable right to self-determination and to exercise that right in accordance with its
legitimate aspirations. We shall thus vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Council.

34. In their resolutions adopted at the end of last
year the General Assembly and the Security Council
called on all States to respect the unity and territorial
integrity of East Timor. Romania unreservedly subscribes to that appeal, which is the expression of one of
the fundamental
principles
of international
law
enshrined in the Charter and reaffirmed on many
occasions by both the Assembly and the Council.

,4 1. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
As there are no further speakers, if no other representative wishes to speak at this stage, I take it that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote. I shall
now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by
Guyana and the United Republic of Tanzania [s/12056]
and the Japanese amendment thereto [S/1205T]. The
Council will vote first on the Japanese amendment.

35. In this connexion, I should also like to recall that
in the Declaration annexed to resolution 2625 (XXV)
the General Assembly stressed that
“Every State shall refrain from any action aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national
unity and territorial integrity of any other State or
country.”

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Italy, Japan, Libyan Arab
Republic,
Pakistan, Panama, United Kingdom
of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America.

In the case of East Timor, respect for that principle
is an essential condition for the people of East Timor
to be able to decide freely and peacefully its own
destiny.

Against:

36. It is in this spirit that we believe there must be
an immediate cessation of any act of violation of the
territorial integrity of East Timor and a withdrawal of
all foreign military forces from that Territory, so that

Benin.

Abstaining:
Guyana, Romania, Sweden, Union
Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United
Republic
Tanzania.

6

of
of

The result of the vote was 8 in favour,
5 abstentions.

The amendment was not adopted, having failed
obtain the aflrmative
votes of nine members.
One member
voting.

(China)

in any practicalYsense any further responsibilities
as
the administering
Power, though this did not prevent
us from listening with interest to what the representative of Portugal had to say about the present situation
and his delegation’s suggestions about the future.

1 against arzd

did not participate

to

in the

46. It is the future of East Timor which must concern
the Council at this stage. We listened with great attention to what the representatives of that Territory had
to say here. I wish to assure them of the sympathy
of the people of my country for the hardships which
they have been undergoing and the sufferings which
they have endured. The loss of human life in the
Territory, the dislocation caused to its economy and the
material damage suffered have by all accounts been
enormous. It is our hope that reconciliation,
and not
retribution,
will now become the common objective
and that, keeping in mind the supreme need for peace
and the speedy development
of the people, all the
leaders of East Timor will now look to the future and
work jointly for the common benefit. This must remain
the Council’s own principal objective.

42. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
The Council will vote next on the draft resolution in
document S/12056.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
China, France, Guyana, Italy, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania.
Against: None.
Abstaining:
Japan, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. *
One member (Benin) did not participate

47. The Council’s point of departure naturally was its
resolution 384 (1975), in which it recognized the right
of the people of East Timor to self-determination
in
accordance with the principles and decisions of the
United Nations and in which it called on the Government of Indonesia to withdraw its forces from the
Territory.
We read with very great care the report
submitted by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, who visited the Territory in pursuance of the
mandate given to the Secretary-General
under resolution 384 (1975). I should like to put on record my
delegation’s appreciation of the conscientiousness and
determination
with which Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
tried to carry out the task entrusted to him in this
regard. The difficulties inherent in the prevailing situation, difftculties to which the Special Representative
refers with considerable circumspection
in his report,
may have made it inevitable that he would not be able
fully to achieve the objectives set out in resolution 384
(1975). The one conclusion of a positive character
which does emerge from his report is his belief that
it would be worth making further efforts “to build on
the slender common assumption that the people of
East Timor should be consulted on the future status of
the Territory”
[S/12011, annex, para. 441.

in the voting.

43. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
I shall now call on those members who wish to speak
in explanation of their vote.
44. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): My delegation stated
its views on the general aspects of the issue of East
Timor while explaining its vote in favour of resoiution 3485 (XXX).3 My delegation continues to believe
that the two principles on which both that resolution
and resolution 384 (1975) were based remain pertinent
to the consideration of this case: namely, self-determination and its corollary, the non-use of force and
non-intervention
in the affairs of other States.
45. In giving primacy to principle, we do not by any
means wish to ignore the complex realities of the
situation which prevails in the Territory at the present
time and the factors, immediate
as well as remote,
which have brought it about. The report of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative
mentions the
astounding fact that in the whole of East Timor only
some 10 persons hold university degrees. There cannot
be a more telling indictment of colonialism,
which in
the case of East Timor lasted over a period of centuries.
The state of affairs is also an indication of the difficulties which confront the people of the Territory
as they face the future. The proximate cause of the
crisis in East Timor was the outbreak of dissension
and civil strife between various political and ideological
factions in the Territory. We know that one of these,
FRETILIN,
made a unilateral declaration of independence while the others proclaimed
a merger with
Indonesia. It is no longer material to discuss which
act was the cause and which the consequence;
undoubtedly the vacuum created by Portugal’s abrupt
and unceremonious
departure from the scene had
much to do with these developments.
In the circumstances it is difficult to accept Portugal as having

48. In the course of the current series of meetings
we have heard the representatives
of the different
East Timor parties as well as of the concerned States,
including, above all, Indonesia, speak in support of the
idea that the people of the Territory must be allowed
to decide their future for themselves and in freedom.
There seems to be agreement also that the United
Nations should have a role in enabling the people to
exercise their right to self-determination.
Furthermore,
we heard views as to the alternatives which are to be
put to the East Timorese people for decision. Although
on this matter there are naturally sharp differences of
opinion, representatives of all parties agreed that one
7

of the alternatives to be considered by the people
of East Timor would be integration with Indonesia.
The important consideration is that the people must be
given the opportunity to state their choice in conditions
of freedom and without outside interference. We were
therefore gratified by the repeated assurances of Indonesia that it had no territorial claims over East Timor
and that it would respect the freely determined views
of the people of East Timor regarding their future
constitutional status and afliliation. We have also taken
note of the Indonesian Government’s declaration that
the armed personnel which went into East Timor from
Indonesia were being withdrawn and that the process
would be completed in a short time.

task. We are pleased to see that the resolution now
adopted has avoided fault-finding and recrimination
and aims at finding a solution which would be acceptable to all and would promote the welfare of the people
concerned. In the spirit which animated the sponsors,
we should like to endorse the appeal addressed in
paragraph 5 to all States and parties concerned to
co-operate fully with the United Nations in achieving
a peaceful solution to the situation and in facilitating
the decolonization of East Timor. It is in this spirit
that my own delegation cast an affirmative vote for the
text.
50. Mr. RfOS (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish to place on record that my delegation had
requested to speak, although perhaps we did not do
so at the right time, because we wished to become a
sponsor of the draft resolution which the Council
just adoptd. I wish it to be placed on record, if the
rules allow it, that Panama would like to appear as a
sponsor of the draft resolution which has now become
a resolution.

49. The resolution which the Council hasjust adopted
is broadly in line with the views of my delegation on
the East Timor question. In it the Council reaffirms
the decision of the General Assembly and this Council
that the people of East Timor should be enabled to
decide their own future. It calls on Indonesia to complete, as it has committed itself to doing, the withdrawal
of all its forces from the Territory. It authorizes the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative to continue the assignment given to him by resolution 384
(1975) and to pursue consultations with the parties
concerned with a view to achieving a peaceful solution
to the existing situation. We attach particular importance to this mission at the present stage and hope
therefore that the Special Representative will receive
continued Council support in his difficult and delicate

The meeting

rose at 1 p.m.
Notes

I Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
* See resolution 389 (1976)
3 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Fourth Committee, 2188th meeting, paras. 41 to 43.

8

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agenccs depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genive.
ICAE

lIO,XYVMTI;

II3fiAHMII

HsAanm
3nnax

Oprawisaqmi
w 8reHTCTBaX

aaruerd

K~AH(HOM

HawA,

C~KUHR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

OPrAHEI

3A4EiZI

06’beAnnenribxx
BO BCex
pafiOHa?$

HaqwR
rdwpa.

rdaraamre
no npoAaxe

HIIW nmu~~e
usAanuR,

PUBLICACIONES

Or;bEAWZEHHhIX
MOXCHO
HaaoAHTe

no aapecy:
Hbm-Ffoprc

icynwrb
cnpasKH

Opranwsauu~

HAUZIR
B KHW~KA~IX
mara06 HSAaHHIlX
a
06’beAUEIeHHblX

UJIH XCeneaa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidotas
en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n deVentas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

c

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-August1984-2.200
