S/2020/946

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2020
Original: English

Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The United Nations entered 2020 envisioning to make it a milestone year for
progress towards realizing global commitments on gender equality and women and
peace and security. In the face of the unprecedented crisis unfolding as a result of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the resolve to fulfil those commitments
has not waned – if anything, the sense of urgency has increased.
2.
In the policy brief on the impact of COVID-19 on women, 1 the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) warned
that the limited progress that has been made on gender equality was at risk of reversal.
Women constitute the bulk of front-line health-care workers, shoulder most of the
burden of care and will be the most affected by the economic consequences of the
crisis. Women are already suffering from a rising incidence of gender-based violence.
Experts rightly fear the diversion of resources from efforts aimed at women’s health,
including sexual and reproductive health, the long -term impact on the participation
of girls in education and employment among women and a backslide towards
infringing women’s rights, with the pandemic as the pretext. The pandemic will have
profound implications for international peace and security, including through the
further marginalization of women in political decision-making, in particular where
peace agreements are being negotiated or in countries undergoing political transitions.
More generally, there is a strong correlation between gender inequality and conflict
risk. 2 In his policy speech on gender equality, in February, the Secretary-General
noted that there was a straight line between violence against women, civil oppression
and conflict; trillions of dollars were spent every year on peace and security, but we
should be asking: whose peace? whose security?
3.
In its resolution 2532 (2020), the Security Council acknowledged the critical
role that women played in COVID-19 response efforts, and called for concrete actions
to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the development
and implementation of an adequate and sustainable response to the pandemic. In the
__________________

United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women), “The
Impact of COVID-19 on Women”, policy brief. Available at www.unwomen.org//media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/policy -brief-the-impact-ofcovid-19-on-women-en.pdf?la=en&vs=1406.
2
World Bank and United Nations, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., World Bank, 2018).
1

20-12597 (E)

281020

*2012597*

S/2020/946

past two decades, the Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions on women and
peace and security, all of which were centred on the importance of women’s human
rights and the leadership of women in preventing and responding to crises. Many of
the best examples of leadership during the pandemic have come from women, yet
women lead only 7 per cent of countries. The results of a survey of 30 countries with
COVID-19 task forces and committees showed that on average only 24 per cent of
members were women. 3 In conflict-affected countries, 4 the representation of women
on COVID-19 task forces is even lower, at 18 per cent. 5
4.
At its core, the women and peace and security agenda is a crisis-prevention
agenda. In conflict-affected countries, women’s organizations and networks are a
lifeline for their communities and at-risk groups. Although the primary responsibility
for handling public health emergencies lies with the State, women’s groups have
demonstrated that they are essential leaders in emergencies and play a key role in
maintaining social cohesion and preventing further conflict and instability. They have
the community’s trust and outreach capacity, which are crucial when managing public
health messaging during a pandemic. Unless they are financially supported, such
organizations run the risk of halting operations.
5.
Over the past year, women have been at the forefront of social movements under
which people have filled the streets, demanding their rights, equality, a different
social contract and more ambitious climate action. One of th e most commented upon
features of those social movements, including in countries like Algeria, Chile,
Colombia, Haiti, Iraq, Lebanon and the Sudan, was the prominent leadership of
women of all ages. Research shows that participation of women on the front l ine is
highly correlated with the chance that a social movement will use non -violent
methods and succeed, even in highly repressive contexts. 6
6.
The combination of vibrant social movements, fragile peace agreements and a
global pandemic is a wake-up call to build more equal and inclusive societies. The
effects of ignoring the lessons learned from decades of women’s peace activism and
our own commitments to women and peace and security will be long -lasting and
intergenerational for women, as well as have an impact on collective efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
7.
The present report is especially timely, not only because of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), but because
of the juncture between losing hard-fought gains on gender equality and peace and
recovering better from the COVID-19 pandemic. The report was informed by analysis
of progress and trends, based on data and informatio n provided by entities of the
United Nations system, Member States, regional organizations and civil society and
from globally recognized data sources. Key findings include the following:

__________________

Care International, “Most countries fail to include women in their COVID -19 response teams and
plans”, press release, 9 June 2020. Available at www.care-international.org/news/pressreleases/most-countries-fail-to-include-women-in-their-covid-19-response-teams-plans.
4
In the present report, that includes agenda items of which the Security Council is currently seized
and which were considered by the Council at a formal meeting during the p eriod from 1 January
to 31 December 2019, countries with peacekeeping or special political missions in 2019 and
countries that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2019.
5
UN-Women analysis of data available from 12 situations of which the Security Council is seized.
6
Erica Chenoweth and others, “Women’s participation and the fate of nonviolent campaigns: a
report on the Women in Resistance (WiRe) data set”, paper prepared for the One Earth Future
Foundation, Broomfield, Colorado, 2019.
3

2/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

(a) Between 1992 and 2019, women constituted on average 13 per cen t of
negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and 6 per cent of signatories in major peace
processes worldwide; 7
(b) Worldwide, the percentage of peace agreements with gender equality
provisions increased, from 14 to 22 per cent between 1995 and 2019; 8
(c) As at May 2020, 5.4 per cent of United Nations military personnel and
15.1 per cent of police personnel were women, compared with 3 and 10 per cent,
respectively, in 2015; 9
(d) The United Nations has verified 102 women human rights defenders,
journalists and trade unionists as having been killed in 26 conflict-affected countries
between 2015 to 2019, which is likely an undercount; those incidents are expected to
increase, due to the mobility restrictions and reductions in protective measures put
into place to combat the pandemic; 10
(e) The representation of women in national parliaments has increased, from
13.1 per cent in 2000 to 24.9 per cent in 2020; in conflict-affected countries, the
representation of women in parliaments remains lower, at 18.9 pe r cent; 11
(f) The share of women in national parliaments in conflict and post -conflict
countries with legislated quotas is more than twice that of those without them (23 per
cent and 10.8 per cent, respectively), and the share of women in local government
bodies with quotas is 26 per cent – over three times higher than that for those without
quotas; 12
(g) As at July 2020, 85 Member States (44 per cent of the United Nations
membership) had translated the women and peace and security agenda into national
action plans – an increase from 53 in 2015 and 19 in 2010 – but only 24 per cent
included a budget for the implementation of those plans at the time of adoption; and
55 local action plans on women and peace and security have been adopted, in 16
countries; 13
(h) In the first five years after resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, only 15
per cent of Security Council resolutions included explicit references to women and
peace and security issues; between 2017 and 2019, the proportion had risen to
approximately 70 per cent; 14

__________________

Council on Foreign Relations, “Women’s participation in peace processes”, 30 January 2019.
Available at www.cfr.org/womens-participation-in-peace-processes.
8
Data from University of Edinburgh, PA-X Peace Agreements Database, version 3. Available at
www.peaceagreements.org/.
9
Data from Department of Peace Operations and Department of Operational Support. Available at
https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/gender.
10
Data from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in
cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and the International Labour Organization (ILO).
11
Data as at 1 January 2020. Excludes the Niger and Yemen. UN-Women calculations based on
reporting under Sustainable Development Goal indicator 5.5.1.
12
Data on the proportion of women in national parliaments and local government obtained from
United Nations, Statistics Division of the Secretariat, Global Sustainable De velopment Goal
Indicators Database. Available at https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database. Data on gender
quotas obtained from International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assist ance, Stockholm
University and Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), Global Database of Gender Quotas. Available at
www.quotaproject.org.
13
UN-Women analysis of national and local action plans on women and peace and security.
14
Data from reports of the Secretary-General on woman and peace and security for the
corresponding years.
7

20-12597

3/37

S/2020/946

(i) Total bilateral allocable aid committed to support gender equality efforts
in fragile and conflict-affected countries continued to increase, with $20.5 billion per
year between 2017 and 2018, compared with $18 billion per year between 2015 and
2016; however, bilateral aid to women’s organizations has stagnated, at 0.2 per cent
of total bilateral aid; 15
(j) In 2019, global military expenditure reached $1.9 trillion, following the
largest annual increase in a decade, 16 but only 30 per cent of national action plans
include disarmament as an area of focus.

II. Women and peace and security agenda in 2020: progress,
challenges and emerging issues
8.
In the previous report on women and peace and security ( S/2019/800), which
included an assessment of the implementation of the recommendations relating to
women and peace and security relevant to the United Nations system from the three
peace and security reviews undertaken in 2015, 17 many implementation gaps were
brought into sharp focus. It is high time do better everywhere – from local, informal
conflict resolution to formal peace negotiations, in the Security Council chamber and
in the rooms where plans and budgets for peacebuilding and recovery are decided –
and to ensure the seamless interconnection of those endeavours. What is supported
and advocated in one sphere must often be brought into practice in another. For
example, the conclusions of the Berlin Conference on Libya (S/2020/63, annex I),
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2510 (2020), encouraged the full,
effective, and meaningful participation of women, but the Libyan representatives in
the three UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan dialogue tracks on security, political and
economic matters are overwhelmingly men. 18
9.
In the previous report, six areas that needed accelerated action were highlighted:
the meaningful participation of women in peace processes and the implementation of
the results; women’s economic security and access to resources; protection and
support for women human rights defenders and peacebuilders; increasing the number
and strengthening the influence of women in peacekeeping missions and national
security forces; financing for the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda; and making United Nations leaders accountable for delivering on the
commitments of the women and peace and security agenda, from meeting targets to
improving analysis and messaging.
10. The report contained information on progress across those and other areas of the
agenda, with particular attention given to follow up on the concrete com mitments and
recommendations put forward in the preceding report. Moving forward, more
attention must be paid to the intersecting forms of discrimination that many women
face based on race, ethnicity, ability, economic status, sexual orientation and gender
identity and to the removal of structural barriers to increase the participation of a
__________________

Data from Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Creditor Reporting
System. Available at http://stats.oecd.org.
16
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, “Global military expenditure sees largest
annual increase in a decade – says SIPRI – reaching $1917 billion in 2019”, 27 April 2020.
Available at www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2020/global-military-expenditure-sees-largestannual-increase-decade-says-sipri-reaching-1917-billion.
17
The three reviews were: Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace: a global study on the implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1325, study prepared for UN-Women, 2015; A/70/95-S/2015/446; and A/69/968S/2015/490.
18
All of the representatives in the security and economic tracks are men, and only 7 of the 26
participants in the political track are women.
15

4/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

diverse complement of women in preventing and resolving conflict and building
peace.
11. The mutually reinforcing United Nations reforms undertaken across the areas of
management, peace and security and development lay a solid foundation for a
coherent approach to inclusive analysis, planning and programming processes,
including gender-responsive approaches. Some progress is already evident in
integrated leadership and analysis at Headquarters and on the ground, in contexts such
as the transitions in Haiti and the Sudan. More must be done, however, to make sure
that women are at the centre of the Organization’s development, peace and security,
humanitarian and post-pandemic long-term recovery plans. The Secretary-General’s
gender parity strategy, which is integrated into all the reforms, has had a significant
impact on the number of women in peace operations, a key commitment of the women
and peace and security agenda.

A.

Advancing gender equality and the meaningful participation of
women in peace processes and political transitions
12. Women peacebuilders and feminist movements have long called for an end to
discriminatory laws and practices, which deny or limit acce ss for women to justice
and to social, political and economic opportunities. In 2019, Sudanese student and
activist Alaa Salah, speaking to the Security Council at the annual debate on women
and peace and security, said that, if women were not represented at the peace table,
and if they did not have a meaningful voice in parliament, their rights would not be
guaranteed, discriminatory and restrictive laws would remain unchanged and the
cycle of instability and violence would continue (see S/PV.8649).
13. The full, equal and meaningful participation of women and the realization of
women’s rights must immediately be put at the core of all approaches to conflict
prevention, resolution and recovery efforts, not only by exposing and tackling gender
discrimination and bias in planning and decision-making, but also by ensuring that
there are solid building blocks for the inclusive participation of women. There is
sufficient knowledge and good practices to build on, su ch as inclusive peace process
design approaches, which should be used and encouraged by all mediators. The
primary cause of the lack of progress, however, is the absence of political will, in
particular from parties to conflicts, to fully realize the globa l commitments enshrined
in the women and peace and security agenda across all stages of peace processes.
With increased commitments, reinforced policies and accountability frameworks for
Member States, regional organizations and the United Nations, as well as new
Member State initiatives, such as the Commitment 2025 initiative led by Finland and
Spain, a radical shift could happen and be measured not only in numbers around the
table, but also in gender-inclusive and gender-responsive approaches to conflict
prevention and resolution and in the design and implementation of peace agreements.
14. On 23 March 2020, in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic spreading around
the world, the Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire – an immediate
cessation of hostilities in all corners of the globe to reinforce diplomatic action, help
to create conditions for the delivery of lifesaving aid and bring hope to places that
were among the most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequently, he made
a dedicated call for an end to all violence everywhere, from war zones to people’s
homes, in the light of the worrying global surge of violence against women during
the COVID-19 pandemic and the related lockdowns. Member States, parties to
conflicts, regional organizations and civil society actors, including many women’s
organizations, were swift to respond to the calls, either by lending their support or by
taking specific measures. The Security Council endorsed the global ceasefire in its

20-12597

5/37

S/2020/946

resolution 2532 (2020), recognizing the risk that fragile peace processes could be
derailed in the wake of the pandemic. Support for the inclusion of women is more
important now than ever, as is the link between individual and international peace and
security, which formed the core of the agenda 20 years ago.
15. By and large, global progress in realizing women’s rights to equally and
meaningfully participate in decisions concerning the future of their countries across
all stages of peace processes remains inadequate. Between 1992 and 2019, women
constituted on average 13 per cent of negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and 6 per
cent of signatories in the major peace processes worldwide that were tracked by the
Council on Foreign Relations. Although there has been some progress in increasing
the participation of women, about 7 of every 10 peace processes still did not include
women mediators or women signatories – the latter an indicator that few women
participated in leadership roles as negotiators, guarantors or witnesses. 19 Collecting
and making public the data on the participation of women in peace processes in real
time could help to put pressure on all actors to ensure the inclusion of women. The
participation of women is non-negotiable. More men must step up and do their part
to break the cycle of exclusion.
16. In response to the previous report and Security Council resolution 2493 (2019),
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs began holding context-specific
high-level strategy meetings to design and support inclusive peace processes. The
first such meeting, held virtually in April 2020 with the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary General for Yemen, explored actions to enhance gender inclusion in
the Yemeni peace process, including the effectiveness and impact of the Yemeni
Women’s Technical Advisory Group. Sharing the outcomes of those sessions with the
Security Council Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, as well
as maintaining close engagement with women leaders and peacebuilders, could help
to shape priorities, including for displaced women. Efforts are also being made to
address gender imbalance on mediation teams. In 2019, teams supporting United
Nations-led and jointly led peace processes comprised 30 per cent women on average.
17. In the context of shrinking physical, civic and political spaces, efforts to create
new pathways for the meaningful participation of women in peace proce sses, through
virtual consultations and engagement, such as those by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, have been welcome. At the same time, it is important to recognize that
consultations, either online or in person, cannot be a substitute for direct participation.
Furthermore, digital inclusion initiatives require targeted efforts to address gender
gaps and other gaps in access to power, as well as in access to digital technology. It
is important that all actors facilitating and supporting peace processes scale up
political support for inclusive processes and invest in processes and technology that
can reach and meaningfully engage all constituents.
18. Delegations to peace talks in wartime are a reflection of the conflict and societal
power structures. When decision-making structures consistently exclude women from
visible roles, parties to conflicts are more likely to see them as untested, given that
they have not previously participated, and they therefore go unrecognized. Between
2018 and 2019, the number of delegations of parties to conflicts at United Nations led and jointly led peace processes that included women decreased, but there was
some notable progress, such as in the peace negotiations concerning the Central
African Republic, held in Khartoum in 2019, at which a woman represented an armed
group, directly participated in the peace negotiations and was one of the signatories
to the agreement. In August 2020, as the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
from Darfur, South Kordofan and the Blue Nile signed eight protocols towards a
__________________
19

6/37

Council on Foreign Relations, “Women’s participation in peace processes”.
20-12597

S/2020/946

comprehensive peace agreement, several women represented the armed groups and
were signatories to four of them. That is an important signal a nd step forward for the
Sudan. In 2019, the chairs of the Geneva International Discussions initiated the
implementation of a joint chairs’ strategy and action plan on women and peace and
security and systematically engaged with women’s civil society groups .
19. The underrepresentation of women is also evident in negotiations that are not
led by the United Nations. None of the bilateral talks between the United States of
America and the Taliban held in Doha included Afghan women, the intra -Afghan
dialogue, held in Doha in July 2019 and hosted jointly by Germany and Qatar, brought
together Afghan civil society groups, government representatives acting in their
personal capacity and representatives of the Taliban. Of the 67 participants, 10 were
women. They played a critical role in the talks and helped to foster a productive
environment for dialogue. In the opening ceremony of the intra -Afghan negotiations
between Afghanistan and the Taliban held in September, three of the four women
members of the Afghan negotiation team participated, whereas the Taliban delegation
consisted exclusively of men.
20. A multitrack approach that increases the number of women, integrates a gender
equality perspective and is grounded in discussions with feminist and women’s rights
constituencies, including human rights defenders and peacebuilders, is critical.
United Nations envoys have worked with partners across the United Nations system
and third-party mediation organizations to help to envision and operationalize such
approaches. Mediators are expected to promote the direct participation of women,
clearly articulate it as a priority, rather than as something that can be addressed only
after peace between warring parties has been achieved, and explore all possible
strategies, including providing incentives and implementing temporary special
measures. In 2019, advisory boards provided important advisory and consultative
spaces for women’s voices, including in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen,
but they are not a substitute for the direct participation of women. Regular
consultations with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and the continued advocacy
by the Office of the Special Envoy helped to ensure that women, including members
of the Advisory Board, achieved 28 per cent participation in the constitutional
committee for the Syrian Arab Republic, including in its smaller drafting body. The
creation of a third bloc of Syrian experts, civil society members and others helped to
improve the representation of women and the presence of independent voices; it offers
a model for consideration in other processes. However, numerical representation is
only the first step. The symbolic, superficial, last-minute or ad hoc representation of
women, without the real opportunity to influence the outcome of processes, cannot
be considered enough or acceptable, especially in processes supported by the United
Nations, especially given that such insufficient representation withholds valuable
perspectives and input from those processes.
21. Mediators must ensure the participation of representatives of social movements
and organizations that advocate for the issues at the heart of the women and peace
and security agenda. Historically, the participation of women in formal peace
processes has frequently been initiated and attained through concerted pressure by
women’s organizations in combination with individual leaders. In 2019, the United
Nations ensured regular consultations with women’s civil society organizations in all
four active peace processes that it led or jointly led. In the Central African Republic,
that resulted in provisions on gender equality being in the final agreement. In Iraq
and Lebanon, the United Nations missions engaged with women members of protest
movements and supported reforms aimed at promoting and protecting women’s rights.
In Haiti and Iraq, the missions advocated for accountability for the killing and
abduction of women protesters. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the mission
is supporting a network of women mediators to reinforce the participation of women
20-12597

7/37

S/2020/946

and their involvement in community dialogues and conflict resolution at the local
level.
22. An analysis of trends for the period from 1995 to 2019 reveals that globally the
percentage of peace agreements 20 with provisions on gender equality has grown over
time (from 14 to 22 per cent), while remaining disappointingly low overall (see
figure 1). The percentage is much lower for partial agreements, especially ceasefires.
Between 2015 and 2019, only 11 per cent of ceasefire agreements included provisions
on gender equality, compared with 26 per cent of other peace agreement types. That
is compounded by the low representation of women in ceasefire monitoring
mechanisms.
Figure 1
Percentage of peace agreements with provisions on gender equality, 1995 –2019
40

30

26

Percentage

Total agreements

20

Other peace
agreement types

22

16

14

11

10

Ceasefire
agreements

2
0
1995–1999 2000–2004 2005–2009 2010–2014 2015–2019

Source: PA-X Peace Agreements Database.
Note: Other agreement types include other partial agreements and comprehensive and
implementation agreements.

23. While peace negotiations are understandably in the spotlight, the
underrepresentation of women is typically replicated in the committees and bodies
set up to implement peace agreements once they are signed. In Mali, more than four
years after the signing of the peace agreement, women made up 3 per cent of the
national commission on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, 6 per cent of
the national council for security sector reform, 20 per cent of the truth, justice and
reconciliation commission and 4 per cent of the subcommittees of the agreement
monitoring committee. In several other committees, there were no women at all.
Those paltry numbers were still an improvement over the fir st year, when there was
only one woman among approximately 70 members of the agreement monitoring
committee and its four technical subcommittees. In South Sudan, only two
committees have met the 35 per cent quota for women set out in the Revitalized
__________________
20

8/37

Data from PA-X Peace Agreements Database, for which a peace agreement is defined broadly as
a formal, publicly available document produced after discussions with conflict protagonists and
mutually agreed to by some or all of them, addressing conflict with a view to ending it.
20-12597

S/2020/946

Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Although 20 per cent of
the committees were chaired by women, women averaged only 18 per cent of the
membership of those national bodies; that was after the numbers had improved over
the course of 2019, thanks to the sustained advocacy of women’s organizations. In
the Central African Republic, the percentage of women in the formal monitoring
mechanisms of the peace agreement is 17 per cent at the national level and 23 per
cent at the local level. Colombia offers the rare exception, where women are better
represented and where the implementation of the provisions on gender equality in the
peace agreement are actually being tracked, both by the Government and by civil
society groups.

B.

Gender-responsive peacekeeping and peace operations
24. Women and peace and security is one of the overarching priorities of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which includes commitments on the full participation of
women in peace and political processes, the systematic integration of women and
peace and security into all stages of planning, implementation, analysis and reporting
and the greater representation of women in peace operations. There has been progress
made in each of those areas.
25. Using all the resources and expertise of United Nations peace operations is
required to ensure that women are leading and creating political solutions.
Partnerships with local feminist leaders and women’s rights organizations are
crucially important. In northern Mali, for example, the United Nations mission and
UN-Women established a Case de la Paix to bring together 76 women’s organizations
from diverse ethnic groups with common peacebuilding goals. The mission has also
worked with the United Nations country team, civil society organizations and the
Government to increase the percentage of women in the implementation bodies of the
peace agreement. In the Central African Republic, women made up only 10 per cent
of active participants and observers in the negotiations of the peace agreement signed
in 2019, and even that required significant coordinated mobilization by the African
Union, the United Nations and civil society groups, including the African Women
Leaders Network and the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation. In South Sudan, 28 per cent of participants in the local peace negotiations
supported or monitored by the United Nations mission were women. Those peace
operations: helped Darfuri women to participate in discussions in Khartoum about the
political transition and to establish a platform for women to influence the peace
process in Juba; engaged with Misseriya and Ngok Dinka women in intercommunity
conflict prevention mechanisms in Abeyi; and facilitated the participation of Malian
women in the 2020 elections, which increased their rep resentation in the parliament
from 10 to 28 per cent, the additional difficulties brought about by the COVID -19
pandemic notwithstanding.
26. To support inclusive political transitions, the Security Council should more
consistently issue specific instructions and mandates to integrate a gender perspective
into security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. Although women combatants represent a small percentage of demobilized
caseloads in peacekeeping missions, the implementation of community violence
reduction projects has shown the positive impact of women in mitigating local
conflict, preventing recruitment into armed groups, increasing the sustainability of
reintegration and building community resilience. In both the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali, for example, women represent half of the beneficiaries of
community violence reduction projects.
27. The implementation of new accountability tools and strategic guidance, from
standardized gender-responsive conflict analysis as part of transition planning to the

20-12597

9/37

S/2020/946

inclusion of a special objective on women and peace and security in the compacts of
senior representatives, has also yielded results. It is made possible by the availability
of gender expertise in peace operations, thanks to Member States raising the
importance of such expertise in the context of Security Council mandates and budget
negotiations. The successor political missions to two of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Haiti and the Sudan integrated gender equality
considerations systematically throughout their planning and mandates. Improved
reporting has given more visibility to women and peace and security issues and can
also lead to more positive and durable results. For example, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the presence of women corrections officers increased to 25
per cent, and the mission reinforced patrols and surveillance in 18 locations with
heightened security needs for women, informed by gender-responsive security
mapping. In Lebanon, the mission sector commanders and battalion commanders
must meet specific performance benchmarks on women and peace and security.
28. The United Nations has over 82,000 uniformed personnel across 22 peace
operations. Since the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
the representation of women has begun to inch upwards, after several years of
stagnation. In peacekeeping operations, as at May 2020, 5.4 per cent of military
personnel and 15.1 per cent of police personnel are women, compared with 3.3 and
10.2 per cent, respectively, in 2015 (see figure 2).
29. In October 2019, the Deputy Secretary-General undertook a high-level
solidarity mission with representatives of the African Union to the Horn of Africa and
met with women peacekeepers, who informed the mission of the range of challenges
they faced, including sexual harassment, inadequate or inappropriate facilities and a
lack of access to basic hygiene items such as sanitary pads. They also expressed their
frustration that, despite their qualifications, many had been assigned mainly to
administrative duties. The teams in-country, including across missions and
development agencies, in partnership with Member States, are seeking solutions to
those challenges.
30. The positive trends seen in traditionally male-dominated peacekeeping support
components are welcome. The number of women in technical positions in mine action
has increased, from 3 per cent in 2017 to 19 per cent in 2020. The percentage of
women corrections officers and justice officers deployed as government -provided
personnel increased, from 25 per cent in 2018 to 29 per cent in 2019, exceeding
established targets. In adopting resolution 2538 (2020) – the first resolution on
peacekeeping fully devoted to the representation of women – the Security Council
demonstrated the importance of that issue. The Elsie Initiative led by Canada, and all
the countries that have joined it or support the Elsie Initiative Fund, is commendable.
It is aimed at supporting and incentivizing efforts to increase the meaningful
participation of uniformed women in United Nations peace operations, in line with
the recommendations of the global study conducted in 2015. 21

__________________
21

10/37

Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict.
20-12597

S/2020/946

Figure 2
Proportion of women military and police personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, 2010–2020

20

15.1
15

10.2

Percentage

9.6

Police

10

5.4
5

Military

3.3
2.4

May 2020

2019

2018

2017

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

0

Source: Department of Peace Operations and Department of Operational Support. Available at
https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/gender.

31. Although those efforts are on the right track, there is still a long wa y to go.
Dialogue with civil society organizations can sometimes be ad hoc, tied to one -off
events and performative, rather than regular, participatory and meaningful.
Substantive engagement with women’s civil society organizations and women human
rights defenders requires further action in order to become the core operating
framework of all United Nations missions, in line with the Secretary -General’s call
to action for human rights. Beyond the numbers, United Nations reporting will be
further enhanced to include political analysis of United Nations mission engagement
in that area of work, including any signs of backlash or reprisals, and analysis of the
linkages between harmful gender norms and conflict dynamics. It also entails
investing in data-driven communications that better convey the important role of
women leaders and networks in advancing political solutions and consolidating peace
in peacekeeping contexts and the positive impact that United Nations peacekeeping
efforts can have on women’s lives. For example, recent research contends that
locations where peacekeeping operations are deployed have improved maternal health
outcomes, access to vaccinations and school enrolment rates among girls. 22

__________________
22

20-12597

Theodora Ismene Gizelis and Xun Cao, “A security dividend: peacekeeping and maternal health
outcomes and access”, Journal of Peace Research, July 2019.
11/37

S/2020/946

C.

Protecting and promoting the human rights of women and girls in
conflict settings and in the context of humanitarian emergencies
32. At the end of 2019, women’s rights activist and aid worker Almaas Elman was
shot and killed in Mogadishu, a few hours after she had posted on social media about
her sister’s speech at the United Nations on the importance of reconciliation. Like her
parents and two sisters, she was devoting her life to the service of others and the
betterment of Somalia. In June 2019, Fatima “Natasha” Khalil, a 24-year-old human
rights worker who had also returned to Afghanistan to help others, was killed along
with her driver in another explosion in Kabul. She was a former refugee and an
outspoken advocate for women’s rights who had returned to Kabul to join the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
33. In 26 conflict-affected countries, the United Nations has verified 102 killings of
women human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists that occurred between
2015 to 2019, which is likely an undercount. 23 In Colombia, the Ombudsman’s Office
reported 480 threats against women leaders and women human rights defenders in
2019, including misogynistic insults and threats of sexual violence. At least 12 of
them were killed, a 50 per cent increase compared with the previous year. In 2020, as
soon as the lockdowns in response to the COVID-19 pandemic went into effect in
Colombia, a women’s rights activist was killed outside her home and an assassination
attempt was made against an activist for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex persons. More people were killed in the following
days, as women leaders became easy targets when confined in their homes and
security personnel were diverted to enforce quarantines. Women’s rights
organizations are also the most affected by the enactment of laws that shrink civic
space. Aside from the scrutiny and restrictions in some countries brought about by
counter-terrorism laws, various other restrictions on non -governmental organizations
may be used by the authorities to target civil society actors that advocate on behalf of
women and girls in their communities.
34. Much more must be done to support women and women’s rights organizations
and their efforts to stand up for human rights, from immediate condemnation to
diligent follow-up. In the vast majority of murders of women’s human rights
defenders, the victims had been previously threatened and did not receive the
necessary protection and support from State authoritie s from the time that they
reported the threats to the time that they were murdered. Available data suggest that
many of them worked on sexual and reproductive health and rights, indigenous rights
and environmental issues. 24 The international community is asked to provide
sustained financing to organizations channelling emergency funds to women human
rights defenders at risk. The proliferation of national strategies and networks to
protect women human rights defenders and the tireless work of national human rights
bodies is welcomed. 25
35. In his report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487), the SecretaryGeneral provided a sombre record of atrocities, documenting 2,838 cases of conflict -

__________________

Data from OHCHR, in cooperation with UNESCO and ILO. Organizations such as CIVICUS and
Front Line Defenders report higher numbers.
24
Front Line Defenders, “Global Analysis 2019”, 11 January 2020. Available at
www.frontlinedefenders.org/en/resource-publication/global-analysis-2019.
25
Two thirds of conflict-affected countries reviewed for the present report (29 of 45) have national
human rights institutions fully or partially in compliance with the principles relating to the status
of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Pari s Principles);
there remained 14 countries with no accredited national human rights institutions. One third of
national human rights institutions are led by women, serving as chairpersons of commission -type
human rights institutions or as heads of ombudsperson-type institutions.
23

12/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

related sexual violence verified by the United Nations in 2019; in 96 per cent of cases,
the violence was targeted at women and girls, in violation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions on that subject adopted since 2008. Although that information
does not reflect the full scale and prevalence of those crimes, due to the chronic
underreporting fuelled by entrenched gender inequality, fear, stigma and lack of
access to services and judicial mechanisms, it serves to illustrate its severity. The
impact of conflict-related sexual violence may extend through generations, given that,
in some countries, children born out of rape are at risk of becoming stateless and may
lack access to health care, education and basic services. It was the ninth such report
in which the Secretary-General listed parties credibly suspected of committing or
being responsible for patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in countries
and situations of which the Security Council is seized. In the past decade, 65 parties
have been listed, across eleven countries, and only 1 has ever been delisted, after
taking the necessary actions. The Secretary-General called for enhanced monitoring
and enforcement of compliance, given that 42 of those parties had not made any
commitments to address those grave human rights violations and that sanctions
committees had not imposed sanctions on individuals or entities specifically for
sexual violence, despite eight of them explicitly including those crimes as designation
criteria. 26 Recent research confirms that rates of non-partner sexual violence in
conflict-affected countries are extraordinarily high compared with non -conflict
contexts. 27
36. The unconscionable attack on the maternity ward of the Sad Bistar Hospital in
Kabul in May, which resulted in the killing of 24 civilians, including 16 women and
newborn babies, was a stark reminder of the many ways in which women’s and girls’
lives are assaulted in conflict-affected countries. In Afghanistan, where there is a high
level of underreporting, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
documented 27 cases of conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487, para. 17). It
also documented 204 other cases of serious crimes of violence against women,
including 96 cases of so-called “honour killings”, 45 cases of forced and child
marriage and six threats against women human rights defenders. In Yemen, women
political leaders and activists have been systematically targeted by the Houthis since
2017, as detailed by the Panel of Experts on Yemen established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2140 (2014), which pointed to a network led by the director of the
criminal investigation department in Sana’a (see S/2020/313). While the world was
entering into the unprecedented lockdown in response to the COVID -19 pandemic
and Yemeni feminist groups were joining the call for a global ceasefire, the Houthis
allegedly attacked the women’s section of the central prison in Ta‘izz, killing seven
women and a child living with his detained mother and injuring 26 other wome n.
37. Earlier in 2020, the escalation in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
prompted the flight of 1 million people over the course of two months, the largest
incident of mass displacement since the war began nine years ago. Some Syrian
children are so traumatized that they no longer speak, and the numbers of early
deliveries, miscarriages and low-weight births are increasing. In addition to the
widely documented cases of gender-based violence, abduction and trafficking, Syrian
women suffer from the disappearance or detention of their husbands or male relatives,
also because they risk losing their legal rights to housing and land without knowing
__________________

Twenty-two individuals and four entities in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Libya and South Sudan have had crimes of sexual violence added to the
narrative accounts of the violations in their cases, although their designations were primarily
based on other grounds.
27
Maureen Murphy and others, “What works to prevent violence against women and girls in
conflict and humanitarian crisis”, synthesis brief prepared for What Works to Prevent Violen ce,
p. 8. Available at www.whatworks.co.za/documents/publications/355-p868-irc-synthesis-briefreport-lr-26092019/file.
26

20-12597

13/37

S/2020/946

the whereabouts of their husbands or male relatives or without having a death
certificate. In conflicts throughout the world, women-headed households are
especially at risk. In Ukraine, nearly 70 per cent of households on both sides of the
contact line are headed by women, who often have no access to social benefits and
limited access to income or protection. In Yemen, women-headed households,
especially in situations of displacement, are at higher risk of eviction and report
extreme levels of mental and emotional suffering.
38. Intimate partner violence perpetrated against women and girls is more prevalent
than non-partner sexual violence, even during times of conflict and humanitarian
crises. The results of a cross-sectional survey in three conflict-affected areas in South
Sudan revealed that up to a third of women and girls had experienced sexual assault
by a non-partner during their lifetime; however, the rates of intimate partner violence
were higher, ranging from 54 to 73 per cent. 28 There is an alarming rise in intimate
partner violence in situations of quarantine, in terms of both frequency and severity.
Experts are certain that the compounded effects of the COVID -19 pandemic in
conflict-affected settings will increase the rates of child marriage, sexual exploitation
and abuse and trafficking in persons. Refugee and displaced women and girls are
found to be particularly at risk in that regard. In 2018, women and girls accounted for
about 65 per cent of the more than 45,000 detected victims globally, and yet, there
has been a decline in the prosecution of traffickers. 29 It is of concern that the
COVID-19 outbreak is increasing the risks of sexual exploitation and abuse, due to a
surge in negative coping strategies, isolation measures, lack of accountability, the
normalization of violence perpetrated by men and boys, limited access to information,
services and reporting channels and unequal access to food and health supplies.
39. Women and girls with disabilities account for more than half of all persons with
disabilities and nearly one fifth of all women worldwide. Women and girls with
disabilities are also disproportionately represented in conflict settings. For example,
according to a humanitarian needs assessment conducted in the Syrian Arab Republic
in December 2019, 28 per cent of all displaced women in the Syrian Arab Republic
were women with disabilities. They are less likely to be prioritized by or have access
to humanitarian response efforts and are less likely to be included in peacebuilding.
Addressing the rights of women with disabilities is mandated by the Security Council,
in its resolution 2475 (2019).
40. In its resolution 2122 (2013), adopted unanimously at its 7044th meeting, the
Security Council noted the need for access to the full range of sexual and reproductive
health services, including regarding pregnancies resulting from rape, without
discrimination. In November 2019, in the context of the commemorations of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the International Conference on Popula tion and
Development, renewed commitment to sexual and reproductive health and rights was
shown. However, the COVID-19 pandemic poses a daunting challenge to women’s
health (see figure 3). The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) has warned that
the pandemic could result in close to an additional 50 million women with an unmet
need for contraception, including due to the disruption of supply chains, travel
restrictions and the diversion of women’s health resources to other services. In
addition, in 2019, there were already more than 1,000 security incidents affecting
health-care facilities, a significant increase from 795 in 2018. 30 In certain conflictaffected or fragile States, the maternal mortality rate is alarmingly high, although it
has dropped by 38 per cent worldwide since 2000 (from 342 to 211 maternal deaths
__________________

Maureen Murphy and others, “What works to prevent violence against women and girls”, p. 8.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Global Report on Trafficking in Persons
2020 (forthcoming).
30
S/2020/366; and World Health Organization Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care.
Available at https://extranet.who.int/ssa/Index.aspx.
28
29

14/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

per 100,000 live births). It is of concern that maternal mortality has worsened in
Myanmar, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of) in recent years. Most maternal deaths can be prevented by providing
high-quality care before, during and after childbirth and ensuring access to
comprehensive and non-discriminatory sexual and reproductive health services.
Figure 3
Extent of national laws and regulations that guarantee full and equal access to sexual and reproductive
health care, information and education, conflict-affected or fragile countries, 2019

Source: United Nations, Statistics Division of the Secretariat, Global Sustainable Developme nt Goals Indicators Database,
indicator 5.6.2. Available at https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database.

41. Many stakeholders are increasing their efforts to meet those challenges,
reaching millions of women and girls in conflict-affected countries with services that
barely existed two decades ago. In the conference on ending sexual and gender-based
violence in humanitarian crises, held in Oslo in 2019, 21 donors pledged $363 million
for programmes in 2019 and 2020. The joint European Union-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative is targeting 50 million beneficiaries throughout the world,
including in many humanitarian emergencies and in conflict-affected countries.
Prevention-oriented interventions work, especially when being led by women,
targeting social norms and involving the whole community. Attitudes can change
relatively quickly when enough resources and expertise are at hand. One such
programme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo resulted in a reduction in
intimate partner violence from 69 to 29 per cent and in non -partner sexual violence
from 21 to 4 per cent, in just a few years. 31
42. United Nations women protection advisers and human rights officers in peace
operations play a vital role. The United Nations mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo launched an action plan to prevent and address conflict -related sexual
violence perpetrated by the Raia Mutomboki faction, which had been responsible for
the highest number of recorded incidents in the previous year. The plan has led to a
decrease of almost 72 per cent in reported conflict-related sexual violence in the
__________________
31

20-12597

Rachel Jewkes, Erin Stern and Leane Ramsoomar, “Preventing violence against women and girls:
community activism approaches to shift harmful gender attitudes, roles and social norms”,
evidence review prepared for What Works to Prevent Violence, p. 5. Available a t
www.whatworks.co.za/documents/publications/357-social-norms-briefweb-28092019/file.
15/37

S/2020/946

region since 2018. It has also led to the trial of the faction leader, who was sentenced
to life imprisonment for crimes against humanity, including rape and sexual slavery.
In South Sudan, the United Nations has been engaging with armed groups for the
release of hundreds of women and girls abducted in Western Equatoria State. Many
are still being held in military camps. Globally, efforts to free other abducted women
and girls, like the many Yazidi women and girls still being held captive, must be
redoubled.
43. As at December 2019, 167.6 million people needed humanitarian assistance 32 –
the highest reported figure in decades. The number of people experiencing acute
hunger increased, from 113 million in 2018 to 135 million in 2019, which is a fraction
of those that are chronically hungry. 33 Almost 60 per cent of people experiencing acute
hunger are living in conflict-affected countries. South Sudan and Yemen and the Sahel
are the biggest areas of concern. The global pandemic is expected to bring about a
worldwide economic crisis, increased food insecurity, a sharp drop in remittances, a
collapse in oil prices and cuts in life-saving foreign aid, all of which will have a
profound impact on women and girls, from food insecurity and hunger to
disengagement from education and rising incidences of gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse.
44. It is clear that the protection of, and leadership by, crisis-affected women and
girls is essential in order to have a sustainable and efficient impact in humanitarian
action. Although progress is evident in normative and policy frameworks, it remains
to be systematically translated into action in the lives of women and girls in need of
humanitarian assistance. In 2019, the Reference Group on Gender and Humanitarian
Action of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee published the first report on a gender
policy accountability framework, in which it established for the first time a
centralized accounting of how well the United Nations is delivering on its
commitments, standards and roles and responsibilities with regard to gender in the
context of humanitarian assistance. The report will be produced on an annual basis,
and all humanitarian organizations are encouraged to implement the Standing
Committee’s recommendations. 34 Funding for promoting gender equality in
humanitarian action remains low. The results of a joint study conducted by UNWomen and UNFPA covering Bangladesh, Jordan, Nigeria and Somalia revealed that
less than 51 per cent of the total funding requested to cover the needs of crisis-affected
women and girls was received and that programmes targeted at and/or tailored for
women and girls were disproportionately underfunded. 35 The Emergency Relief
Coordinator has identified gender-based violence as one of the four strategic priorities
for funding allocations. Analysis of and expertise in gender equality-related issues
will inform United Nations humanitarian efforts, including when responding to the
global pandemic and its consequences. Thus far, less than 10 per cent of the funding
called for in order to respond to gender-based violence as part of the global
humanitarian response plan for COVID-19 has been received.
__________________

United Nations, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Global humanitarian
overview 2020”. Available at www.unocha.org/sites/unocha/files/GHO-2020_v9.1.pdf.
33
World Food Programme, “2020 Global report on food crises”. Availa ble at
https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-0000114546/download/?_ga=2.103660224.
1556261707.1598964667-1440025491.1593782226.
34
Inter-Agency Standing Committee and UN-Women, “Gender accountability framework report:
2018”. Available at https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/iasc_af_gender_
report_2018.pdf.
35
UN-Women, “Funding for gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls in
humanitarian programming”. Available at www.unwomen.org/en/digitallibrary/publications/2020/06/funding-for-gender-equality-and-the-empowerment-of-women-andgirls-in-humanitarian-programming.
32

16/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

III. Building and sustaining peace: linking the women and peace
and security agenda to efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development
45. Preventing conflict and sustaining peace depends on addressing the root and
structural causes of instability, such as exclusion, injustice, inequality and the spread
of arms. The present section contains information on areas that are both vital to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and central to realizing the
women and peace and security agenda, such as disarmament, ensuring women’s
political rights, equitable economic systems and the rule of law, as well as emerging
issues, such as violent extremism and the climate crisis, in which the leadership,
influence and perspectives of women are sorely needed.
46. The results of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
conducted in 2020 36 revealed that many national and local actors, in particular
women, were still not always engaged in a meaningful way in the development and
advancement of national peacebuilding priorities. Despite advances made by bodies
such as the Peacebuilding Commission in integrating gender equality into i ts
programme of work and the Peacebuilding Fund in channelling financial support to
gender equality, more must be done to treat women and peace and security as a
fundamental part of peace processes and peacebuilding efforts and to address
structural barriers to the meaningful participation of women in those processes.

A.

Disarmament and arms control
47. Disarmament is core to what was originally envisioned for the women and peace
and security agenda. It also features prominently in the section on wome n and armed
conflict of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, under the strategic
objective and related commitments to reduce excessive military expenditures and
control the availability of armaments. However, the connections between the
disarmament agenda and the women and peace and security agenda are yet to be fully
explored. Only 30 per cent of national action plans on women and peace and security
include disarmament as an area of focus.
48. Efforts by the Office of the High Representative f or Disarmament Affairs and
individual Member States to bring greater attention to women and peace and security
commitments in various disarmament forums are welcomed. The national focal points
network on women and peace and security bringing disarmament an d arms control
issues, including the need to address the gender-specific threats and harm posed by
the approximately 1 billion small arms in circulation globally, to the centre of the
discussion on the implementation of the women and peace and security age nda at its
meeting held in Windhoek, Namibia, in 2019, is also welcomed. In a recent report on
the impact of arms transfers on human rights (A/HRC/44/29), the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights noted that ownership and use of arms related
closely to specific expressions of masculinity, power and control that furthered
gender-based discrimination and violence against women and girls.
49. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is collecting global
data on the gender dimension of individuals arrested, prosecuted and adjudicated for
illicit firearms trafficking offences. 37 In April, the Office for Disarmament Affairs

__________________
36
37

20-12597

See www.un.org/peacebuilding/content/2020-review-un-peacebuilding-architecture.
See UNODC and United Nations, Office for Disarmament Affairs, illicit arms flows
questionnaire global data collection tool. Available at www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-andanalysis/statistics/crime/iafq.html.
17/37

S/2020/946

launched a multi-year project on advancing gender-mainstreamed policies,
programmes and actions in the fight against small arms trafficking and misuse. The
full implementation of related treaties and instruments remains an urgent priority.
Countries advocating for the women and peace and security agenda are expected to
lead by example and take a strong stand on issues linked to arms trade and transfers,
which include halting global arms exports, a particularly urgently needed measure in
conflict-affected countries. Security Council arms embargoes and sanctions must be
respected by all, including in contexts such as Libya and South Sudan. Regional
initiatives, such as the “Silencing the guns by 2020” campaign of the African Union,
are particularly noteworthy.
50. Of deep concern is the renewed threat posed by nuclear weapons, with growing
tensions among nuclear powers and an eroding nuclear disarmament regime. In
marking the fiftieth anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, there must be a strong recommitment to the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction, as well as continued efforts by States to
promote the inclusion of gender perspectives into the work of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. Further research and discussion in multilateral forums of the
linkages between other weapons of mass destruction and gender is encouraged, given
that those fields trail behind the progress made in the field of nuclear weapons. In that
regard, a research report released in 2019 by the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research offers ideas for promoting gender-responsive assistance
within the context of the monitoring regimes for the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction.
51. New technologies and innovation can offer opportunities for the advancement
of gender equality. However, women and peace and security advocates have also
raised the alarm about the related risks, such as the potential for autonomous weapons
being used to carry out acts of gender-based violence. Machines with the power and
discretion to kill beyond human control are politically unacceptable and morally
repugnant. The growing investment by some Member States in such weapons
technologies is of particular concern.
52. Women remain chronically underrepresented in multilateral forums at which
arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament are addressed. In multilateral
meetings on disarmament, only one third of the participants are likely to be women,
and the proportion of women heads of delegation is even lower. 38 To address those
imbalances, it was decided in February 2019 that future disarmament groups of
governmental experts would aim to achieve the full and equal participation of women
in all such bodies, in accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Agenda for Disarmament. Strengthening the role of women and promoting a
diversity of voices in policymaking are crucial steps to achieving the collective goals
of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. Creating more inclusive,
effective and sustainable outcomes also requires looking beyond the numbers and
actively incorporating gender perspectives into policies and programmes, which
requires sustained investment in gender analysis, expertise and research.

__________________
38

18/37

Renata Hessmann Dalaqua, Kjølv Egeland and Torbjørn Graff Hugo, “Still behind the curve”,
report prepared for the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, Geneva, 2019.
20-12597

S/2020/946

B.

Political participation and representation
53. Men vastly outnumber women in political decision-making worldwide. Men
hold over three quarters of the world’s legislative power, with women representing
only 24.9 per cent of national parliamentarians. 39 In 2000, the percentage was 13.1
per cent. The representation of women is even lower in conflict and post-conflict
countries, at 18.9 per cent. At the subnational level, the proportion of women in local
government globally is 36 per cent, and it is 21 per cent in conflict -affected
countries. 40 Women under the age of 30 only represent 0.9 per cent of the world’s
parliamentarians. Young women commonly experience misogyny, and their
participation is hindered by discriminatory social norms and laws. A woman holds the
position of Head of State or Government in only 23 countries.
54. The COVID-19 pandemic placed the leadership of women in the spotlight.
Many analysts have noted how women leaders around the world have demonstrated
successful management of the pandemic on the basis of inclusive and evidence -based
leadership. Women parliamentarians championed gender-sensitive COVID-19
responses. Drawing on the lessons learned from the Ebola virus disease crisis, the
Parliamentary Women’s Caucus of Sierra Leone, supported by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), has engaged with State institutions, traditional
leaders and border authorities on mitigating the pandemic’s risks for women and girls
and on ensuring gender-sensitive response efforts. More parliaments are urged to
further identify ways to promote the leadership and participation of women in
COVID-19 response and recovery in the future.
55. Gender quotas, in combination with other temporary special measures, continue
to be effective means of reducing the gap in the political representation of women,
allowing women to realize their rights to equal representation and for societies to
benefit from the increased effectiveness of decision-making derived from greater
inclusion. That is why it is one of the areas of focus of the United Nations system in
jointly delivering on the call to action on human rights. An encouraging trend is that
most conflict and post-conflict countries reviewed in the context of the present report
used legislated quotas for national parliaments (64 per cent) and local government
(61 per cent). Consistent with previous reporting, the share of women in parliament
in conflict and post-conflict countries with legislated quotas is more than twice that
of those without such quotas (22.9 per cent with quotas compared with 10.8 per cent
without) (see figure 4). The representation of women in local government follows a
similar trend. The average representation of women in local government in countries
with quotas is 26 per cent, compared with 8 per cent in those without. 41 Recent
research has shown that including provisions on quotas in peace agreements was a
better predictor of the representation of women in post-conflict political contexts and
their labour force participation than any other provisions aimed at promoting gender
equality. 42 Recent reforms to introduce temporary special measures that promote
gender balance in the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Niger and Ukraine
are encouraging. To strengthen progress, Member States are urged to consider
adopting and enforcing quotas and other temporary special measures to achieve
gender balance at all levels of elected and appointed decision -making posts. Not all
temporary special measures are equally effective, however. In Afghanistan, 25 per

__________________

Data on women in national parliaments as at January 2020 from IPU. Available at
https://data.ipu.org/women-ranking?month=1&year=2020.
40
Data as at 1 January 2020. Excludes the Niger and Yemen. UN-Women calculation based on
reporting on Sustainable Development Goal indicator 5.5.1.
41
Excludes Yemen. UN-Women calculation.
42
See https://gnwp.org/nyu-research-2020.
39

20-12597

19/37

S/2020/946

cent of the provincial council seats are reserved for women. However, the leadership
of the 34 councils is overwhelmingly held by men, who chair 33 of them.
Figure 4
Proportion of women in national parliaments and local government in conflictaffected and post-conflict countries, 2019
30

26.0
22.9

Percentage

20

With legislated quota
Without legislated quota
10.8
10

8.3

0

National parliaments

Local government

Source: United Nations, Statistics Division of the Secretariat, Global Sustainable Development
Goals Indicators Database; International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance,
Stockholm University and Inter-Parliamentary Union, Global Database of Gender Quotas.
Note: Where data for 2019 were not available, the latest year available was used.

56. The underrepresentation of women remains common in positions in cabinets and
other governmental bodies, although there are examples of change. In Lebanon,
increasing gender equality and eliminating discrimination against women and girls
were two of the most unifying demands of the popular protests. In the new Cabinet,
there is an unprecedented number of women ministers (30 per cent), including the
Minister of Defence, a first for the Arab region. In Iraq, sustained advocacy by the
United Nations helped to increase the number of women in the constitutional review
committee from one to five. In the Sudan, 22 per cent of ministerial positions were
held by women, including the first ever woman foreign minister, and 18 per cent of
the members of the Sovereign Council were women. The first woman Chief Justice
in the Sudan was appointed in 2019.
57. Political leadership by women and the inclusion of women are essential
components for effective national and local governance and reform, but steep and
persistent barriers continue to be put in the way of realizing those components.
Violence against women in politics and elections remains a pervasive violation of
human rights. Women leaders and public officials face harassment, threats and abuse,
both in society and online. For women to participate fully in public life, political
institutions must be free of gender-based discrimination and violence. It has been a
year since the abduction of Siham Sergiwa, a member of parliament in Libya, from
her home in Benghazi, and the public space for Libyan women to voice their opinion

20/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

continues to shrink. Member States bear the duty to prevent, investigate and punish
acts of violence against women, and to act by institutionalizing an approach of zero
tolerance of intimidation, sexual harassment and any other form of gender -based
violence, adopting relevant legislation and policies and making the requisite resources
available to promote and enable the full and meaningful participation of women in
political and public spheres. Addressing those issues remains a top priority for the
United Nations system.

C.

Economic recovery and access to resources
58. Addressing economic inequality is a crisis prevention strategy, as has been
emphasized in previous reports. Women are more likely to spend their incomes on
family needs, including health care and education, and thus make a larger contribution
to recovery. Yet gender norms and discrimination keep women away from assets and
productive resources, including land, property, inheritance, credit, technology and
banking. Instead, the international community’s support to women is focused on
microenterprises and microcredit, while large-scale reconstruction after conflict is
dominated by men and overwhelmingly benefits men.
59. While too little continues to be known about the financing of gender-related
priorities in reconstruction and peace agreement implementation, studies point to
extreme underfunding. Recent research focused on peace agreement implementation
in Colombia and the Philippines and reconstruction in Iraq shows that less than 2 per
cent of official development assistance is currently targeting gender equality as a
principal objective. 43 In Colombia and the Philippines, where the participation of
women in the peace process was higher than average, while funding for gender
equality did increase in the year following the signing of the peace agreement, it
decreased significantly thereafter. In the Philippines, the Comprehensive Agreement
on the Bangsamoro included a rare provision to earmark 5 per cent of development
funds to support recovery among women, their participatio n in political life and their
protection from violence, yet none of the programmes funded by the Mindanao Trust
Fund for Reconstruction and Development from 2013 to 2017 reported on allocating
funds to projects and activities benefiting women.
60. There are too few examples of good practice in gender-responsive economic
reconstruction. In 2013, UNDP began tracking disbursements allocated to women in
the context of temporary employment and productive livelihood projects in conflict
and post-conflict settings. In 2019, 34 per cent of women benefited from those
programmes, an increase from 31 per cent in the previous year.
61. Often, pilot programmes are not replicated at a substantially greater scale, even
when proving beneficial. For example, in the Gaza Strip, UN-Women engaged 250
women in cash-for-work programmes; their household incomes increased by 345 per
cent. Of those 250 women, 71 per cent reported a decrease in domestic tension and
55 per cent said that their new situation had enabled them to particip ate in decisionmaking in their household. In Jordan, the use by the United Nations of an innovative
blockchain cash disbursement method enabled it to instantly switch its cash -for-work
programme for Syrian refugees in camps to direct cash assistance as so on as
lockdowns were in place to prevent the spread of COVID -19. When providing
livelihood and employment-related support, it is critically important – both for gender

__________________
43

20-12597

Forthcoming study by Jacqui True and Sara Davies (2020).
21/37

S/2020/946

equality and peace dividends – to promote decent work and to ensure that women
workers’ rights are respected. 44
62. The COVID-19 pandemic and worldwide lockdowns exposed the enormous
value of unpaid care and domestic work for the economy and how disproportionately
that burden is shouldered by women. In several conflict -affected countries, women
perform three to seven times as much unpaid care and domestic work as men. 45 That
has a profound impact on paid employment among women, which is expected to be
exacerbated by the global economic contraction. For example, even prior to the
destruction of the port in Beirut, the economic contraction was estimated to have
reduced employment among women in Lebanon by 14 to 19 per cent. 46 The case for
prioritizing care work in decisions about recovery and reconstruction, investing in
social protection instruments, including basic income initiatives, and ring-fencing
spending on education and health is more urgent and relevant than ever. Alleviating
crushing debt through reform of the debt architecture and rectifying austerity policies
that affect women disproportionately is also critical to creating fiscal space to shift
investment toward social protection and economies of care.

D.

Rule of law and access for women to justice
63. In late 2019, a young woman from Bosnia and Herzegovina who works for the
rights of the victims of war in her country told the Security Council that justice efforts
were slowing down dangerously. She reported that some public spaces, such as
streets, memorials and monuments, had been named after convicted war criminals,
yet there had been almost no public spaces dedicated to war victims. Moreover, in
contrast to war veterans, civilian victims, in particular women survivors of sexual
violence, still had to fight for their rights, a quarter of a century after the end of the
armed conflict (see S/PV.8658).
64. That was a stark reminder that the quest for justice lives on through decades,
and that victims will fight all efforts to deny or delay their rightful claims and persist
in challenging the power, impunity and glorification of perpetrators. In separate
historic decisions, the Committee against Torture and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women both requested Bosnia and
Herzegovina to establish a comprehensive system of reparations for survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. 47 In Guatemala, which was the first country where a
national court issued a conviction for sexual slavery during armed conflict, the United
Nations is supporting the victims in receiving the reparations awarded to them in the
historic verdict in the Sepur Zarco case. It is also monitoring judicial procedures in
another important case of sexual violence committed by paramilitaries against the
Mayan Achí almost four decades ago.
65. The testimony of the woman from Bosnia and Herzegovina is also an important
reminder to not let up or give in when impunity is rampant in the most devastating
conflicts of our time, from Myanmar to the Syrian Arab Republic, and from
Afghanistan and South Sudan to Yemen. In his most recent report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2020/487), the Secretary-General noted that not a single case of

__________________

See ILO, Employment and Decent Work for Peace and Resilience Reco mmendation, 2017
(No. 205).
45
United Nations, Global Sustainable Development Goal Indicators Database, indicator 5.4.1.
46
UN-Women, “Gender-responsive recovery in Lebanon: recommendations for fiscal, social and
labour policy reform”. Available at https://www2.unwomen.org/-/media/field%20office%20arab
%20states/attachments/publications/2020/06/macro%20economic%20policy%20recommendation
s%20_final%20english%20design.pdf?la=en&vs=5558.
47
A v. Bosnia and Herzegovina (CAT/C/67/D/854/2017) and S.H. v. Bosnia and Herzegovina
(CEDAW/C/76/D/116/2017).
44

22/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

conflict-related sexual violence had been brought to trial in Ma li. In Nigeria, in spite
of the publicity garnered by Boko Haram and its atrocities against women and girls,
the first reported conviction in a case of conflict-related sexual violence did not take
place until 2019, when a court martial sentenced a soldier for the rape of a 14-yearold displaced girl. No cases of sexual violence committed in the 2010 –2011 crisis in
Côte d’Ivoire had progressed to trial and none of the survivors had received
reparations. In South Sudan, there was still no hybrid court or spe cialized court on
sexual and gender-based violence, and the Government’s investigation into the mass
rape in Bentiu in 2018 had acknowledged only 16 incidents of rape and had
characterized them as isolated acts of criminality. Despite extensive documentati on
of conflict-related sexual violence in the Syrian Arab Republic, not a single
perpetrator had faced in-person prosecution until Germany initiated the first case after
nine years of conflict.
66. Nevertheless, survivors and their defenders find other ways to strive for justice.
Advocates use different avenues, like the mechanisms created by the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council to investigate the most serious international
crimes committed in Myanmar and the Syrian Arab Republic, resp ectively. The
Security Council requested the Secretary-General to establish the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) to support domestic efforts to
hold Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) accountable for its actions in
Iraq. UNITAD has prioritized the investigation of sexual and gender-based violence
and has achieved gender parity among its more than 100 staff and leadership team.
The extensive use of international commissions of inquiry has also put on the
historical record atrocities against women and girls that used to be shrouded in
silence, providing a detailed account of facts for when a path for justice finally opens
up. In many conflict-affected countries, those documentation efforts have linked
conflict-related sexual violence to violations of women’s social and economic rights
and to broader gender inequality, demonstrating that gender inequality is a driver of
instability and conflict and must be addressed as a root cause.
67. A post-conflict environment that is marked by insecurity, violence and a lack of
legal and judicial protection is an obstacle to the participation of women in
peacebuilding and development. Over the past two decades, considerable progress
has been made to strengthen legal, justice and security systems to create safer
environments for women and girls and to protect their rights. Recent efforts include
stronger legislative and normative frameworks on, inter alia, ge nder parity and
electoral laws, particularly on representation in public bodies, such as in the Central
African Republic and Côte d’Ivoire. Extending financial support to a network of
women lawyers in the Central African Republic has enabled the provision of legal
services and access to justice for approximately 13,500 women. Advancing the rule
of law in post-conflict countries, including through constitutional and legislative
reforms, is instrumental to addressing the intersectional inequalities that women often
face and to mitigating the daily socioeconomic injustices that women will continue to
experience post-conflict on issues such as family, identity and nationality, property,
health care, inheritance and employment.
68. Other developments are encouraging. In Colombia, 55 per cent of the members
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and 45 per cent of the members of the truth
commission are women, and over a third of registered victims of sexual violence have
received reparations. There are burgeoning efforts to expand access for women to
reparations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Iraq and Sri Lanka,
including with the support of the Global Survivors Fund. The inclusion of an
independent budget line to facilitate the participation of wo men and girls in the Truth
and Dignity Commission in Tunisia could be emulated by other countries. In Mali,
20-12597

23/37

S/2020/946

the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has received more than 16,000
testimonies, 60 per cent of which have been from women. Mechanisms su ch as the
Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict continue to assist national authorities in conflict affected countries. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where more than 1,0 00
individuals have been prosecuted for conflict-related sexual violence since 2013,
several emblematic trials are under way. In December 2019, the Central African
Republic held a dedicated criminal court session in Bangui for two dozen cases of
conflict-related sexual violence, a positive step towards beginning to close the
impunity gap. In South Sudan, mobile courts supported by the peacekeeping mission
tried 260 cases, many of which related to sexual violence, resulting in 136 convictions
by the end of 2019. In July 2020, the International Criminal Court opened its trial
against a Malian defendant in what will be the first case in which the crime against
humanity of gender-based persecution will be adjudicated by the tribunal.
69. Those steps will not succeed in closing the justice gap unless women are fairly
represented in justice processes and historic firsts and good examples become
common practice. There have been instances of the COVID -19 pandemic being used
to justify the postponement of trials and investigations. Allowing the pursuit of gender
justice to slow down is unacceptable.

E.

Preventing and countering terrorism and violent extremism
70. Misogyny and the subjugation of women and girls are a common feature of most
extremist and terrorist groups, regardless of their ideology. That is no coincidence.
The strategic manipulation of gender norms and stereotypes is part of their narratives
and their recruitment tactics. Controlling the lives of women and girls is not just a by product of what they do; it is foundational to their purpose.
71. In its resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council urged Member States and the
United Nations system to ensure the participation and leadership of women and
women’s organizations in developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent
extremism and requested the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate to integrate gender as a cross -cutting
issue throughout the activities within their respective mandates. Since then, the
United Nations has made progress across its institutional architectu re, its policy
frameworks and guidance and its programmatic interventions. The Office of CounterTerrorism has adopted a gender marker and begun establishing a financial tracking
system to comply with the instruction to allocate 15 per cent of funding to p rojects
focused on gender equality and the empowerment of women. The assessments by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate of Member States’ efforts
included more than 60 gender-related recommendations in 2019. Efforts led by
UN-Women, UNDP, UNODC and the International Organization for Migration have
supported the rehabilitation of women formerly associated with extremist groups and
the inclusion of women-led organizations in the drafting and monitoring of national
action plans to counter violent extremism in countries such as Indonesia, Kenya,
Libya, Mozambique, Nigeria, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and the Sudan, and in
community-based initiatives for early warning and prevention. Still, much more is
required to ensure the active and meaningful participation of women-led civil society
organizations and gender equality activists.
72. Knowledge has also expanded. In 2019, Monash University and UN -Women
published noteworthy findings from their research in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Libya

24/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

and the Philippines. 48 In all four countries, quantitative surveys showed that misogyny
was far more strongly associated with support for violent extremism than religiosity,
age, gender, level of education, employment or location. Research has also shown
that women tend to receive less rehabilitation and reintegration support than men and
that such support is often not sufficiently tailored to their gender-specific needs. 49 The
rate of return of women suspected of having family ties with ISIL members from Iraq
and from the Syrian Arab Republic is significantly slower than that of men and
children.
73. Counter-terrorism laws and operations continue to compromise the rights of and
peacebuilding advocacy conducted by women’s groups, whether intentionally or not.
Mechanisms for sustained dialogue with women’s organizations are still insufficient
and in many countries are non-existent. Women are severely underrepresented in both
decision-making bodies and law enforcement agencies devoted to counter-terrorism.
Outreach and support to victims requires urgent enhancement. For all the attention
and resources that have been devoted to addressing groups that have engaged
extensive systems of sexual slavery and sexual violence, including ISIL and Boko
Haram, many of their victims have not received justice or adequate support
(S/2020/487).

F.

Climate change and its peace and security implications
74. In their efforts to prevent and respond to the multitude of contemporary security
challenges, countries cannot lose sight of the existential risk of today – climate
change. The impacts of climate change and environmental degradation are already
exacerbating complex crises across the globe.
75. A growing body of evidence points to the critical role of gender norms and
power structures in determining the impact on women and men of climate -related
security risks. Nevertheless, a more concerted effort is needed to integrate and address
the linkages between gender, climate and security in polic ymaking and to prioritize
the participation of women in response and prevention mechanisms. Of the current
national action plans on women and peace and security, only 17 contain even a
mention of climate change, and gender is largely absent from policy deb ates on
climate change and security.
76. A recent report by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
UN-Women, the Peacebuilding Support Office of the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and UNDP provides compelling evidence of the va rious ways
in which gender norms and power structures determine how women and men of
different backgrounds experience and manage climate-related security risks. 50
77. Women are left at the front lines of both climate change and insecurity, burdened
with new economic responsibilities in ever degraded environments. For instance,
across the Sahel, where the impacts on livelihoods of rising temperatures and

__________________

Melissa Johnston and Jacqui True, “Misogyny and violent extremism: implications for
preventing violent extremism”, Monash University and UN-Women, 2019. Available at
https://arts.monash.edu/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/2003389/Policy -Brief_VE_and_VAW_
V7t.pdf.
49
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate “Gender dimensions of the response to
returning foreign terrorist fighters: research perspectives”, Febru ary 2019. Available at
www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Feb_2019_CTED_Trends_Report.pdf; and
“CTED Analytical Brief: the repatriation of ISIL-associated women”, September 2019.
50
UNEP, UN-Women, Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UNDP, “Gender,
climate & security: sustaining inclusive peace on the frontlines of climate change”, 11 June
2020. Available at https://gender-nr-peace.org/gender-climate-security/.
48

20-12597

25/37

S/2020/946

unpredictable rainfall are contributing to intercommunal violence, migration patterns
are shifting. In many communities, such as those in Northern Kordofan, in the Sudan,
men are increasingly leaving villages in search of alternative livelihoods to farming,
while herders are leaving women behind as they search for grazing land in
increasingly insecure environments. In northern Nigeria, gendered norms and power
dynamics underlie the decisions of some young women and young men to join armed
opposition groups. Some men are motivated by economic opportunities, seeking to
escape failing livelihoods, while some women have joined armed groups to access
education and other opportunities for empowerment. In Latin America, the impacts
of climate change, conflict and security challenges, and gender inequality converge
in a number of contexts, creating compounded risks for food security. In the dry
corridor of Central America, climate change and migration have increased women’s
burdens, including the need to travel greater distances to secure water.
78. Despite those challenges, successful pilot programming by United Natio ns
entities has shown that climate change adaptation and inclusive natural resource
governance provide important entry points for strengthening leadership among
women in conflict prevention and dispute resolution. The Peacebuilding Fund is
investing in scaling up those approaches, including in transboundary contexts. Key
partnerships, such as that of UNEP, UN-Women, UNDP and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the joint climate security mechanism of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNDP and UNEP guide policy,
investment and programme design to support the leadership of women to build
resilient, inclusive and peaceful societies. While emphasizing the centrality of
conflict prevention, it is critical to recognize the importance of directing resources,
through pooled funds and other means, to local women’s groups at the front lines of
climate change, and to support the leadership of women in addressing those
interlinked crises.

IV. Committing to action for the next decade
A.

Planning for action and monitoring results at the national and
regional levels
79. At the policy level, national and regional commitments in support of the women
and peace and security agenda have continued to grow. Since the first nati onal action
plan adopted in 2005 by Denmark, 43 per cent of States Members of the United
Nations and observers had adopted a national action plan by June 2020. Of the 85
Member States and territories with a national action plan, more than half have adopted
two or more iterations of their plan to address changing contexts and priorities. Some
70 per cent of European Union member States and 45 per cent of African Union
member States have adopted national action plans. There is a growing recognition
among countries with outward-facing national action plans, such as Canada and
Ireland, of the important need to address domestic priorities related to peace and
security, including the status of indigenous, refugee, displaced, returnee and minority
populations. To address how specific groups of women, within and outside their
borders, face different, often structural and intersecting forms of exclusion,
discrimination and inequality national action plans would benefit from including
concrete actions and priorities related to COVID-19 responses.
80. In January 2020, Mexico became the second country after Sweden to publish a
feminist foreign policy, and Canada and France have announced feminist foreign
and/or development policies. Increased coordination between gender m achineries and
those focused on foreign affairs, the security sector and finance, would enable a
whole-of-government, comprehensive and streamlined approach to the women and

26/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

peace and security agenda. Strengthened partnerships between the United Nations an d
regional organizations are essential, and the commitment by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to give greater prominence to the agenda is
welcome.
81. In April 2019, 64 Member States, eight United Nations entities and three
regional organizations made more than 400 specific commitments in support of the
full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda leading up to the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). At
a midpoint stocktaking exercise in early 2020, more than half of the Member States,
almost two thirds of the United Nations entities and a third of the regional
organizations that had announced commitments reported on concr ete actions taken to
fulfil those commitments. In addition, there are currently 10 Member States that have
declared themselves Action for Peacekeeping women and peace and security
champions. Other Member States are encouraged to join that group and all
stakeholders are urged to make good on their commitments and close the remaining
implementation gaps.
82. The universal periodic review process of the Human Rights Council provides
an invaluable forum to promote accountability on women and peace and security.
Nevertheless, that important mechanism remains underutilized. A review of the past
two universal periodic review cycles for 11 conflict-affected countries showed that
out of 3,747 recommendations from countries, only 189 could be considered relevant
to the women and peace and security agenda. That said, 713 did address gender
equality and the realization of women’s rights. A good practice in synergies is the
marked increase since 2010 in the number of State party reports on the
implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women that reference and report on women and peace and security
implementation. That trend is likely to have been accelerated as a result of the
adoption by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women of
its general recommendation No. 30 (2013) on women in conflict prevention, conflict
and post-conflict situations. 51
83. Member States are increasingly mobilizing in global coalitions to strengthen the
agenda. In May 2020, the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network
convened a special session to discuss how to advance the women and peace and
security agenda in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lebanon, for example,
has leveraged its national action plan to issue a decree establishing a special fund and
services for survivors, to address increased levels of gender-based violence. More
Member States and regional organizations are encouraged to join the Network. On
the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), an innovative
compact for women and peace and security and humanitarian action will be launched
as part of the Generation Equality Forum. 52 The compact will bring together Member
States, international and regional organizations, civil society, the private sector and
other stakeholders to drive the fulfilment of existing financial and political
commitments and responsibilities in the agenda. It will be equally important to ensure
that the six thematic Generation Equality Action Coalitions also integrate peace,
security and humanitarian focus analysis into their work.

__________________

See Agnieszka Fal-Dutra Santos and Kelly Yzique-Zea, “Strengthening synergies between
CEDAW and women, peace and security resolutions”, policy brief (The Global Network of
Women Peacebuilders, 2018). Available at https://gnwp.org/strengthening-synergies-betweencedaw-and-women-peace-and-security-resolutions/.
52
See https://forum.generationequality.org/.
51

20-12597

27/37

S/2020/946

B.

Leadership, coordination and accountability within the United Nations
84. The urgent need for leadership, accountability and financial support to
accelerate progress on delivering on existing women and peace and security
commitments has been highlighted in previous reports. An independent assessment of
the implementation of the recommendations in the three 2015 peace a nd security
reviews showed that, despite many efforts and positive developments, a significant
amount of work remains to be done. To close implementation gaps further, the reports
outlined 10 evidence-driven and time-bound commitments upon which United
Nations entities agreed. A year later, it is clear that United Nations entities have made
serious efforts to strengthen entity- and gender-specific policies and processes to
make progress towards those commitments.
85. Achieving gender parity within the United Nations system and in peacekeeping
is a distinct priority in the fulfilment of the full scope of women and peace and
security provisions. It is not a substitute for integrating a gender perspective into
entities’ work. Ahead of target dates, parity has been achieved among senior
leadership in the Secretariat. Significant progress has also been made since 2016 in
closing the gender gap at senior mission leadership level in both special political
missions and peacekeeping operations. While women accounted for 21 per cent of
senior mission leadership in 2017, by August 2020, that proportion had risen to 41 per
cent. The Secretary-General remains steadfast in his commitment to gender parity
across the Organization and is working with Member States to ensure t hat goal is not
only reached but sustained. Overall, the representation of women in senior positions
(P-5 level and above) in the United Nations system shows an upward trend, from
29 per cent to 39 per cent between 2007 and 2019. As for resident coordinato rs,
gender parity was sustained globally and, for the first time, was reached also across
conflict-affected countries.
86. Efforts to strengthen the gender architecture throughout the Organization
continued (see E/2020/50). Of the current peacekeeping missions, 10 have gender
units, 7 of which are located in the office of the head of the mission, as recommended
in the 2015 global study. All senior gender advisers and gender affairs officers’ posts
in the missions were resourced through the regular assessed budget in 2019. In
settings such as the Central African Republic and Mali, the missions were additionally
supported with extrabudgetary technical staff to assist in the implementation of
priority tasking specific to the women and peace and security agenda, as outlined in
the mission mandates. Among special political missions, there were 27 gender
advisers at the end of 2019, a historic high. Five missions were served by senior
gender advisers (P-5 level or above) and nine missions were served by P-4 level
gender advisers. 53 Seven missions were not served by gender advisers, out of which
three had fewer than 10 professional staff. 54 In special political missions, the majority
of gender posts and activities are funded through extrabudgetary resources, which

__________________

All missions are served by either gender advisers or gender focal points. Some advisers served
more than one mission (i.e., the gender advisers for the United Nations Office to the African
Union also served the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary -General for the Horn of
Africa, and the gender adviser for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus also se rved
the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus).
54
The Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon/Office of the Special Envoy of the Secret ary-General
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004), the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hudaydah Agreement, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary -General on Myanmar, and the
United Nations Representative to the Geneva International Discussions. Th e latter three all have
fewer than 10 professional staff.
53

28/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

makes the availability of expertise temporary and dependent on project fundin g. In
addition, seven peacekeeping operations and special political missions had women
protection advisers. Few resident coordinators in conflict settings have dedicated
gender experts in their offices, which is especially problematic if UN -Women does
not have a presence in those countries. In transition settings, such as the Sudan,
dedicated capacity is essential to connect and prioritize gender equality and women
and peace and security commitments across the work of entities with a presence on
the ground.
87. In humanitarian settings, to help alleviate the gap in gender capacity, short -term
senior gender and protection advisers (gender standby capacity and protection
standby capacity) are deployed. In 2019, those inter-agency senior gender advisers
were deployed to 21 countries with humanitarian crises. Such deployments are a
stopgap; the need remains for longer term investments in technical gender expertise
that can help broker the humanitarian, peace and development divide to effectively
deliver on the women and peace and security agenda.
88. The United Nations and its senior managers remain fully committed to
strengthening accountability of United Nations system entities towards the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. In his previou s report,
the Secretary-General committed to updating compacts, terms of references and
directives of senior managers to reflect the fulfilment of commitments on the women
and peace and security agenda and gender mainstreaming. All senior leaders of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions are now, through their
compacts, expected to promote and monitor the implementation of women and peace
and security resolutions and integrate a gender perspective into all activities. A similar
provision is now included in the terms of reference of Special Envoys.
89. The Secretary-General also committed to including gender equality and women
and peace and security in United Nations strategic planning instruments and to
strengthening accountability by reinforcing monitoring frameworks. A survey among
United Nations entities showed that many of them have integrated gender equality
considerations in their strategic planning frameworks as a cross-cutting theme, but
only a few reported that they have included gender equality or women and peace and
security as stand-alone goals. Progress has been made with regard to gender-specific
indicators, which are increasingly used to enhance accountability. For example, in
2019, 10 peacekeeping missions reported for the first time on a set of 15 specific
women and peace and security indicators. Furthermore, 4 peacekeeping missions
integrated mission-specific women and peace and security indicators into their new
comprehensive performance accountability system frameworks. The D epartment of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs is updating its women and peace and security
indicators. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) Gender Accreditation Programme translates the commitment of OHCHR
to gender equality, diversity and inclusion into concrete actions, and the updated
Policy on Age, Gender and Diversity of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees defines specific responsibilities across senior
management and staff. Transforming the United Nations systems to be more genderresponsive requires continuous evaluation. One example is the forthcoming
recommendations of the 2020 inter-agency humanitarian evaluation on gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls in humanitarian crises.
90. As a response to the Secretary-General’s call for strengthened engagement with
civil society and local communities at large, a United Nations -civil society working
group developed system-wide community engagement guidelines to support co untryspeciﬁc and local-level community engagement strategies on building and sustaining

20-12597

29/37

S/2020/946

peace. 55 The guidelines include specific recommendations to encourage the
meaningful participation of diverse women civil society actors in all aspects of
peacebuilding, including the negotiation and implementation of peace agreements and
processes and wider access to long-term, flexible funding models. The guidelines also
include recommendations on ensuring the safety and protection of civil society actors
in restricted environments and promoting and protecting civic space. The United
Nations will make use of the guidelines to ensure that all engagement with women
civil society organizations is meaningful and effective, including by seeking ways to
engage local women peacebuilders in people-centred responses to COVID-19.

C.

Financing for the women and peace and security agenda
91. While financing for the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda has increased, and notably so over the past five years, inadequate and
unpredictable financing remains a major roadblock. Often commitments have not
been linked to budgets, planning not informed by a gender analysis and
recommendations by women leaders and organizations left unheeded or deprioritized
in final decisions. Bigger and bolder steps are needed to translate into reality the
feminist vision for peace, grounded in positive peace and human security, that women
peacebuilders laid out when crafting the building blocks for the women and peace and
security agenda 20 years ago.
92. The impact of COVID-19 in conflict-affected and humanitarian settings may be
devastating, exacerbating deprivation, inequality and the feminization of poverty.
How the international community upholds its commitments to gender equali ty will
affect countries’ abilities to rebuild their economies and societies and to prevent the
escalation of violence. The absence and exclusion of women from many of the spaces
and processes where major plans, fiscal packages and responses are currently being
designed is of concern. A recent report found that in a sample of 30 countries, 25 per
cent had not made funding or policy commitments to address gender-based violence,
sexual and reproductive health, or economic assistance to women in their response to
COVID-19. 56
93. Durable and transformative change also requires a re-examination of the global
political economy. Existing economic structures and power dynamics are
unsustainable, as they continue to deplete natural resources and prevent peace from
taking hold. The COVID-19 crisis placed systemic inequalities and skewed spending
patterns under a magnifying glass. In particular, there is a stark difference between
soaring rates of military spending and the strains witnessed in social protection
systems. In 2019, global military expenditure reached $1.9 trillion, following the
largest annual increase in a decade. 57 At the same time, current social protection
systems have failed with inequalities within education systems more evident in efforts
to adapt to learning under the pandemic; shelters unable to respond to the upsurge in
demand during lockdowns; the supply of medical equipment and masks even in the
most affluent countries falling short; and increased restrictions on necessary health
care disproportionately impacting women and girls.

__________________

See www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/un_communityengagement_guidelines.august_2020.pdf.
56
CARE International, “Where are the women? The conspicuous absence of women in COVID -19
response teams and plans, and why we need them”. Available at
https://insights.careinternational.org.uk/media/k2/attachments/CARE_COVID -19-womensleadership-report_June-2020.pdf.
57
See www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2020/global-military-expenditure-sees-largest-annualincrease-decade-says-sipri-reaching-1917-billion.
55

30/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

94. Total bilateral aid committed to support gender equality in fragile and co nflictaffected countries continued to increase, reaching $20.5 billion per year by 2017 –2018
(see figure 5). Nevertheless, the share of aid dedicated to programmes or projects with
the primary objective of improving gender equality and women’s rights has decreased
to 4.5 per cent. In addition, bilateral aid to women’s organizations in fragile or
conflict-affected countries has stagnated at 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid
($96 million on average per year). In a year marking historic milestones for gende r
equality and peace, concerted action to reverse those trends, to grow and diversify the
group of donors supporting gender equality initiatives, and to ensure that women
leaders and organizations working for peace in fragile contexts have access to
sustainable funding must be a priority.
Figure 5
Bilateral aid targeting gender equality and the empowerment of women in
fragile or conflict-affected situations, 2010–2018, average per year
50

25
40.1

34.9
20

Bilateral aid for
gender equality ($)

15

Significant
(percentage)

20

10

Principal
(percentage)

10

5

40

20.5

30.4
28.0

18.0

$ (billion)

Percentage

30

14.3
12.1

5.3

5.4

5.3

4.5

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

2011–2012

2013–2014

2015–2016

Bilateral aid to
women’s
organizations
(percentage)

0

2017–2018

Source: OECD, aid projects targeting gender equality and women’s empowerment, and Creditor
Reporting System data. Available at http://stats.oecd.org.
Note: Data represent the average per year.

95. Limited financing continued to pose a challenge for the full implementation of
national action plans. Few such plans had a dedicated budget or earmarked centralized
funding. As at June 2020, only 20 national action plans (24 per cent) included a budget
at adoption. In cases where funding for the plan is decentralized throughout
government ministries, departments and agencies, there is usually insufficient
information to track funding allocations and expenditure and to properly assess the
total amount dedicated to overall implementation. Canada, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden are among countries that have taken steps towards more comprehensive
tracking of national action plan-related spending. Member States are urged to allocate
dedicated funding to their national action plan in centralized and sectoral budgets and
to annually track expenditure toward implementation of the plan.
20-12597

31/37

S/2020/946

96. Financial resource tracking and allocation remain areas for improvement also
for the United Nations. In December 2019, the High -level Task Force on Financing
for Gender Equality concluded that financing for gender equality remained
insufficient across the United Nations and suggested the implementation of an
automated gender equality marker system at the entity and country team levels. More
entities are adopting financing targets and rolling out systems to track gender equality
allocations. In 2020, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
institutionalized a revised gender marker to ensure more consistent integration of
women and peace and security considerations at all stages of extrabudgetary project
formulation and planning. In addition, that Department is committed to devoting at
least 17 per cent of the annual multi-year appeal budget to initiatives and programmes
that recognize and help advance the crucial role of women in conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. Among entities that have had systems in place to track allocations,
some positive trends were seen. For instance, UNDP and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) allocated over half of programmatic funding worldwide
to addressing gender equality in some form. Among United Nations country teams,
only a few have reached the target to allocate minimum programmatic benchmarks
for gender equality and the empowerment of women and impro ve gender
mainstreaming in all areas of expenditure. United Nations entities are expected to
ensure that the implementation plan of recommendations emanating from the High level Task Force on Financing for Gender Equality is operationalized into entity specific action.
97. 2020 also marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment of UN -Women.
Demand for global peace, security and humanitarian programming and coordination
support from UN-Women has risen sharply over its first decade as a new United
Nations entity. In 2019, total expenditure by UN-Women on peace and security
programming and humanitarian interventions rose to $110.53 million, up from
$89.44 million in 2018, increasing the reach of programming from 55 to 65 countries
and territories.
98. The Peacebuilding Fund has demonstrated how the systematic inclusion and
participation of women and young people, and gender analysis, are essential to
effective peacebuilding. In 2019, the Fund approved investments of $191 million in
34 countries. Some 40 per cent of all Fund investments supported gender-responsive
peacebuilding, within which 14 per cent was dedicated to promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of women as a principal objective, an increase from 12 per cent
in 2018. Lessons from the Peacebuilding Fund in promoting gender-responsive
programming could be replicated in other pooled funds, including the United Nations
COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund. In response to the Secretary-General’s
2019 report on women and peace and security, the Fund’s Gender and Youth
Promotion Initiative in 2020 designated two women and peace and security priorities
to its thematic focus: (a) the participation of women and their leadership in peace
processes, peacebuilding and leadership; and (b) the protection of w omen human
rights defenders and peacebuilders responding to an identified gap in the women and
peace and security agenda.
99. Advances by other multi-donor initiatives are welcome. In Myanmar, the Joint
Peace Fund has earmarked 15 per cent of its budget for gender equality and opened a
separate window for women and peace and security. In Colombia, the multi -partner
trust fund raised its earmarked budget from the original 15 per cent to 30 per cent in
2019.
100. In his previous report on women and peace and security, the Secretary-General
emphasized the importance of direct, dedicated and flexible financing for women’s
civil society groups and called upon Member States to support the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund achieve its $40 million target by the en d of 2020. The target
32/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

has not only been surpassed, but thanks to the increased support, the Fund has been
able to quadruple the number of grass-roots civil society organizations reached by
funding. To date, it has funded more than 200 organizations in conf lict-affected
countries and humanitarian settings.
101. The COVID-19 global pandemic has presented grave new threats to the critical
work and very existence of local civil society organizations working at the front lines
of crises. In a survey conducted by the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, 30 per
cent of its local civil society partners reported that their organization’s existence was
at risk due to the pandemic and it effects. Notably, many of the local women’s
organizations self-identify as particularly well placed to prevent and respond to the
pandemic. Yet, their contributions often go unrecognized and unfunded. In response,
the Fund launched a new COVID-19 emergency response window to support the
projects of women’s organizations at the front lin e of the pandemic and to provide
organizations working on women and peace and security issues with institutional
funding to help them sustain themselves through the crisis. The call for proposals
launched in 25 countries received close to 5,000 proposals f rom local civil society
organizations. In the Secretary-General’s report on the socioeconomic impacts of
COVID-19, he recommended the expansion and capitalization of the Fund as a means
of scaling up support to women’s organizations in the context of the p andemic, and
urged Member States to follow suit.
102. As called for in 2019, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund launched a
new rapid response window on the participation of women in peace processes and the
implementation of peace agreements. The window will contribute directly to
increased participation by women in peace processes, including through funding for
travel, visa, childcare, and logistical and technical support.

D.

Tracking progress and monitoring results
103. The current monitoring and accountability framework, as laid out by the
indicators to measure progress on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
(S/2010/498, annex), has facilitated evidence-based planning and programming
across the United Nations system, advancing the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Ten years on, it must be updated. In the current peace and
security context, the relevance of issues such as the climate crisis, pandemics,
misogynist extremism, the growing power of private corporations and the role of new
technologies is evident. With the adoption of six additional resolutions by the Security
Council since 2010, the monitoring framework has to ensure that there is coherence
with policy frameworks that did not exist in 2010, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the sustaining peace resolutions, the youth, peace and
security agenda, the agenda for disarmament, the Arms Trade Treaty, the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, and the outcome of the 2016
World Humanitarian Summit. It is also important in the context of the revision of the
seven-point action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding led by the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women (A/65/354-S/2010/466). A
dedicated task force under the Standing Committee on Women and Peace and Security
has been set up to promote alignment and strengthen the existing monitoring
framework.

20-12597

33/37

S/2020/946

V. Work of the Security Council
104. In the first five years after resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted, only 15 per cent
of Security Council resolutions included explicit references to women and peace and
security issues. Between 2017 and 2019, the proportion had risen to almost 70 per cent.
105. The Council has also changed in other ways. Since December 2016, it has
invited more than 50 women from civil society to brief it during formal meetings on
country-specific situations. Beyond civil society, the percentage of women addressing
the Council in general has steadily grown, including as a resu lt of the appointments
of more women to senior leadership positions in the United Nations. In 2019, 38.8 per
cent of the 387 speakers who were invited to brief the Council under rule 39 were
women, breaking the previous records of 30 per cent in 2018 and 24 per cent in 2017. 58
United Nations senior leaders provide more detailed information and analysis on
situations on the Council’s agenda through the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, which has held an average of eight meetings a year since it started
convening in 2016. 59
106. Nonetheless, beyond those positive developments, there have also been some
more uneven ones. The negotiations on both of the resolutions on women and peace
and security adopted in 2019 were difficult. The members of the Security Council
held four Arria-formula meetings on women and peace and security in 2019, a record
number. Nevertheless, the percentage of Security Council decisions containing
references to women and peace and security issues was lower than in the previous
two years. 60 There was also a record number of briefers from civil society in 2019,
but the number plummeted in the first half of 2020 after the COVID -19 pandemic
forced the Council to suspend regular meetings. The advice of those briefers, while
often welcomed and praised, was rarely followed by robust action. 61 Regarding
sanctions, the Council has asked multiple times that expert groups and monitoring
teams have adequate resources and dedicated expertise on gender equality and sexual
and gender-based violence; the United Nations will continue to work with Member
States to ensure that they do.
107. The Secretary-General’s previous report on women and peace and security
contained several recommendations for Council members, including to ensure tha t
mission mandates included concrete language requiring the meaningful participation
of women in the follow-up mechanisms tasked with implementing and monitoring
peace agreements. Several of the resolutions adopted in 2019 did contain good
examples of such language. The Council welcomed the commitment to a 35 per cent
quota for women in the implementation bodies of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. It also called upon all
parties in Mali to meet the 30 per cent quota for women in the mechanisms established
__________________

See “Highlights of Security Council Practice 2019”. Available at www.un.org/securitycouncil/
content/highlights-2019. Such highlights are published annually by the Security Council Affairs
Division.
59
In 2019, the Informal Expert Group was co-chaired by Germany and Peru, in collaboration with
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. It held two meetings on South Sudan
and one meeting on the situations in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya,
Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen.
60
In 2019, 67 per cent of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council included provisions on
women and peace and security, a slight decrease from 72 per cent in 2018. The percentage of
presidential statements containing references to women and peace and security dropped sharply
to 40 per cent, compared to 85 per cent in 2018.
61
See analysis from the NGO Working Group on Women and Peace and Security at
www.womenpeacesecurity.org/resource/mapping-women-peace-and-security-in-the-un-securitycouncil-2019/ and www.womenpeacesecurity.org/support-civil-society-security-council/.
58

34/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

under the peace agreement, and urged the Malian parties to hold a high -level
workshop to identify ways and agreed timelines to make that happen. 62
108. Following the recommendation in the previous report that Council Members
require enhanced reporting on women and peace and security issues, 63 the mandate
renewals of peacekeeping missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Lebanon, Mali and South Sudan were good examples of that reporting requi rement.
Nevertheless, an independent analysis of the NGO Working Group on Women and
Peace and Security shows that most reports still lack strong analysis on those
matters. 64 In their statements, many Council members raised relevant women and
peace and security issues more systematically. They insisted that 30 per cent be
considered a minimum for the representation of women in any meeting held by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and highlighted the importance
of safeguarding the 30 per cent quota for women in the forthcoming elections in
Somalia.
109. Speaking out regularly in recognition of the legitimacy and value of human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and civil society, and condemning all attacks against
them remain indispensable. When those individuals are harassed or threatened for
engaging with the United Nations, including the Security Council, the response by
Council Members or United Nations agencies has to be crafted in consultation with
the defender at risk and the civil society organizations supporting them. Dedicated
and independent spaces and avenues for civil society participation must be protected,
and Council Members are encouraged to continue working with the NGO Working
Group on Women and Peace and Security in that regard.

VI. Conclusions and recommendations
110. While the present report is an account of progress and ongoing challenges over
the past year, it is also a look back at two decades of implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Twenty years on, our impact is not limited to
statements and resolutions. Rather, we see important changes in the ways in which
the United Nations works on international peace and security, the resources we invest,
and the expertise on which we draw. There have been notable achievements along the
way, as the women’s movement and its allies in governments and international
institutions have changed discriminatory laws, reached milestones in political
representation and international jurisprudence, and made a difference in a peace
process. Yet progress has been too slow and too narrow, there have been setbacks, and
the progress made has been easy to reverse.
111. The COVID-19 pandemic is a wake-up call for an international community that
has already been challenged by rising nationalism and attacks on multilateralism and
global norms. We face an urgent need to build more equal and inclusive societies.
Either we lose hard-fought gains on women’s rights, the Sustainable Development
Goals and international security, or we emerge from the pandemic more equal,
resilient and on the road to lasting and inclusive peace. Twenty years after
transnational feminist movements successfully pushed for resolution 1325 (2000), it
is time to realize their transformative vision and build just and sustainable peace for
__________________

Security Council resolutions 2514 (2020), para. 31, 2480 (2019), paras. 4–5, and 2531 (2020),
para. 4.
63
In 2019, 90 per cent (35 out of 39) of Department of Peace Operations reports and 96 per cent
(23 out of 24) of Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs reports contained references
to women and peace and security and/or information on violations targeting women and girls.
64
See www.womenpeacesecurity.org/roadmap-2020/.
62

20-12597

35/37

S/2020/946

all people based on inclusive power structures that underpin our economies, our
political systems and peace processes.
112. It is my firm belief that the multilateral system can rise to this challenge. In
2019, as we prepared for this anniversary, I issued directives for the United Nations
agencies and departments and recommendations for Member States and the Security
Council (S/2019/800, paras. 34–38). They remain as relevant today as they were a
year ago. Their implementation will be tracked yearly by my Executive Committee. I
also hope for the international community to make more profound changes in the way
we conduct our work on international peace and security. As the 2030 Agenda has
provided a global blueprint for sustainable peace, security and development, let us
join forces behind a vision of inclusive, gender-equal peacebuilding and
policymaking.
113. Over the next decade, let us:
(a) Push for a radical shift in the meaningful participation of women in
our peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, ensuring that women
are fully involved as equal partners in peace and from the earliest stages in each
and every peace and political process that the United Nations supports. As laid
out in my Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women is a non-negotiable political priority for the United Nations.
Already in my report on women and peace and security in 2019, I called for context specific high-level strategy meetings on designing and supporting inclusive
processes, at the start of every mediation process an d every subsequent year for
ongoing processes. Our efforts will require significant investment in new pathways
for the participation of women, including through the use of digital technologies,
expanding our partnerships with diverse women’s networks, and the strengthening
and modernizing of data collection to make public data on the participation of women
in peace processes, in real time. I expect that those combined efforts will show
tangible results in the next five to ten years;
(b) Turn the unconditional defence of women’s rights into the most visible
and identifiable markers of the work of the United Nations on peace and security.
I have asked all senior officials to advance my Call to Action on Human Rights and
ensure that public messages and statements, as well as other forms of engagement
with all stakeholders, reinforce the importance of realizing the full range of women’s
human rights and the legitimacy and value of the work of women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders. In addition, I have asked peacekeeping and political
missions to use their periodic reporting to raise the alert on any signs of backlash or
reprisals and improve their monitoring and reporting of threats and violence against
activists, including women human rights defenders. I reiterate that I expect more than
general references to continued risks; specific data and analysis are needed on who is
being targeted for doing what work, and how the Government and international actors
responded. Our commitment to women’s rights, info rmed by gender-responsive
conflict analysis in each context, has to be integrated throughout our political
advocacy, our partnerships and our strategic planning at global, regional and country
levels;
(c) Reverse the upward trajectory in global military spending with a view
to encouraging greater investment in the social infrastructure and services that
buttress human security. I have asked Member States to ratify the Arms Trade
Treaty, controlling the availability of armaments; to promote the participatio n of
women in all arms control and disarmament processes and forums; and to reduce
excessive military expenditures. The current context calls for renewed efforts to curb
military spending, which has been a chief strategic objective of the women’s
movement for peace. I call on women and peace and security and disarmament actors
36/37

20-12597

S/2020/946

to join forces to review and bring spending below its current level, including by
developing evidence-based analysis, policy recommendations and advocacy that links
savings in military spending to investments in economic and social development;
(d) Galvanize the donor community’s support for universal compliance
with the target of allocating a minimum of 15 per cent of official development
assistance to conflict-affected countries to advancing gender equality, and the
remaining 85 per cent to integrating gender considerations, including
multiplying by five direct assistance to women’s organizations, currently at
0.2 per cent. This entails not only seeking an increase in allocations, bu t also
earmarking and tracking resources to support women and peace and security,
following the good example set by some donors and United Nations entities, such as
the Peacebuilding Fund. I expect all relevant United Nations entities and country
teams to comply with the recommendations of the High-level Task Force on Financing
for Gender Equality to set benchmarks to reach the target of allocating a minimum of
15 per cent of programmatic budgets to gender equality and to improve the
mainstreaming of gender in all areas of expenditure, as instructed in my 2019 report.
Implementation of this directive will be tracked yearly and discussed with my
Executive Committee;
(e) Bring about a gender data revolution on women and peace and
security that reaches the general public, focuses on closing data gaps and
increases our knowledge of today’s most pressing issues, building on my data
strategy. Over the past two decades of implementing this agenda, our annual reports
to the Security Council have presented details about international courts and peace
tables, percentages of women in politics and the security sector, documented atrocities
against women and girls, the intricacies of national action plans, and markers of
professionalization and normative development in o ur international institutions.
While our knowledge of those matters has grown steadily, significant gaps remain. It
is clear that we have to expand our partnerships on data production and use and invest
much more in making the knowledge both useful for both policymakers and the
general public, and relevant to the current peace and security context and emerging
challenges and trends.
114. More than ever before we must build on the incremental progress made in the
women and peace and security agenda, move beyond incremental to wholesale
implementation, and make an all-out effort to address the remaining challenges with
vigour and steadfast commitment.

20-12597

37/37
