S/PV.9403

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9403rd meeting

Wednesday, 23 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24838 (E)
*2324838*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Ms. Lubna Alkanawati, Deputy Director of
Women Now for Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: The Syrian people both inside and
outside Syria continue to suffer acutely from the conflict
in all its dimensions, and the absence of a genuine
political process is deeply detrimental to their wellbeing. One latest indicator of suffering is the further
collapsing economy. A very bad economic situation has
become even worse. In three months, the Syrian pound
has lost more than 80 per cent of its value. Last week,
it hit an all-time low of 15,500 to the United States
dollar at the unofficial market rate. Remember that, in
2011, the Syrian pound was 47 to the dollar. Prices are
now spiralling out of control for essential goods, such
as food, medicine, fuel and basic commodities. Every
part of Syria and every community have been affected.
Many are struggling to provide meals to their families.
We take note of some of the steps taken to respond to
the sudden deterioration, including doubling minimum
State salaries to roughly $13 a month. Yet a monthly
food basket in June cost at least $81, according to the
World Food Programme, a figure that has gone up by
roughly 70 per cent in just a year and is no doubt higher
now in late August. Those trends speak for themselves.
The tragic reality is that, for as long as the violent
conflict continues and the political process is blocked,
the suffering of the Syrian people will simply get worse.
Syria cannot fix its economy while it is in a state of
conflict. And that applies to the many other crises that
2/18

23/08/2023

are ravaging Syria: the crisis of displacement, of the
detained, abducted and missing, of human rights abuses,
of terrorism, of hostilities and violent conflict and of the
de facto division of Syria undermining its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Only with movement on
resolution 2254 (2015), addressing the political crisis
at the heart of the conflict, can we begin to address the
many crises afflicting the country. Even starting with
some incremental steps on resolution 2254 (2015) could
create a floor beneath the unsustainable free fall and
initiate a process of trust-building and healing.
Let me echo the Secretary-General in welcoming
the understanding reached on the continued use, for the
next six months, of the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing to
deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance to millions
of people in need in north-west Syria. I also welcome
the extension of authorization for the United Nations
to use the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai border crossings
for an additional three months, as well as consent to
cross the lines within Syria at Sarmada and Saraqib
for the delivery of assistance for the next six months.
It is indeed essential that the United Nations and its
partners continue providing cross-border humanitarian
assistance at the necessary scale and in a principled
manner that allows for engagement with all parties
for the purposes of seeking humanitarian access
and in a manner that safeguards the United Nations
operational independence. We also need to redouble
efforts to secure sufficient humanitarian resources
at a time when funding is more stretched than ever.
This year’s humanitarian response plan is funded at
25 per cent, and the Regional Refugee and Resilience
Plan at roughly 10 per cent. We need support for all
pillars, including enhancing early recovery in the
humanitarian response plan and for refugees and host
countries. It remains critical that any adverse effects
of sanctions that could aggravate the predicament
of ordinary Syrians be avoided and mitigated. The
full use of existing humanitarian exemptions and
active engagement by sanctioning States to counter
overcompliance are essential.
We must not forget that, despite the broad military
stalemate since March 2020, the violent conflict
continues, causing civilian deaths and destruction
on all sides in Syria. The past month saw: air strikes
attributed to Israel near Damascus; reports of proGovernment air strikes in north-west Syria, an area
which also saw attacks, including attempted drone
attacks by listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

on Syrian Government positions, as well as front-line
clashes and exchanges of artillery; attacks claimed by
Da’esh during the Ashura commemoration near the
Sayyidah Zainab shrine and later on a bus carrying
Syrian Government forces near Al-Mayadin; reports of
strikes on a United States military base in Deir ez-Zor;
reports of Turkish drone strikes in north and north-east
Syria; an attack by the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF)
on a Turkish military base in Azaz; reports of clashes
between factions in areas under the control of the SDF;
reports of clashes and tensions in the south, in Dara’a,
Tafas and As-Suwayda; and a strike by the international
coalition on the radical group Hurras Al-Din in Al-Bab.
I continue to call for a genuine and sustained calm
that all key Syrian and international players work
to support, so as to build a nationwide ceasefire; a
cooperative approach to addressing the real threat posed
by proscribed terrorist groups; and full respect for
international humanitarian law. The central importance
of protecting civilians and upholding international law
was brought home again by the dark commemoration
this past week of 10 years since the shocking chemical
weapons attacks in the suburbs of Damascus.
As Council members know, at present it is difficult
to see that conditions are in place to bring about a
comprehensive settlement of the conflict. But — and I
emphasize this — I strongly believe that the status quo
is untenable and that there are things that can be done to
advance the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
I welcome the fact that reconvening the
Constitutional Committee is a clear point of consensus
among many key actors. It is important that the
Committee resume, continue, deepen and gradually
build some trust and move forward on substance — a
first move of many. I and my team are fully engaged
in the effort to unblock the impasse and find a way
forward on substance and working methods.
During the reporting period, the Arab contact
group met in Cairo with the Syrian Foreign Minister
and expressed its aspiration to see the next meeting
of the Constitutional Committee in the Sultanate of
Oman with United Nations facilitation before the end
of the year. That is one of a number of alternative
venues that has been suggested for the Constitutional
Committee. Let me stress that I continue to seek to
facilitate consensus to overcome the issues that have
prevented the Constitutional Committee from meeting
in Geneva and to ensure that it resumes and makes

S/PV.9403

credible progress. Earlier today, I spoke with the
Syrian Foreign Minister, as well as with the head of the
Syrian Negotiations Commission, and I look forward
to continuing those discussions. I also look forward to
briefing the middle third civil society participants on
any consensus that may emerge.
Let me just add that I continue to welcome enhanced
attention from the region on Syria. In the past few days,
I have spoken with the Foreign Ministers of Jordan,
Egypt and Saudi Arabia and had contact with senior
Turkish officials. Of course, I will continue to work
with Arab players, the Astana players and the Western
players too — all of whom have contributions to make
towards supporting a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
political process. It is a simple fact of Syria that no one
actor or group of actors can determine the outcome of
the conflict or bring about the kind of steps needed
for a political solution to emerge. A political solution
will be possible only with steps from a broad range of
different players and genuine verification too.
The political process must be much more than just
the Constitutional Committee, as Council members
well know. I have long sought to bring about movement
incrementally towards a safe, calm and neutral
environment in Syria — something that obviously
overlaps heavily with the question of refugees and the
internally displaced. That was also an issue highlighted
when the Arab contact group met last week. It remains
to be seen whether the Syrian Government is ready
to do more to address the very real and continuing
protection concerns. And for their part, donors could
do more to address the concerns all Syrians have about
basic services and livelihoods. A step-for-step dynamic
in that regard could begin to change realities on the
ground for all Syrians, including the displaced, and
build confidence and political space for a broader set
of issues related to resolution 2254 (2015). The close
coordination of the Syrian authorities with the United
Nations would be a cornerstone in that regard.
Earlier this month, I had the pleasure of having an
in-depth exchange with the Truth and Justice Charter
representatives, who have been among the key drivers
towards the General Assembly’s decision to create
the Independent Institution on Missing Persons in the
Syrian Arab Republic (resolution 77/301). For those
families and victims, the decision is a bittersweet
milestone. It underlines the momentous scale of the
problem: tens of thousands of men, women and children
are detained or missing, with ongoing abductions

23-248383/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

and arbitrary detentions still happening across the
country. They told me how families continue to learn
about their loved ones’ deaths in custody only when
civil registry records are updated, after having waited
years with hopes of seeing their loved ones return.
On previous occasions, they also relayed the risks of
persecution and harassment and extortion that they face
in their struggle to seek information about their loved
ones. Syrians have the right to be provided full and
transparent information about the fate and whereabouts
of the detained and missing. We will continue to consult
widely on that and other issues with Syrian civil society
and Syrian women, including through the Civil Society
Support Room and the Women’s Advisory Board, to
ensure that their legitimate aspirations are understood
and ultimately met.
I am also pleased to report to the Council that
the process of seeking new members for the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board through a process of rotation
has begun, and we look forward to concluding this
process in the coming months. Existing members of the
Women’s Advisory Board have provided sound advice,
and I remain extremely grateful for their efforts.
It is deeply troubling that, for over a year, the
intra-Syrian political process has been in deep
freeze. A political process is the right of the Syrian
people — they are entitled to chart their own destiny.
And a political process is a necessity. Syria is a country
and people remain divided. There is no military victory
on the horizon for any one actor, and the terrible effects
of conflict continue to cascade across the region. We
are all paying a heavy price for the conflict — first
and foremost the Syrian people, most of whom have
lost close to everything in this past decade, but also
the region and the international community at large. As
international attention and funding for Syria wane, the
situation will become even more unsustainable.
The only path out of this is a political process that
involves the Syrian parties themselves, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Alkanawati.
Ms. Alkanawati: I thank you, Madam President,
for inviting me to speak today and for prioritizing the
voices of civil society and survivors of war crimes.
I am at this meeting today to speak to the Security
Council about the political situation in Syria, to shed
4/18

23/08/2023

light on grave human rights violations that Council
members are aware of owing to the incredible efforts
of brave Syrian men and women who documented
those violations and briefed the Council and other
international bodies time and time again.
In response to those incredible efforts, the Security
Council has afforded war criminals impunity, with many
countries now normalizing relations with the Syrian
regime, warmly welcoming Bashar Al-Assad, the main
perpetrator of war crimes and the man who turned
Syria into a narco-State, back to the diplomatic stage.
I have witnessed and survived many of those
violations. I survived a mustard gas attack on Harasta
and witnessed the Syrian regime’s chemical weapons
massacre in Ghouta in 2013. I lived under the regime’s
siege of Ghouta, completely cut off from all services at
a time when even obtaining a loaf of bread was a battle.
Starvation and dire economic conditions were the
main features of that period. The regime intentionally
crushed the area with no regard for the lives of the
people living there. It is no wonder that the same
regime does not care that 90 per cent of Syrians today
are living below the poverty line. The conditions have
driven brave men and women to take to the streets to
demand change. I understand their pain very well and
admire their courage in being willing to protest today
under the threat of a very real risk of death, detention,
torture or disappearance.
Over the past 12 years, 100,000 people have been
detained or forcibly disappeared, the majority of them
at the hands of the Syrian regime. But the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other armed forces have also
used those practices as a weapon of war. Detainees are
subjected to torture and rape and denied food, health
services and visits. Thousands have been killed. The
families of disappeared persons are waiting in anguish
for any news about their missing loved ones, not
knowing whether they are alive or dead. The United
Nations Independent Institution on Missing Persons in
the Syrian Arab Republic, newly established with a view
to uncovering their fate, is a positive step, the result of
an effort led by brave women. It is now the Council’s
duty to ensure that the Syrian regime collaborates with
it to reveal the fate of all who are missing in Syria.
Today I am a refugee in France. I wish I could go
back to Syria and stand with the brave men and women
protesting in As-Suwayda, Jaramana, Tartus and other
areas, but I cannot, because I know that if I return to
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Syria I will end up detained, tortured or killed. Today
Syrian refugees in Türkiye and Lebanon fear for their
lives as both countries are escalating their deportations
of refugees to Syria, putting them at risk of grave
human rights violations that run counter to their State
commitments under international law. It is the duty of
Council members to pressure host countries to protect
refugees. My country is not safe. The conditions for the
dignified, safe and voluntary return of refugees do not
exist right now.
Many efforts are being made by the international
community, including the Council, to secure
humanitarian aid and cross-border access, document
war crimes and more, but while they are important, they
are treating only the symptoms, and the root causes of
the Syrian crisis remain. There is one way out of the
situation, which is a real political process that meets
the demands of the Syrians and leads to a political
transition. The United Nations-backed Constitutional
Committee has failed to produce any tangible outcome,
largely due to the Syrian regime’s intentional and
systematic disruption and to fading international
support and commitment. The political and peace
processes cannot and should not be reduced to mere
constitutional debates. Accountability and justice are
an essential step in any peace agreement. As a human
rights defender and a feminist, I demand accountability
for all the perpetrators of human rights violations and
for all crimes committed by parties to the conflict.
The political process should prioritize the release of all
detainees. We need to activate a wider political process,
ensuring a political transition at the centre within a
clear timeline. That cannot happen without a strong
international commitment to the process capable of
countering the dominance of the Syrian regime’s allies
Russia and Iran over Syria’s future. In addition, any
political process must ensure the participation of Syrians
from all sectors and parts of the country, including civil
society, survivors and survivor-led groups. Women’s
participation must not be a box-checking exercise for
the Special Envoy. An inclusive approach is vital. It is
not enough to consult Syrian women. Our full, equal
and meaningful participation in decision-making and
policy formation must be ensured.
Twelve years ago, the streets of Syria were filled
with hope for change. We were part of a revolution
demanding democracy, dignity and freedom. We
were met with terrible brutality and abandoned by
the international community. But despite all of that,

S/PV.9403

Syrians are still demanding change. They are showing
unbelievable courage, and I am inspired by them to
speak out today. Right now, as I speak here, Syrians
are in the streets protesting, saying the same words that
we said 12 years ago. It is time for Al-Assad to leave,
so that we can have a chance to build a new country
based on freedom, equality and democracy. It is now
the turn of the members of the Security Council to
show us courage.
The President: I thank Ms. Alkanawati for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for providing
an overview of the political situation in the country. We
also listened carefully to Ms. Alkanawati, who long ago
lost her connection to Syria. I think it would probably
be hard to find something further from the truth than
the fabrications and claims that we have just heard from
her. We regret that the United States presidency has
decided to turn our meeting into a farce and a useless
anti-Syrian performance.
We still see no alternative to advancing the political
settlement process in Syria, led and implemented by the
Syrians themselves with the assistance of the United
Nations, in strict compliance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and with respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the country. In that
regard, we believe firmly in the need to continue the
direct intra-Syrian dialogue, for which the primary
platform remains the Constitutional Committee. At the
same time, we continue to believe that fundamental
decisions on the modalities of the further work of the
Constitutional Committee and the venue for the next
rounds of consultations should be made by the Syrians
themselves without external interference. They should
determine that platform in cooperation with the Special
Envoy and in coordination with the Astana-format
guarantor countries, Russia, Iran and Türkiye. We
support the Special Envoy’s proposal for holding such
meetings in Oman.
Progress on the Syrian political settlement track is
also particularly necessary now because the tensions in
the situation remain, with the main security threats for
both Syria and the entire region continuing to be related
to the persistence of large-scale hotbeds of terrorism.

23-248385/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

On 10 August, in Deir ez-Zor governorate in eastern
Syria, Islamic State terrorists attacked a bus carrying
Syrian Arab Republic soldiers. Several dozen people
were killed and injured as a result of the attack. We
strongly condemn that terrorist act and express our
solidarity with the leadership and people of the Syrian
Arab Republic in their fight against terrorism. I
would like to stress once again that terrorist threats to
Syrians emanate from areas outside of the control of
the country’s Government. At the same time, one of the
main destabilizing factors remains the illegal United
States military presence in the trans-Euphrates region
and around Al-Tanf in south-eastern Syrian Arab
Republic, where the active recruitment and training of
fighters for various terrorist groups, including Da’esh,
is under way.
Against that backdrop, the Western States’ flirtation
with the terrorist elements and attempts to use them for
their own geopolitical purposes does not stand up to any
scrutiny. Washington’s policy aimed at maintaining the
de facto occupation of vast areas in north-eastern Syria,
which are rich in oil, gas and agricultural resources,
and at continuing the illegitimate sanctions pressure
on Damascus is leading to a further deterioration of
the social and economic situation and contributes to
mobilizing the extremist underground in Syria.
In that connection, we stand in solidarity with the
legitimate demands of the Syrian authorities for the
withdrawal of all military contingents illegally present
in the country’s territory. We believe that achieving
sustainable stabilization in the Syrian Arab Republic
is possible only through an end to the foreign military
presence in violation of the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and the unconditional cessation of
regular air strikes by the Israeli Air Force, the most
recent of which hit the suburbs of Damascus shortly
before today’s meeting — the twenty-second such
attack since the beginning of this year. Such actions, in
violation of the sovereignty of Syria and neighbouring
Arab countries, in addition to the lack of any proper
response from United Nations leadership, are deeply
regrettable and condemnable.
We believe that the return of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the Arab family and the mutual steps
towards restoring relations with Türkiye contribute to
the overall improvement of the situation in the Middle
East and to swiftly overcoming the consequences of
the Syrian crisis. In that context, we are convinced that
the persistent attempts by Western countries to hinder
6/18

23/08/2023

those natural processes are counterproductive. We
consider such unconstructive steps as interference in
the sovereign decisions of States and as a politicization
of purely humanitarian issues, such as facilitating the
return of refugees, whose host countries — Lebanon,
Jordan and Türkiye — have been clear about the
limits of their capacity to further accommodate them.
Meanwhile, western donors, who loudly lament the
misfortunes of the Syrians, in reality stubbornly refuse
to help them to return to their homeland, preferring
to pay for their stay in host countries. We see that as
yet another example of the double standards of our
Western colleagues.
For our part, we believe it is necessary to ensure the
fundamental right of return of refugees, as stipulated in
resolution 2254 (2015), provided that such efforts are
carried out in strict coordination with Damascus.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Mozambique and
my own country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
important update and commend his efforts in search of
peace and stability in Syria. We listened with attention
to the briefing by Ms. Lubna Alkanawati.
The A3 expresses its concern about the paralysis of
the country’s political process, despite the consensus
on the importance of reconvening the meetings of the
small body of the Constitutional Committee. In that
regard, we welcome the proposal by the contact group
of the League of Arab States to hold the next meeting
of the Constitutional Committee in Oman as a step in
the right direction and call for consensus among key
stakeholders on the various proposed venues for the
resumption of the Committee’s meetings as soon as
possible. The A3 underscores the need for the parties
to build trust and deepen discussions on substantive
issues in order to improve the prospects of a fruitful
dialogue within the Constitutional Committee. Gabon,
Ghana and Mozambique therefore urge all the parties to
set aside their differences and give new impetus to the
political process.
The threat posed by terrorist acts and the prevalence
of arrests, forced disappearances and torture continue
to undermine efforts towards a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. As the world witnesses the persistence of
hostilities, particularly in northern Syria, we reiterate
our call for an immediate ceasefire, in the interests of
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian people and the stability of the region. The
A3 holds the view that the presence of foreign military
forces undermines regional and international security,
and we reiterate our position that Syria should not be
used as a battleground for geopolitical rivalries.
The strong commitment and good faith of the
countries in the region are essential. In that regard,
we reiterate our appreciation for Syria’s return to
the League of Arab States. We believe that that path
encourages a diplomatic strategy for resolving the
Syrian conflict by signalling a willingness to engage
with Syria. It may also contribute to the promotion
of improved relations among Arab countries, acting
as a bridge between diverse regional actors. We are
convinced that resolution 2254 (2015) remains the main
road map for achieving a political solution to the crisis
in Syria while respecting the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country.
The A3 remains convinced that the solution to
the conflict in Syria lies in the hands of the Syrians
themselves and that peace can be achieved through a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned genuine, comprehensive
and inclusive dialogue that produces consensus. That
process must be carried out under the auspices of the
United Nations. Needless to say, a political solution to
the conflict is the only desirable alternative. To that
end, it requires necessarily the cessation of hostilities,
the restoration of State authority over the entire Syrian
territory and an inclusive good-faith dialogue involving
all segments and actors of Syrian society, including
women, young people and minority groups.
To conclude, we reaffirm our full support for
Special Envoy Pedersen and his relentless efforts,
including his step-for-step process towards ending the
conflict that has been tearing Syria apart for more than
12 years and taking a toll on its people, who continue
to pay a heavy price. All the parties involved and the
international community as a whole must do everything
possible to bring this conflict to an end.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and
commend the tremendous efforts he has made in
implementing the resolutions of the Security Council
and advancing the political process in Syria. I also
listened attentively to the briefing made by the civil
society briefer, Ms. Alkanawati. I would like to make
the following three points.

S/PV.9403

First, the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria must be respected. One certain country has
continued to strengthen its illegal military presence in
Syria. China is deeply concerned about that. We urge the
foreign forces to immediately put an end to their illegal
presence and unlawful military operations in Syria and
to stop the illegal plundering of its natural resources.
Secondly, a political solution is the fundamental
way out of the Syrian impasse. China supports Special
Envoy Pedersen in adopting a step-for-step approach
and in engaging extensively with all parties on the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). We look
forward to a speedy resumption of the meetings of
the Constitutional Committee, which should be based
on the principle of Syrian leadership and ownership.
China welcomed the successful convening of the Arab
ministerial contact group on Syria and hopes that Arab
countries will unite in full solidarity to provide greater
support for a political settlement of the Syrian issue.
Countries outside the region should refrain from any
acts or rhetoric that could obstruct or interfere with
reconciliation and should seek to create an enabling
environment for dialogue and consultation among the
countries of the region.
Thirdly, resolute action must be taken to combat
all terrorist forces in Syria. The counter-terrorism
situation in Syria remains challenging, and terrorist
organizations such as Da’esh and the Al-Nusra Front
have recently been running rampant there. The Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement/Turkistan Islamic Party,
which has been listed by the Council, has also continued
its terrorist activities in the country. China supports
the Syrian Government in taking all the necessary
measures to combat terrorism and maintain security
and stability. In accordance with international law
and the relevant Council resolutions, the international
community should take a zero-tolerance approach to
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and completely cut off such groups’ sources of weapons,
personnel and financing. We urge the relevant parties
to stop condoning, shielding and exploiting terrorist
forces for political purposes.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that
the Council has considered the question of Syria
three times this month, which is not the best way to
approach the issue. The Syrian dossiers should rather
be consolidated and considered together or addressed
in a more appropriate format.

23-248387/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Alkanawati for their briefings.
Twelve years ago, the Syrian people peacefully
took to the streets to demand freedom, political reform
and a Government that respects and upholds human
rights. The Al-Assad regime met those demands with
brutality. The ensuing conflict has cost the lives of more
than half a million people and left more than 12 million
displaced. Through its adoption of resolution 2254
(2015), the Council agreed unanimously on a political
path out of the conflict that would protect the rights of
all Syrians, with civil society, women and minorities
playing a critical role. Eight years on, there has been
next to no political progress. The conditions that drove
the conflict, including the behaviour of the Al-Assad
regime, have not changed. The regime’s complicity
in the production and trafficking of Captagon is a
recent example. As ever, the regime and its allies
profit while the Syrian people and the region suffer
the consequences.
As Ms. Alkanawati has clearly articulated,
despite the untold hardships faced by women in Syria,
many continue to play vital roles in the pursuit of
justice, accountability and peace, often in the face of
harassment, intimidation and fears for their own safety.
We commend them for their courage.
The United Kingdom recognizes the enormous
generosity of the States of the region that are hosting
Syrian refugees and will continue to support them
in doing so. While we hope that Syrian refugees will
ultimately be able to return home, we agree with the
United Nations assessment that the current conditions
in Syria do not permit that. It is essential to ensure
that international law is respected and that any refugee
returns are voluntary, safe and dignified. The onus
must be on the Al-Assad regime to substantively
change its behaviour and provide verifiable protection
assurances for prospective returnees, many of whom
fear prosecution if they return. If the regime wants
to show that its behaviour has changed, genuine
engagement on the issue of the missing and detained
would be an important step towards demonstrating a
safe environment for refugee returns.
As the recent conclusions of the Arab contact
group have noted, resolution 2254 (2015) remains the
only viable route to a lasting and inclusive settlement
in Syria. While we welcome the recent efforts to make
progress on the political track, proof of the regime’s
8/18

23/08/2023

good faith will be a concrete step in guaranteeing the
rights of the Syrian people and in engaging substantively
in meetings of the Constitutional Committee.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen for his briefing. We commend his work
and that of his team and share his concerns about the
urgent need to make political progress. I also thank
Ms. Alkanawati for enriching today’s discussion with
her important insights and experiences.
The support and solidarity we have witnessed in
the aftermath of the February earthquake must translate
to the political track. Only a political solution can put
an end to the suffering that the Syrian population are
enduring. Resolution 2254 (2015) clearly outlines
the only viable pathway for a political solution to the
conflict. Malta remains supportive of a genuine Syrianled and Syrian-owned political process, facilitated by
the United Nations, with all key stakeholders working
constructively and coherently for the people of
Syria, as provided for in the resolution. We thank the
Special Envoy for his unwavering commitment to its
implementation and for his continued engagement with
a wide range of stakeholders to try to find a way out of
the current impasse. The single most relevant element in
advancing the stalled political process is a resumption
of the work of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
The deadlock affecting the Committee is deeply
regrettable, particularly as it remains the only format
that convenes all the parties together for dialogue. We
also stress that much greater investment is needed to
support the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women and to ensure that substantive gender equality
remains a priority. Similarly, Malta encourages sincere
engagement between all stakeholders and the good
offices of the Special Envoy when it comes to the stepfor-step initiative. The efforts must be reciprocal and
verifiable, and a breakthrough in that regard would have
a substantial effect as a confidence-building measure.
Without a safe, calm environment on the ground
in Syria, the conditions will not be right for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their areas of origin. Refugees
must be protected from refoulement. It is imperative
that we see the political will from Damascus that is so
urgently needed, as well as from all the key regional and
international stakeholders present in Syria, to ensure
that a nationwide ceasefire can take effect. That would
facilitate desperately needed confidence-building
measures and enable real progress to be made.
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

One such confidence-building measure relates
to establishing the fate of the detained, disappeared
and missing in Syria. Political will from all parties is
essential to addressing that serious and urgent issue.
Malta reaffirms its support for the newly established
Independent Institution on Missing Persons in the Syrian
Arab Republic and emphasizes that the implementation
of its mandate must be gender-responsive and survivorcentred. We also note the continued practice of arbitrary
arrests, forced detention and torture and the recruitment
of children into the military. Malta denounces such
practices in the strongest terms and calls for an
immediate stop to them. We urge Damascus to swiftly
develop and adopt a comprehensive action plan to end
and prevent such grave violations against children.
In conclusion, we urge all parties to engage with
the Special Envoy to ensure that the opportunities that
arise from the renewed diplomatic attention to Syria
are not wasted. We reiterate that stability in Syria and
the region will be achieved only through a political
solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), that meets
the aspirations of all Syrians.
Ms. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Lubna
Alkanawati for their briefings.
Switzerland joins the Special Envoy in following
with interest the dynamics currently at work in the
region. In particular, we welcomed the first meeting
of the Arab contact group on Syria, held in Cairo on
15 August, following on from the Amman, Cairo and
Jeddah declarations in May. We welcome the fact that the
declaration issued at the end of that meeting makes clear
reference to the Council’s resolution 2254 (2015). We
note that the group wishes to ensure good coordination
with the United Nations, including in preparation for a
forthcoming meeting of the Constitutional Committee.
The convening of a Committee meeting as soon as
possible would be an important step in the step-forstep approach. Switzerland hopes that such a meeting
can enable substantial progress to be made towards a
political solution to the conflict in Syria.
Switzerland shares with the Special Envoy and
Ms. Alkanawati a sincere belief that the women and
peace and security agenda is central in Syria. In
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), Switzerland
once again stresses the importance of the full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation of Syrian women in
the political process. Throughout the country, civil-

S/PV.9403

society organizations, many of which rely on the
voluntary involvement of women, play a key role in
the quest for a lasting peace in Syria. In that regard,
we welcome the close collaboration between the Office
of the Special Envoy and the Civil Society Support
Room, a platform which ensures the broad participation
of civil society in the political process and in which
women account for 43 per cent of participants. The
Support Room ensures that women’s priorities and
realities are taken into account on the ground and in the
political process.
We note with concern the way in which the very
deep humanitarian and socioeconomic crises afflicting
the country are affecting women. In that respect, it is
essential to ensure people’s access to humanitarian
aid throughout the country. In addition, women are
often subjected to forced or early marriages or made
to operate in an informal labour market that exposes
them to all sorts of abuses. In the worst cases they have
no protection from sexual and gender-based violence.
We call on all parties to the conflict and every country
to respect their obligations and immediately end all
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights committed against civilians in Syria, including
women. To that end, we reiterate our full support to the
Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, whose work is fundamental
to the fight against impunity.
Finally, Switzerland remains very concerned about
the precarious security situation in several areas of the
country, where hostilities continue to affect the civilian
population with a disproportionate impact on women
and girls. As resolution 2254 (2015) and the Council
itself have repeatedly emphasized, the imposition of a
nationwide ceasefire and respect on the part of all the
parties for such a ceasefire remain priority measures
for enabling the implementation of peace efforts and
humanitarian assistance operations. The Syrian people
need them desperately.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen for his thorough briefing. We also
listened attentively to Ms. Alkanawati’s presentation. I
welcome the representatives of Syria, Türkiye and Iran
to today’s meeting.

23-248389/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

Brazil, a country that is very proud of its illustrious
and hardworking community of Syrian descent,
continues to support the Special Envoy’s efforts to
facilitate a Syrian-led and -owned political settlement,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), which urged
all parties to the United Nations-facilitated process to
adhere to a number of principles in their talks. They
include a commitment to Syria’s unity, independence
and territorial integrity. They also highlight the need
to ensure the continuity of governmental institutions,
non-sectarianism and the protection of the rights
of all Syrians, regardless of ethnicity or religious
denomination. We reiterate that call and those
principles. In our view, clarity on the part of all parties
on the requirements of resolution 2254 (2015) could
facilitate a resumption of the political dialogue and
support progress in the substantive discussions once
they are resumed.
We welcome the role of the League of Arab States
in facilitating a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
Syria’s reinstatement as a full member of the Arab
League constitutes a positive development in the
region in support of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political settlement, as has been said. Coordination
between the Arab League’s ministerial contact group
on Syria and the good offices of the Special Envoy
may strengthen the prospects for reconvening the
Constitutional Committee. We encourage all the parties
to show flexibility in overcoming differences, including
regarding location and logistical arrangements, in
order to enable the United Nations-facilitated process
to resume.
Brazil underscores the need to address the
situation of Syrian refugees in cooperation with the
Syrian Government. The countries hosting refugees,
particularly those neighbouring Syria, bear a
significant burden. The international community can
facilitate the voluntary and safe return of refugees,
including by supporting development and livelihood
projects for the returning population in Syria. Support
for initiatives throughout Syria that alleviate the human
suffering resulting from economic hardship should not
be politicized. Early-recovery projects and adequate
funding of the humanitarian response, without
geographic discrimination, would help to create an
environment conducive to social stability in the whole
country. We took note of the statement by the Deputy
Special Envoy concerning possible fraud in support
of membership applications to the Syrian Women’s
10/18

23/08/2023

Advisory Board in exchange for money. If that is the
case, such fraudulent behaviour is unacceptable.
The latest report of the United Nations Monitoring
Team regarding the threat posed by Da’esh and
Al-Qaida and their affiliated groups (S/2023/568) states
that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham remains the terrorist group
exerting effective control in north-western Syria. The
report also indicates that Da’esh views the north-west as
a potential gateway for expanding its presence beyond
Syria. Brazil reiterates its condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations regardless of any
justifications or pretexts. We emphasize the need to
coordinate counter-terrorism operations in Syria with
the Syrian Government, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and with full respect for Syrian
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Resolution 2268 (2016) established the 30-day
reporting cycle justifying today’s meeting. In 2016,
when that resolution was adopted (see S/PV.7634),
the Council recognized that a cessation of hostilities
in Syria constituted a step towards a lasting ceasefire,
with a close linkage with the parallel political process.
Brazil considers that that linkage between peace
and the prospect of a successful political settlement
requires a commitment to peace within Syria, but
also outside Syria and towards Syria, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Mr. Geir Pedersen for his valuable briefing. We also
listened attentively to the statement delivered by
Ms. Lubna Alkanawati.
Twelve years after the outbreak of war in Syria, the
situation in the country remains extremely complex.
That is why we need a comprehensive, prompt political
solution that can bring an end to the Syrian people’s
suffering and maintain Syria’s independence, unity and
territorial integrity. We once again stress that a political
solution is the only way to resolve the crisis.
It is our hope that progress can be made on the
political track against the backdrop of some positive
recent developments in that regard, including the
strengthened, constructive Arab role in assisting
Syria in recovering and restoring stability. In that
context, we believe that the inaugural meeting of
the Arab ministerial liaison committee on Syria,
attended by the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

is a positive indicator of strengthened cooperation and
understanding among Arab States. The meeting also
served as a follow-up to the implementation of the
Amman declaration and further supports efforts to find
a settlement to the Syrian crisis while addressing its
humanitarian, political and security consequences.
We welcome the communiqué issued by the Arab
ministerial liaison committee on Syria regarding the
Syrian constitutional track, in which it looks forward
to holding the next meeting of the Constitutional
Committee in the Sultanate of Oman by the end of
the year. My country hopes that the next meeting of
the Constitutional Committee will help to overcome
the long-standing impasse. We stress the importance
of the full and meaningful participation of Syrian
women in all discussions related to the constitutional
track, especially given the centrality of their role in
developing and building Syrian society.
With regard to the security situation, we reiterate
the need for de-escalation throughout Syria, especially
in the north-west and north-east regions. Such efforts
will be crucial for establishing security and stability,
strengthening regional security and creating the
necessary conditions for improving the deteriorated
humanitarian situation in Syria. Moreover, the
persistent gross security threat posed by the Da’esh
terrorist organization against Syria must be addressed.
Despite continued efforts to combat terrorism and the
tangible progress that has been made, Da’esh continues
to reorganize its ranks, acquire weapons and recruit
additional fighters, especially in the camps in northeast Syria. That threat must be seriously addressed. In
that regard, we stress the need to continue strengthening
and coordinating all international efforts to counter
terrorism everywhere. We support the call of the Arab
ministerial liaison committee on Syria for increased
cooperation among Syria, the countries concerned
and the United Nations to combat that scourge in
the country.
In conclusion, it is imperative to focus all efforts on
supporting the political track by finding a solution to the
crisis rather than merely managing it. Furthermore, we
must support Arab and international efforts, including
those made by the Special Envoy for Syria.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the information provided by Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Ms. Lubna Alkanawati of Women

S/PV.9403

Now for Development. I welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representatives of Syria, Türkiye and Iran.
My delegation acknowledges the work of
Mr. Pedersen and echoes his recommendations to
strengthen coordination and cooperation among Syria,
neighbouring countries, regional organizations and the
United Nations in order to gradually move forward in a
constructive political negotiation process.
We know that 2023 has been a particularly difficult
year for the Syrian people, owing to the February
earthquakes. However, it has left us with a valuable
lesson that should be capitalized upon by the parties
concerned: when there is political will, tangible results
can be achieved. The Syrian Government’s decision
to allow humanitarian aid access through the Bab
Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai crossings and the
determination of the League of Arab States to readmit
Syria as a full member are advances that must be
reflected in the political and humanitarian arena. Such
momentum towards concerted action must be harnessed
to facilitate the implementation of diplomatic and
political strategies aimed at resolving the conflict and
initiating the transition to institutional, economic and
social recovery in Syria.
In that regard, we encourage the Special Envoy
to not tire in his efforts to regain the trust of the
parties, unblock the reconvening of the Constitutional
Committee in Geneva and resume the step-by-step
negotiation plan. We hope for the resumption of
the political negotiation so that it can include the
representation of the greatest number of social and
political sectors and that it can consider the full,
equitable and meaningful participation of women and
young people at all its stages. Increasing political
stability and good governance indicators and creating
strong State institutions to ensure accountability, a
democratic system and respect for human rights will
undoubtedly improve the humanitarian situation of the
Syrian population, which has deteriorated significantly
after 12 years of war.
My delegation reiterates its support for any
initiative aimed at resuming diplomacy to achieve
peace within the framework of an intra-Syrian process,
based on the principles of sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity, as set forth in resolution
2254 (2015).

23-2483811/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Alkanawati for their
informative briefings.
The Syrian people have dealt with more than 12
years of bloodshed, compounded with the aftermath of a
devastating earthquake. Japan is grateful to the Special
Envoy and his team for their relentless efforts to engage
with all relevant stakeholders inside and outside of Syria
through active dialogue and diplomacy. It is critical for
the Security Council to continue supporting a Syrianled, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated
political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
However, as clearly stated by the Special Envoy,
it is deeply regrettable that the intra-Syrian political
track remains stalled, including the Constitutional
Committee. As the political track, the economic
situation and the humanitarian situation are tightly
intertwined, the situation in Syria, without the progress
of even an incremental political process, can become,
or continue to be, a free fall, as described by the Special
Envoy. All of us around the table need to keep that
in mind.
We acknowledge that regional engagement has
been intensifying, including the so-called Arab contact
group, which is seeking to find a path for a comprehensive
resolution of the Syrian crisis. In that regard, Japan
takes note of the contact group’s recent proposal to hold
the next round of Constitutional Committee meetings
in Oman by the end of the year. We believe that the
selection of the venue should be closely coordinated with
the Special Envoy and all relevant Syrian stakeholders.
It is high time for all Committee participants to
put their broader political disagreements aside and
seriously reconsider a more substantive approach that
includes all relevant stakeholders, including Syrian
women. Meaningful political progress is also key to
regional stability. National reconciliation should be in
everybody’s interest after decades of conflict and the
unnecessary sacrifices of innocent people.
The security situation in Syria remains deeply
alarming. The persistence of terrorist attacks, air
strikes, drone strikes and other violent clashes only
fuels tensions and pushes the Syrian people further
away from peace and stability. We must ask ourselves
how we could possibly guarantee the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their native land if Syria remains an active
war zone. In addition, concerns persist about their
12/18

23/08/2023

fate upon returning to their homes. Those conditions
are simply not in place right now. In that regard,
a nationwide ceasefire and reconciliation remain
essential components of a political process, but until
then, civilians will continue to bear the brunt of the war
and require urgent protection.
Finally, to address the dire economic and
humanitarian situations, there is no option but an
inclusive and comprehensive political solution that
will end the suffering of the Syrian people. Japan, as
a responsible member of the Security Council and a
major donor to the Syrian crisis, will spare no efforts in
working towards that end.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Geir Pedersen and Lubna
Alkanawati for their statements.
I would like to emphasize two messages.
The Syrian regime is behind the suffering of the
Syrian people and the destruction of the country.
Since the peaceful uprising of Syrian demonstrators
in March 2011, the regime has not stopped its killing,
repression and torture. The record is grim: more than
500,000 dead, more than 130,000 forcibly disappeared
and 12 million Syrians have been displaced or have
become refugees. What is more, Syria is now a global
hub for drug trafficking, which is a major source of
instability for the entire region and one of the main
sources of income for Bashar Al-Assad’s regime.
The United Nations has extensively documented the
regime’s systematic use of torture and sexual violence
against women, children and men in the prisons under
its control. The day before yesterday marked the tenth
anniversary of the atrocious sarin gas attack carried
out in the Ghouta district of Damascus by Bashar
Al-Assad’s regime against its own population, killing
more than 1,400 people, many of them children. France
pays tribute to the memory of the victims of that
heinous crime.
The events I have just described constitute war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Those responsible
must be held accountable for their actions. That is
necessary if Syria is to rebuild itself socially and
politically. The sanctions adopted by the European
States are aimed precisely at preventing those crimes
and reducing as far as possible the financial capabilities
and freedom of movement of their perpetrators.
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Only an inclusive political process can guarantee the
lasting and just peace to which Syrians aspire. The war
continues for want of political progress. The deliberate
obstruction practiced by the regime, supported by
Russia, is preventing any political discussion. The work
of the Constitutional Committee has ground to a halt
because Russia alone has decided, in defiance of the
terms of reference agreed by the Syrians, to oppose
the holding of its meetings in Geneva. Geir Pedersen,
whose efforts we commend, has also underscored that
the Committee’s working methods need to be reviewed
to enable it to start carrying out the genuine work which
the regime is deliberately refusing to undertake.
On the ground, the situation remains volatile, as
evidenced by the absence of a nationwide ceasefire.
As we know, the chaos and scorched earth policy
methodically implemented by the regime have provided
fertile ground for the spread of terrorism. We strongly
condemn all attacks carried out by Da’esh and recall that
France itself has on several occasions been the victim
of murderous attacks on its territory by that terrorist
group, which takes advantage of the war to prosper.
However, Bashar Al-Assad’s regime is not a reliable
partner in the fight against terrorism. His regime feeds
on the instability that reigns in Syria and fuels it.
In conclusion, only a lasting and just peace based
on the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), adopted
unanimously by the Council, will make it possible to
put an end to the war in Syria and alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people. That is why we remain adamant:
no normalization, reconstruction or lifting of sanctions
will be possible without tangible gestures on the part
of the regime, notably towards a credible and inclusive
political process; the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees and the fight against drug trafficking.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to start by
thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his insights and
his tireless efforts to advance all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015), including his step-for-step approach in
advancing the political processes, and I assure him of
our full support. I also would like to thank Ms. Lubna
Alkanawati for her briefing and for sharing her views
with us on the situation in Syria.
As we heard once more today, the key to ending the
conflict and suffering of the Syrian people is a Syrianled and United Nations-facilitated political process that
meets the legitimate aspirations of all Syrian people.
Such process, based on resolution 2254 (2015), should

S/PV.9403

provide a clear road map for an inclusive, comprehensive
and sustainable political solution.
Unfortunately, the Syrian regime continues to
hold that process hostage, although is clear that a
military solution could never bring a true peace and
that humanitarian aid cannot provide lasting options,
nor replace the need to build trust among the divided
Syrian people. Thus, we urge the regime and its allies
to allow for a genuine political process to resume.
Albania also takes note of the meeting of the Arab
contact group held in Cairo on 15 August. We support
the call for the Constitutional Committee to reconvene
within this year and stress the need for it to achieve
substantial progress. The irrational arguments related
to the impartiality of the venue must not be used any
longer. More than a year since the convening of its
most recent meeting, a lot of critical issues remain
to be addressed. Multiple reports serve as a sobering
reminder that the regime has never stopped committing
atrocities against its people.
Albania reiterates its call for Damascus to implement
resolution 2401 (2018), end the indiscriminate air strikes
and shelling on civilians and respect international
humanitarian law. We also call for the implementation
of the nationwide ceasefire, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). Those are urgent first steps which would
bring us closer to a safe and calm environment, which
would allow us to engage with pragmatism with a view
to ensuring the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees and IDPs once the conditions are met.
Syrian people have little hope for a better future,
given the economic collapse, rising prices and the
inability of families to secure basic needs. Women and
children, who are the future and backbone of any society,
are suffering the most. In that context, we reiterate that
ending impunity and ensuring accountability are a must
for peace in Syria, and a Syrian-led and United Nationsfacilitated political process is the only way forward.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his sobering
briefing, and I thank Ms. Alkanawati for calling
attention to the unique challenges facing women and
men in Syria and the role that Syrian women must play
in the peace process. I also want to take this opportunity
to apologize to Ms. Alkanawati for the unprofessional
attack on her credibility by one Member State and

23-2483813/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

encourage her to continue to raise her voice in defence
of the voiceless.
More than 12 years after the beginning of the
Syrian revolution, some want to pretend the conflict
is over. But the Syrian people continue to suffer the
daily reality the briefers detailed — air strikes,
surface-missile attacks, torture and detention and the
denial of humanitarian aid.
And let us be clear: the Syrian conflict radiates
instability across the region. Millions are unable
to return to their homes. And the regime facilitates
drug trafficking.
In recent days, we have seen peaceful protests in
cities such as Dara’a and Al-Suwayda, where Syrians
have called for political changes and for all parties to
uphold resolution 2254 (2015). Those are areas where
the revolution started, and it is clear that peaceful
demands have not been met.
The Council has repeatedly reaffirmed the
importance of the full implementation of all aspects
of resolution 2254 (2015). It is our shared road map,
but progress is elusive. We appreciate Special Envoy
Pedersen’s persistent efforts to encourage renewed
momentum towards a political settlement in the face
of steadfast opposition by the Al-Assad regime and its
backers, including Russia.
This week we marked the tenth anniversary of one
of the most horrific events in recent history, when the
Al-Assad regime launched rockets carrying the deadly
nerve agent sarin into the Ghouta district of Damascus.
The attack killed more than 1,400 people and injured
many more. Ms. Alkanawati herself was a survivor. The
United States remembers and honours the victims and
survivors of the attack and of the other chemical attacks
carried out by the Al-Assad regime. We continue to call
for long-overdue justice and accountability for those
horrific attacks.
Even in the face of those disturbing human
rights violations, many brave Syrian women like
Ms. Alkanawati have continued to speak out and promote
a peaceful, inclusive and sustainable political solution.
They have called for dismantling discriminatory
laws and systems and building an equal Syria. We
must ensure that those women have not just a seat at
the table but one at the head of the table, especially
because the conflict has had a unique and devastating
impact on Syrian women, many of whom are the sole
14/18

23/08/2023

breadwinners of their families. Pre-existing gender
inequalities, discriminatory laws and social injustices
exacerbate the challenges that women face. We call on
all parties to the conflict in Syria to end restrictions
on women and grant equal access to education, legal
rights, civil documentation and property records.
It is also high time for the Al-Assad regime to
take the necessary steps to improve the lives of the
Syrian people, including Syria’s youngest and most
vulnerable population. Across the country, millions
of children remain out of school, putting them at high
risk of child labour and early or forced marriage.
The bottom line is this. Until conditions improve, the
safe and dignified return of the displaced will not be
possible. Syrians will not return so long as they risk
being drafted into the army, unjustly detained, tortured
or forcibly disappeared. We have also seen many cases
of returnees being harassed or worse. We welcome
the General Assembly’s establishment through its
resolution 77/301 of the Independent Institution on
Missing Persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, aimed
at helping to clarify the fate and whereabouts of at
least 155,000 missing and unjustly detained Syrians.
We hope that all parties to the conflict will participate
in that important new body and reiterate our call on
them to release those arbitrarily detained, provide
human rights organizations with access to detention
facilities and the people in them and share information
on missing persons with their families.
We saw the statement on 15 August by the Arab
ministerial contact group on Syria expressing a desire
for a resumption of the Constitutional Committee in
Oman by the end of the year. It has been more than a
year since the Constitutional Committee last met. We
all know who is holding up progress — it is Russia.
Russia claims to support a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political process, but we know that it is only
trying to exploit the situation for leverage. While
we see no need to change the venue from Geneva,
we support any effort that would press the Al-Assad
regime to return to the Constitutional Committee.
Any selection of the venue must be decided by the
parties themselves and must include input from the
Syrian Negotiations Commission. There must also be
meaningful participation by the regime, regardless of
location. In that regard, we continue to support Special
Envoy Pedersen in his efforts to resume a process that
will make genuine and verifiable progress towards a
political solution. The regime’s lack of action on broad
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9403

political transition initiatives, as well as the dire dayto-day issues facing the Syrian people, demonstrate
Al-Assad’s contempt for Syrians, which we have seen
time and time again over more than a decade of war — a
war in which Al-Assad has used chemical weapons and
committed countless atrocities.

accountable. Syria considers the protective umbrella
that the United States and other Western countries on
the Council provide to Israel makes them complicit
in the responsibility for those serious violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Charter.

In response to those evils, the United States will
continue to promote accountability for the regime’s
abuses, including by applying and enforcing sanctions
on those who deserve them. United States sanctions will
remain in place until there is, at a minimum, concrete,
measurable progress towards a political solution. I
want to make it clear that our sanctions do not target
humanitarian assistance.

Despite the fact that all of the Council’s resolutions
on the Syrian issue affirm respect for Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, certain Member States — both within and
outside of the Council — are still flagrantly violating
them. The United States forces continue to have an
illegal presence on Syrian territory, violating Syria’s
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. Those forces support terrorist organizations
and separatist militias. A significant number of Syrian
soldiers were martyred recently as a result of a terrorist
attack on a bus carrying them, and that act of aggression
comes in the context of the United States’ support and
sponsorship of terrorist organizations, with Da’esh
foremost among them. The United States uses Da’esh
and the separatist militias as a tool to implement its
hostile plans aimed at Syria and the region.

The Council must not look away, or worse, move
away — not when atrocities continue, when the
humanitarian needs are greater than ever before and
when a political solution and accountability are still out
of reach. The Syrian people deserve our full support.
They deserve peace and security and justice. We will
continue to stand with them in their time of need.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I listened attentively to the briefing by Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, and would like to make the following remarks.
The Israeli occupation forces have continued their
attacks on the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic
and persist in their criminal practices against our
people in the occupied Syrian Golan as part of their
dangerous and continuing escalation of the situation in
our region. On Monday the Israeli occupation forces
carried out another missile air attack from the occupied
Syrian Golan, targeting points in the vicinity of the
city of Damascus, injuring one soldier and causing
material losses. That was preceded by another attack
by the Israeli occupation forces on 7 August, resulting
in the martyrdom of four soldiers, injury to others and
material losses. The Syrian Arab Republic condemns
in the strongest terms all those attacks and criminal
practices and calls on the Security Council to break its
silence, fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations, put an end to Israel’s policies of
occupation and aggression and hold the perpetrators

In today’s meeting and the others held on Syria
this month, we have seen the United States exploit
its presidency of the Council in the service of its
malicious policies, by inviting speakers associated with
those policies and by spreading lies and misleading
information and using inappropriate language. Such
wrongful practices distort the participation of civilsociety representatives in the Council’s discussions,
damage the Council’s image and divert it from its
true goals, in contradiction of the responsibility that
the United States bears as a permanent member of
the Council.
Turning to the continued illegal presence of
Türkiye’s military forces on Syrian territory, those
forces are obstructing the process of stabilizing Syria as
a result both of their continued support and protection
of terrorist groups, which include organizations
designated as terrorist by the Security Council, and
of their Government’s policies of Türkification and
demographic change in the service of Türkiye’s interests.
In addition, representatives of some Western countries
continue to illegally infiltrate Syrian territory and hold
meetings with representatives of separatist militias and
of the so-called autonomous administration. We were
recently informed about a Canadian delegation, headed
by the Director of Operations at Canada’s Foreign

23-2483815/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

Ministry, that was violating the sanctity of Syrian
lands and conducting illegal meetings with illegitimate
representatives. The Syrian Arab Republic condemns
all those blatant violations of Syrian sovereignty, which
represent a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the Security Council’s resolutions
related to Syria. They are a clear example of the West’s
colonial behaviour and mentality and new evidence of
their Governments’ direct destructive role in Syria.
The illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed
on the Syrian people by the European Union and the
United States, and the looting of national wealth by their
forces illegally present on Syrian territory, have had a
negative effect on the economic situation and stability
in Syria. That is why my delegation stresses that in order
to improve Syrians’ economic and living conditions
and to create an environment conducive to stability in
the country, we need an immediate and unconditional
lifting of those illegal and inhumane measures and
an end to the illegal United States military presence
on our territory, which is preventing our people from
benefiting from their national resources and wealth.
Within the framework of activating the essential
Arab role in supporting Syria, overcoming the effects
of the war and achieving stability in the country, a
meeting of the Arab Liaison Committee on Syria was
held in our sister nation of Egypt on 15 August, with
the participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic. The situation
in Syria was discussed in the meeting, based on
transparent and direct dialogue and mutual respect for
common interests. The final communiqué issued by the
meeting affirmed respect for Syria’s sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity, a resolve to end the presence of
terrorist groups and to see the withdrawal of all foreign
forces illegally present in Syria. It also expressed a
desire to see a resumption of work on the constitutional
track and to hold the next meeting of the Constitutional
Committee in Oman before the end of this year, with the
facilitation and coordination of the United Nations. We
need to see respect for that position, which expresses
the determination of the Arab countries to support
Syria, their emphasis on the importance of unity for the
land and people of Syria and end to interference in its
internal affairs.
The communiqué welcomed the agreement reached
between the Syrian Government and the United Nations
on 7 August regarding the delivery of humanitarian aid
through the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing for a period
16/18

23/08/2023

of six months, and the Syrian Government’s decision
to extend the opening of the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai
crossings for a period of three months. The communiqué
also stressed the importance of addressing the refugee
crisis and giving it the necessary priority and attention,
contributing to ensuring conditions suitable for the
voluntary and safe return of refugees as a humanitarian
priority and intensifying efforts to accelerate the
implementation of early-recovery projects, especially
in areas to which refugees are expected to return. In
that regard, Syria reiterated its welcome to all Syrian
refugees returning to their country and its desire to
engage constructively with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on issues of refugee return.
While welcoming the communiqué, the Syrian
Arab Republic calls on the countries that have supported
terrorism and imposed sanctions on Syria to cease those
practices if they want Arab efforts to succeed.
Finally, I would like to point out that since its
inception the Astana process has made significant
achievements in terms of reducing the area where
terrorism has a presence in Syria. The countries of the
Astana process have repeatedly affirmed their firm
commitment to the sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
and to the goals and principles of the Charter, as well
as their determination to pursue joint action to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and stand
up to separatist agendas. They have also condemned the
activities of the terrorist organizations and affiliated
groups that operate under different names in various
parts of Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his updated briefing.
Terrorism remains a significant threat to Syria and
the wider region, with its epicentre situated in areas
beyond the control of the Syrian Government. The
unhindered movement of terrorist groups, including
Da’esh, into Syrian territory where foreign forces
are illegally present poses a serious threat to both
regional and global peace and security. Moreover,
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity are being
persistently and gravely violated both through the
occupation of certain areas by illegal foreign forces and
aggressions by the Israeli regime and terrorist groups.
Those violations have inflicted sustained suffering on
23-24838

23/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian people, further exacerbated by the imposition
of unlawful and inhumane sanctions.
The fight against terrorism must not be used as
a pretext for undermining Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We support the legitimate demands
of the Syrian Government for the complete withdrawal
of all illegal foreign military forces from its territory.
The illegal presence of such forces has created
conditions favourable to terrorist activities within
Syria. We believe that sustainable stabilization in Syria
can be achieved only by upholding its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We strongly condemn the repeated
aggressions and violations of Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity by the Israeli regime. Those
reprehensible acts, including the recent terror attacks
on Damascus and its surrounding areas on 21 August,
deliberately targeting civilian infrastructure, constitute
a flagrant breach of international humanitarian law
and the Charter of the United Nations. They also pose
a grave threat to regional peace and stability. The
international community’s inability to address those
ongoing violations is deeply disturbing. The Security
Council must take a strong stance condemning such
egregious violations and compelling the Israeli regime
to cease its aggressions and end its occupation of the
Syrian Golan.
On the political track, there is no alternative to
pursuing a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned settlement
with United Nations assistance. We emphasize the
importance of resuming Constitutional Committee
meetings as an effective mechanism for advancing the
political process. It is crucial that the Committee’s work
strictly adhere to its terms of reference and rules of
procedure, without external interference and pressure
or artificial deadlines. The role of the United Nations
should remain facilitative, with the process being
entirely Syrian-led and -owned. We support the ongoing
efforts by Mr. Pedersen through his contact with the
parties to overcome the Constitutional Committee’s
impasse. We are actively engaged in maintaining
communication channels with the Syrian Government,
the Special Envoy and our partners, with the primary
aim of resolving the crisis and alleviating the immense
suffering endured by the Syrian people.
We applaud the recent bilateral agreement forged
between the United Nations and the Syrian Government
on delivering essential humanitarian aid via Bab
Al-Hawa for a period of six months, offering critical
relief to those in dire need. We also commend the Syrian

S/PV.9403

Government for its constructive cooperation, which is
pivotal to enabling the expansion of the humanitarian
operations. Its decision to extend the operation of the
Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai border crossings for another
three months, until 13 November, has the potential to
significantly enhance direct and efficient access to
individuals in need of assistance.
We believe firmly that a secure, stable and
prosperous Syria is not only in the best interests of the
Syrian people but also serves the broader interests of
the region and the international community. In line with
that belief, we actively support Syria’s growing regional
presence and applaud the recent positive developments
in its diplomatic relations, both regionally and globally.
Syria’s return to the Arab League and resumption of
relations with Arab countries, exemplified by the
meeting in Cairo on 15 August, represent significant
steps forward in bolstering Syria’s security, stability
and prosperity. We also emphasize our support for
the ongoing dialogue between Syria and Türkiye,
recognizing its pivotal role in those broader efforts.
We hope to see Western countries swiftly reassess and
correct their policies regarding Syria. That would have
the potential to contribute significantly to a restoration
of stability, peace and prosperity in the region. Iran
remains steadfast in its commitment to collaborating
with its partners in working to achieve long-term and
sustainable normalization in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I too thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for his briefing.
We are now in the thirteenth year of the conflict
in Syria and the Syrian people’s living conditions are
worsening by the day as their economic hardships
increase. It has therefore become all the more urgent to
give impetus to the international efforts to find a lasting
solution to the Syrian crisis. That can be achieved by
advancing the political process in compliance with
resolution 2254 (2015). The Constitutional Committee
has proved to be a unique platform capable of bringing
together the Syrian opposition and the regime.
However, the Committee has not been able to convene
for more than a year. The Syrian regime should stop
holding the process hostage and should resume and
advance the Committee’s work within the context of a
broader political alignment. Close consultations with
all stakeholders, especially the United Nations and the

23-2483817/18

S/PV.9403

The situation in the Middle East

23/08/2023

legitimate Syrian opposition, are of vital importance to
that end.

of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs unchanged.

I would also like to respond to the references to
my country’s role where the situation of refugees is
concerned. My country has been generously sheltering
millions of Syrians for more than a decade and continues
to host the largest number of refugees in the world. The
facilitation of the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of Syrian refugees should be an integral part of our
overall efforts to settle the Syrian crisis. We therefore
need to increase our engagement in creating conditions
conducive to the fulfilment of those criteria.

The preservation of calm on the ground is important
for many reasons. However, we are concerned about
the recent ceasefire violations in Idlib. In view of the
already fragile situation, any escalation must be avoided
to pre-empt new humanitarian tragedies.

As we discussed in the Chamber two days ago (see
S/PV.9401), the unimpeded delivery of cross-border
United Nations humanitarian assistance remains vital
for millions of people in need in north-western Syria.
In the current circumstances, the Council’s sustained
engagement is essential to the predictable and effective
continuation of that mission, with the modus operandi

18/18

Counter-terrorism is a crucial dimension of the
settlement of the Syrian crisis. All of us must commit
to making the protection of Syria’s political unity and
territorial integrity a priority. The elimination of threats
to neighbouring countries is also of critical importance.
Based on its right to legitimate self-defence as outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations, Türkiye will
continue to fight terrorism in Syria in all its forms
and manifestations, disrupting the destabilizing and
separatist agendas of such entities as Da’esh and the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Unit.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-24838
