S/PV.7708

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7708th meeting

Wednesday, 8 June 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rivas
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2016/501)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-16393 (E)
*1616393*

S/PV.7708

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

capacities of Member States to mitigate the threat posed
by ISIL, as well as ways by which the United Nations
could support those efforts.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2016/501)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/501, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the second report
(S/2016/501) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. The report is submitted
pursuant to paragraph 97 of resolution 2253 (2015),
which requested the Secretary-General to submit an
initial strategic-level report, followed by updates every
four months, that demonstrate and reflect the gravity of
the threat that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) represents to the international community
and the principles and values of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The Secretary-General’s initial report (S/2016/92),
published on 29 January, addressed the areas identified
by the Council, including the risks posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and ISIL’s funding sources, and
contained recommendations for strengthening the
2/5

08/06/2016

This update report provides an updated assessment
on the gravity of the threat posed by ISIL and
associated groups and entities, their funding sources
and geographic and thematic trends of the threat. It
also highlights Member States and United Nations
efforts and progress in implementing related counterterrorism measures.
The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the contribution of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and
in close collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) and other relevant
United Nations actors and international organizations.
The report stresses that the threat posed by ISIL and
its associates remains high and continues to diversify.
ISIL’s military setbacks in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic could be one of the factors behind the marked
increase in the rate of return of foreign terrorist fighters.
However ISIL is yet to be strategically or irreversibly
weakened. The inflow of arms and ammunition,
directly or indirectly, into ISIL-held territory remains
a serious concern.
Given its recent military setbacks, ISIL may be
moving into a new phase — elevating the role of its
affiliates, trying to move funds outside the current
zones of conflict and increasing the risk of complex,
multi-wave and international attacks. The bombings
and shootings in Paris in November 2015, and in
Brussels in March, demonstrate the important role that
returned terrorist fighters can play in coordinating
terrorist operations.
The report also notes that, for the first time since
the declaration of its so-called caliphate, in June 2014,
the ISIL core is under financial pressure. ISIL is trying
to compensate for the loss in oil revenues, mostly due
to international air strikes, by intensifying efforts in
taxation and extortion. It is not clear how much revenue
ISIL earns from antiquities smuggling, which now
16-16393

08/06/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

also may be from Libya and Yemen, but that practice
remains a source of income as well.
The report emphasizes that, in that context, ISIL
may attempt to exploit additional revenue-generating
activities, such as the kidnapping of international
hostages, to move funds internationally, through
informal and formal channels, and to convert local
currency into currency or commodities, such as gold,
that can be more easily transferred internationally.
ISIL’s provision of funds to its affiliates and networks
also represents a major concern.
Significant numbers of foreign terrorist fighters
continue to travel to join ISIL in the Syrian Arab
Republic and Iraq from States around the world, often
using so-called broken travel techniques and false or
stolen travel documents. In terms of current trends,
the report notes the risks that returned foreign terrorist
fighters represent for regions such as South-East Asia
and countries such as Libya.
The report also highlights evolving aspects of the
threat posed by ISIL.
First, in Libya, the terrorist group has gained control
over territory in a relatively short time. Despite ISIL’s
difficulties in consolidating gains, building alliances
and competing with other actors, Libya risks becoming
a hub for ISIL’s expansion in the wider Maghreb and
Sahel region and beyond.
Secondly, in Afghanistan, despite some military
setbacks in 2015 and 2016, ISIL has proved its ability to
hold limited terrain and to conduct terrorist attacks in
cities beyond its core territory.
Thirdly,
information
and
communications
technologies continue to be a key enabler for ISIL and
its affiliates and to play an essential role in helping these
groups function, recruit, gather supplies and attack.
Fourthly, sexual violence continues to be used as a
tactic of terrorism to increase ISIL’s power, revenue and
recruitment base, as well as to shred the social fabric of
targeted communities.
The report also highlights the efforts and
progress of Member States and the United Nations in
implementing related counter-terrorism measures in a
number of thematic areas.
Since the Secretary-General’s initial report
on the threat posed by ISIL, Member States have
continued to update their legislation in response to

S/PV.7708

resolution 2178 (2014); strengthened their capacities
to effectively investigate and prosecute complex
terrorism-related cases; sought to identify barriers
to the sharing of financial information; worked on
designing and implementing comprehensive bordermanagement strategies; and paid increased attention
to the development of comprehensive approaches to
countering recruitment and preventing and countering
violent extremism, among other areas.
During the same period, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force finalized
the Security Council-mandated capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. The implementation plan includes 37
mutually reinforcing project proposals submitted by 12
CTITF entities, prioritized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate geographically and
thematically. The plan addresses the entire life cycle of
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, from their
radicalization to travel, operationalization, fighting,
reintegration and rehabilitation. The total budget of the
entire project is $100 million to $120 million over three
to five years. To date, we have identified approximately
10 per cent of the needed funding from donors and
commenced a number of the projects included in the
plan, including on advanced passenger information.
To implement all the projects and help Member
States make an impact on the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon, further funding will be required. To that
end, the Council will recall that in S/PRST/2015/11, the
Security Council encouraged
“[m]ember States to provide needed financial and
other assistance to CTITF and the UNCCT”.
Since January, CTITF entities have also
implemented
specialized
capacity-building
programmes to counter the financing of terrorism,
strengthen border controls and implement advanced
passenger information systems; developed a counterterrorism prosecutors’ network; launched an innovative
project on private-sector engagement in responding
to terrorists’ use of information and communications
technologies; and organized a major international
conference with our Swiss partners in Geneva on
preventing violent extremism.
In the field, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) has prepared assessment reports
on ISIL that it shares with Member States to support
their efforts to counter the threat of ISIL. UNSMIL

16-163933/5

S/PV.7708

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

has continued to support the efforts of the Presidency
Council in leading Libya’s transition and the
establishment of the Government of national accord to
curtail further expansion of ISIL.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
including the United Nations, to counter ISIL, and
despite ISIL’s military setbacks in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic and its financial pressures, ISIL
continues to pose a significant challenge to international
peace and security.
In the face of this common threat, I would like
to reiterate the Secretary-General’s call to unity and
action, including in finding political solutions to the
conflict in Syria, and to assure the Council that the
United Nations will continue to support Member States
in implementing the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General will provide an update
of this report to the Council in four months’ time, as
mandated by resolution 2253 (2015).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I should like to underscore the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
2253 (2015) in order to combat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and associated groups
such as Jabhat Al-Nusra.
Strategic reports of the Secretary-General to
implement this resolution are meant to shape an
objective understanding of the terrorist threat and
assess the contributions of Member States in combating
this global threat. Unfortunately, the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/501) not meet this goal.
Furthermore, the document is based on one-sided
data and therefore does not give a true picture of the
situation. For example, in paragraph 4 of the report, it is
stated that ISIL’s military setbacks are directly linked
to some efforts of the international coalition forces.
The impression one gets is that the report specifically
highlights the role of the coalition led by the United
States, whereas the efforts of other States, which are
often more effective, are intentionally ignored. This
kind of philosophy is fundamentally wrong, as it does
not contribute to the shaping of the global anti-terrorist
4/5

08/06/2016

coalition whose establishment President Putin of
Russia has called for during the seventieth session of
the General Assembly.
It is important to note that significant damage to
capacity of ISIL was inflicted by the Russian air force.
We deem it unacceptable to say nothing about that or
about the efforts of the Syrian armed forces, which
selflessly are on the front lines of the fight against
the terrorist threat. It is difficult to understand that
the report says nothing about the role of the Russian
air force or the important expulsion of terrorists from
Palmyra and the restoration, with the help of the Russian
armed forces and experts, of peaceful conditions there,
including the demining of that historic citadel.
We would also like to ask the authors of the report
why it does not reflect the data that was provided on the
results of the efforts of the Russian air force in Syria,
including lists of eliminated terrorist leaders, which
were specifically requested from us by the monitoring
group of the anti-terrorist sanctions committees. What
then was the purpose of asking for this information?
In this connection, we think that it is very important
to convey to the Members of the United Nations an
objective picture of the Russian anti-terrorist operation
in Syria. We are convinced that its effectiveness is
based on the fact that we are acting with the legitimate
consent of the Syrian Government. As a result of the
efforts of the Russian air force in Syria, this operation
was a turning point in destroying the resource base of the
terrorists. We destroyed thousands of support facilities
with stockpiles of ammunition and military equipment,
material resources, oil and fuel supplies and explosives.
We destroyed more than 200 oil production, transit and
refining facilities, as well as more than 2,000 transport
modalities used to smuggle oil to Turkey. The most
recent example was the destruction, just several days
ago, of four sites for the illegal production of oil located
in the Raqqa and Homs provinces, which are controlled
by ISIL fighters.
We would like to underscore that without the
consolidation of efforts in combating terrorism, the
threat will remain significant. The situation in Syria
remains a source of considerable concern. What is
important is to quickly separate Jabhat Al-Nusra from
the Syrian opposition. It is essential for those who
are fighting in Syria to clearly state whether they are
with the terrorists or against them. We should not
16-16393

08/06/2016

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7708

delay this process, because by delaying it we are only
strengthening terrorist groups.

has been scrubbed of even indirect links to information
provided by Russian on the financing of ISIL.

As a consequence, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Ahrar
Al-Sham, Jaish Al-Islam and Jaish Al-Fatah have
practically become connected structures, and some
entities have violated the ceasefire regime. These
kinds of threatening developments are occurring due
to external interference by forces that are trying to
undermine Russian-American cooperation. As a result,
the Syrian armed forces are combating large-scale
offensives on the part of the jihadists, who are moving
across the Syrian-Turkish border. A clear illustration is
the situation in Aleppo, where terrorists are continuing,
with external support, to seize new territories. The
Kurdish neighbourhood of Sheikh Maqsoud has been
the target of daily artillery shelling by Al-Nusra. We
have found that Al-Nusra are being helped by other
armed groups that are considered moderate. As a result
of double standard politics, Al-Nusra thinks it can act
without any consequences and is now deploying its
forces in civilian neighbourhoods and using civilians
as human shield.

The regular flow of information about supplies
from Turkish territory into Syria of components for
the production of chemical weapons for the needs of
terrorists requires particular attention. Unfortunately,
that issue is persistently hushed up, and a corresponding
Russian initiative to strengthen the fight against the
threat of chemical terrorism is being slowed down for
no apparent reason.

For several months, we have been assured that the
link between the terrorists and the moderate opposition
would be broken. But we are not seeing any results.
Consequently, violent confrontation continues to
increase, while the terrorist threat, as the events of the
past year have shown, continues to intensify and to
extend far beyond the Syrian border.
Ending external support for terrorists requires
an immediate solution. The Syrian-Turkish border
needs to be closed immediately. In addition to what I
said earlier, border crossings, which the international
community designated for humanitarian deliveries, are
often being used for criminal ends. There is irrefutable
documentary evidence of that process taking place in
the border districts, but that proof is being disregarded.
In that regard, we also continue to be surprised by the
inexplicable lack of action on the part of some of our
international partners.
One is amazed at the ongoing disregard for Turkey’s
role in the financing of, and the provision of resources
and recruits for, terrorist operations in Syria. The report

Another example is the information we have
provided to the Security Council on supplies to ISIL of
components for the production of improvised explosive
devices (IED). Our analysis had shown that those
substances were produced in Turkey and were provided
to Syria. Our analysis of the IED components found in
Syria and Iraq shows that they were either manufactured
in Turkey or delivered to that country without the right
of re-export.
Once again, it behooves us to pay particular
attention to actions by Turkey and to such disturbing
elements in its regional policy as its unauthorized
intrusion on the territory of Syria and Iraq. There are
reports that Turkey is building extended concrete walls
on Syrian territory close to its borders. We request the
Secretariat to find out about that and to report back to
the Council.
As before, we believe that resolution 2253 (2015)
includes a very important list of measures to strengthen
the regime and put an end to the illegal supplies being
channeled to ISIL and groups related to it, as well
as to strengthen the United Nations monitoring and
sanctions regime. As we see it, currently, the goal is to
further strengthen that very important resolution. An
objective, balanced and fair report of the SecretaryGeneral, pursuant to that resolution, would be a very
important contribution to that cause.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

16-163935/5
