A /75/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

85th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 23 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/81 and
A/75/81/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.97)
Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
African States on agenda item 42, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”. This matter is very important to the
African Group and indeed to Africa in general. In
February 2020, at the thirty-fourth ordinary session of
the Assembly of the African Union, our Heads of State
and Government restated their position for the twelfth
time, calling for the lifting of the sanctions on Cuba’s
people and Government. Similarly, the African Group
also reiterates its position that the illegal sanctions,
particularly the implementation of Title III of the HelmsBurton Act, are the main obstacles to Cuba’s realization
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Africa has consistently been concerned about
Cuba’s predicament because of the importance we
attach to the achievement of the objectives of the 2030
Agenda. It is also clear that as a responsible member of
the international community, Cuba has made numerous

positive contributions over the decades to African
countries and many others all over the world. In addition,
the annual resolution on ending Cuba’s blockade by the
United States has represented a call to all countries for
many years now, and the African Group will continue
to reassert its full support for that resolution.
I also want to express our regret with regard to
the setback in the bilateral relations between Cuba
and the United States and to call on the United States
Government to work to restore positive relations and lift
the long-standing blockade imposed on the Government
and people of Cuba.
In conclusion, I want to repeat that the African
Group remains firmly rooted in its principled position
of solidarity with Cuba and its people and Government
in calling for the immediate end to this economic,
commercial and financial blockade.
The President: In view of the large number of
delegations inscribed on the list of speakers for the
debate on this item, I would like to propose that the list
be closed. Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that
the Assembly agrees.
It was so decided.
Mr. Diane (Guinea): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on agenda
item 42, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16114 (E)

*2116114*

A/75/PV.85

23/06/2021

report on the item we are discussing today (A/75/81 and
A/75/81/Add.1).

development envisaged in the 2030 Agenda to which all
Member States have pledged support.

The Group regrets that the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
on Cuba for more than six decades remains in full
application and continues to be enforced. In that regard,
we would like to recall here the positive steps taken
by the United States Administration between 2015 and
2016, which were not sufficient to effectively end the
embargo’s impact but were moving in the right direction.
We regret the policy established by the recent former
United States Administration aimed at reinforcing the
embargo on Cuba, which remains in effect despite the
change in administrations, and which we believe is an
obstacle to the process of achieving normalized relations
between both countries. We are deeply concerned
about the widening of the extraterritorial nature of the
embargo on Cuba, including the full implementation
of Title III of the Helms-Burton Act, and we reject
the United States Government’s reinforcement of the
financial measures it has adopted, aimed at tightening
the embargo.

Cuba has extensively and consistently contributed
to the international community for many decades,
particularly through South-South cooperation. Its
assistance to other countries in the context of the
coronavirus disease pandemic is a great example of its
solidarity with the international community.

The Group of 77 and China reiterates its
commitment to the purposes, principles and spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly regarding
the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and
non-interference in States’ internal affairs, and freedom
of international trade and navigation. We believe that it
is the duty and responsibility of every Member State
to strictly comply with those principles, and that any
policy or action that disregards them — in this case,
unilateral economic sanctions against Cuba — should
be immediately repealed.
The Group of 77 and China is deeply concerned
about the debilitating impact that the United States’
embargo of 60-plus years has had on Cuba and its
people. Between April 2019 and December 2020, the
cost of its impact amounted to more than $9.1 billion.
The limited foreign investment and difficulty of access
to development credits that result translate directly into
economic hardship and humanitarian damage for the
people of Cuba. The embargo has also been a severe
obstacle to the country’s socioeconomic reforms. We
are concerned about the possibility that if the economic
sanctions continue, Cuba’s development potential will
be unfairly undermined in both economic and human
development terms, and it will be impossible for Cuba
to successfully embark on the path towards sustainable
2/27

We, the members of the Group of 77 and China,
reiterate our strong support for the implementation of
the recommendations of resolution 74/7 and would like
to reiterate our call for an end to the United States’
economic, commercial and financial embargo on
Cuba. The urgency and necessity of ending it is even
clearer in the light of the ongoing global collective
efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We therefore appeal to the international
community to step up the efforts in support of the lifting
of the embargo, not just to improve Cuba’s prospects
but to help all members of the global community
in their quest to fully realize their economic and
social development.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I am speaking on
behalf of the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). At the outset, we
would like to warmly welcome and convey our respect
for Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba. We are also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his report and its annex on this important
issue (A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1).
For the past 30 years the General Assembly has
consistently expressed its overwhelming support for
and solidarity with the people and the Government
of Cuba through its principled position in favour of
the resolutions calling for the lifting of the embargo
imposed on this sovereign country by the United
States of America. At the seventy-fourth session of
the General Assembly, an overwhelming majority of
Member States voted in favour of resolution 74/7. In
that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement would like to
take this opportunity to once again reiterate its firm
opposition to the promulgation and imposition of
unilateral coercive measures that are not authorized
by the relevant organs of the United Nations and that
are inconsistent with the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, given their
extraterritorial implications and illegal character.
21-16114

23/06/2021

The Non-Aligned Movement has repeatedly
reiterated its call to the United States Government to
end the unilateral economic, commercial and financial
embargo that it has illegally imposed on Cuba for
almost six decades. The embargo, which is a breach
of international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing inter-State
relations, constitutes a violation of Cuba’s right to fully
interact with the international community.
The Non-Aligned Movement has historically
maintained a principled position in rejecting unilateral
coercive measures that are not authorized by the relevant
organs of the United Nations, that are inconsistent with
the principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations or that contravene the basic principles
of the multilateral trading system and are used as a tool
to put political or economic and financial pressure on
States. That position was reaffirmed at the eighteenth
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement, held in Baku. The embargo
on Cuba is a perfect example of the adverse effects of
unilateral coercive measures on a people’s well-being,
as among other things it prevents them from fully
enjoying and realizing their human rights, including
the right to development. The past four years have
seen a progressive and systematic increase in the
aggressiveness of the United States policy on Cuba
and on States that maintain or attempt to establish
economic, commercial or financial relations with Cuba.
During the Trump Administration’s last years, the
United States implemented more than 240 measures, of
which more than 50 were adopted in 2020 alone, in the
middle of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The direct and indirect damage that the embargo
has inflicted on Cuba is enormous. It affects all the
critical sectors of the Cuban economy, including public
health, nutrition and agriculture, as well as trade,
investment, tourism and banking. The banking sector
has been particularly hard hit, most notably since the
last consideration of this agenda item (see A/74/PV.27
and A/74/PV.28). The persecution of Cuban financial
transactions in third-country jurisdictions, which has
had a significant deterrent effect in economic terms,
has continued. Between April 2019 and December
2020, the United States Government imposed more
than 20 penalties on companies and banks in third
countries from the United States itself, amounting to
a total of $3.7 billion. As a consequence, Cuba has
also been denied access to markets, international

A/75/PV.85

aid from international financial institutions and
technology transfers, which creates serious obstacles
to its socioeconomic development. In addition, the
embargo is the main impediment to broader access for
Cuba to the Internet, people-to-people contacts and the
development of cultural, sports and scientific relations.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that the
continued embargo is totally unjustifiable and runs
counter to the spirit of our times. It is also an obstacle
to Cuba’s ongoing efforts to achieve sustainable
development, including meeting the objectives of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Movement is deeply concerned about the
widening extraterritorial nature of the embargo on
Cuba, including the full implementation of Title III of
the Helms-Burton Act. We also reject the enforcement
of the financial measures adopted by the United States
Government to tighten the embargo, which have
resulted in economic damages borne by the Cuban
people amounting to $1.3 trillion when taking into
account the depreciation of the United States dollar
against the price of gold in the international market.
At current prices, the blockade has caused damages
during its existence amounting to $147.8 billion. It is
worth highlighting the fact that since we last discussed
this agenda item, more than a year ago, the blockade
has caused losses of more than $9.1 billion.
The Non-Aligned Movement considers that the
strengthening of the embargo on Cuba that the United
States Government has pursued since June 2017 is
a serious setback in the process of normalizing the
bilateral relations between the two countries. We also
strongly condemn the most recent inclusion of Cuba
on the United States Department of State’s unilateral
list of State sponsors of terrorism, announced on
11 January. NAM rejects the politicization of the fight
against terrorism, which is detrimental to international
efforts to combat it, including through unilateral lists
that accuse States and their constitutionally established
institutions of allegedly supporting terrorism, and we
therefore reject the unfounded accusations claiming
that Cuba sponsors terrorism. NAM looks forward to
seeing the new United States Administration take the
necessary action to reverse this baseless step and move
forward with the normalization of relations.
The fact that 187 Member States of our Organization
voted in favour of resolution 74/7 during the seventyfourth session constitutes an expression of unanimity

21-161143/27

A/75/PV.85

within the international community in demanding an
end to the 59-year-old embargo and full adherence to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms of international
law, including those relating to mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
More than 190 nations currently engage economically
and politically with Cuba, while the United States of
America remains alone in pursuing its unjustified and
illegal policy of economic sanction. The member States
of the Non-Aligned Movement therefore once again urge
the United States Government to yield to the will of an
overwhelming majority of the international community
and rectify its policies by fully complying with all the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, which
call for an immediate and complete end to the embargo
imposed on Cuba.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement,
while reiterating its commitment to the promotion,
preservation and strengthening of multilateralism,
reaffirms that full respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly those relating to sovereign equality,
non-interference and non-intervention, is critical to
the effective maintenance of international peace and
security. The international community should therefore
continue working together to reverse and eliminate the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
by the United States on Cuba, considering its illegal
character and extraterritorial implications, among
other things.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I have the honour to address
the General Assembly on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to express our
support for draft resolution A/75/L.97, on ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America on Cuba.
ASEAN aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Guinea, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
This is the sixth year that ASEAN has made a
statement at the General Assembly calling for lifting
the United States’ embargo on Cuba as soon as possible.
ASEAN reaffirms its support for the annual resolution
on this topic, which has been consistently adopted by
an overwhelming majority since it was first introduced
in 1992. ASEAN is firmly committed to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which
4/27

23/06/2021

underpin the multilateral rules-based order. We believe
that differences between States should be resolved
through engagement and inclusion, not confrontation
and isolation. We also believe strongly that differences
between States should be resolved on the basis of
the fundamental principles of sovereign equality,
non-interference and non-intervention. ASEAN does
not support the imposition of unilateral economic,
commercial and financial measures on other countries.
Six years have passed since the restoration of
diplomatic relations between the United States and
Cuba in 2015, which was an important step towards the
normalization of relations between these two countries
and remains key to building better regional relations
in the Americas. But as noted in the latest report of
the Secretary-General (A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1), the
economic, commercial and financial embargo continues
to affect many sectors of Cuban society, including
limiting Cuba’s ability to procure preparedness and
response materials for the coronavirus disease pandemic
in a timely and cost-effective manner. ASEAN
continues to believe that ending the United States’
economic, commercial and financial embargo on Cuba
will contribute significantly to improving the quality
of life and living standards of the Cuban people and
the economic and social development of Cuba. It would
also advance the General Assembly’s efforts to achieve
an inclusive 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
ASEAN encourages the United States and Cuba to
renew their commitment to an open and constructive
dialogue, underpinned by mutual respect. Once
again, ASEAN joins other members of the Assembly
in reiterating its support for lifting the unilateral
economic, commercial and financial embargo on Cuba
as soon as possible.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) on agenda item 42, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
The Caribbean Community aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Guinea, on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and Azerbaijan,
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The General Assembly has been seized of the
issue of the embargo imposed by the United States on
21-16114

23/06/2021

Cuba for 30 years. Despite the statements in which
delegations have expressed their disapproval and even
condemnation of this act, which is considered arbitrary
and contrary to international law, as well as the almost
unanimous support consistently given to resolutions on
the issue, the Cuban people have continued to suffer the
disastrous consequences of these unilateral measures.
CARICOM strongly deplores the ongoing embargo
and reiterates, as it has always done, its continuing
concern about the significant negative impact that these
measures have on Cuba’s socioeconomic development
and the general well-being of the Cuban people.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1), which reproduces the
responses from Member States and United Nations
bodies expressing the opposition of the international
community and public opinion to the adoption and
implementation of such measures. We reiterate our
strong support for ending this 60-year embargo.
This situation is of great concern to CARICOM
member States, which consider that the imposition of
such coercive measures is a flagrant violation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Indeed, the Charter
unequivocally enshrines the principles of the sovereign
equality of States, non-intervention in matters within
the domestic jurisdiction of States, the right of peoples to
self-determination, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the maintenance of friendly relations among States.
Their observance is of paramount importance to us as
CARICOM States.
CARICOM member States continue to enjoy
close relations with Cuba, enhanced by years of active
socioeconomic and technical cooperation through a
wide range of programmes in the areas of, inter alia,
trade, health care and human resource training. Those
close ties were renewed at the seventh CARICOMCuba summit, held in December 2020.
Unfortunately, the far-reaching and extraterritorial
measures associated with the blockade are an obstacle
to the development of our relations with Cuba — a
country in our region with which we share a history
and culture and enjoy an exemplary relationship of
friendship and cooperation.
As our Heads of State and Government did in
the past, we continue to reaffirm their unequivocal
opposition to, and rejection of, the imposition of
unilateral coercive measures and to call for an

A/75/PV.85

immediate and unconditional end to the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed on Cuba by
the Government of the United States. The CARICOM
States also oppose the application of extraterritorial
laws and measures, such as the Helms-Burton Act.
The CARICOM States continue to enjoy friendly
relations with Cuba and the United States of America.
However, we regard the lifting of the embargo as
a precondition for any meaningful rapprochement
between the two countries.
CARICOM will continue to advocate for the
normalization of relations between the two countries
with a view to putting an end to the hostile environment
that threatens regional peace and security and to
restoring the harmony that should exist among all the
peoples of the Americas.
Finally, as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic continues to cause loss of life and considerable
damage to the economies of our countries, we must also
acknowledge the solidarity, cooperation and medical
assistance provided to CARICOM member States and
other countries by the Cuban Government in the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic. It should be noted
that, despite the blockade, Cuba has deployed medical
units to CARICOM member States to strengthen their
respective national health-care teams in the fight
against the COVID-19 pandemic. That is the case in
my country, Haiti, where 348 doctors and other health
personnel were sent to help the Government to fight
against the pandemic. I would like to express the
Haitian Government and people’s deepest gratitude
for that brotherly gesture and for Cuba’s supportive
cooperation towards us.
At this difficult time, such solidarity and cooperation
are needed now more than ever to eradicate the scourge
of the pandemic and to enable the entire world to return
to normalcy. The lifting of the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed on Cuba would enhance
the prospects for peace, cooperation and development
in the region and would fulfil the long-standing and
noble wishes of our people.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on draft resolution
A/75/L.97, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”, on behalf of
the members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).

21-161145/27

A/75/PV.85

The economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba has not only affected Cuba’s commercial
sector and national economic activities but also had
disastrous humanitarian consequences for the Cuban
population. Between April and December 2020, the
embargo caused more than $3.5 billion in losses to
Cuba, which compounded the damage from previous
years, representing a total of more than $9.1 billion
from April 2019 to December 2020. Furthermore,
Cuba’s success in halting the spread of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and in developing a vaccine risks
being jeopardized. The embargo has a significant
impact on the national health system. That is reflected
in the shortage of basic necessities and the difficulties
encountered by the national industry in purchasing
the materials needed to preserve food and to produce
medicines and other products. The general situation
remains a source of deep concern.
We strive to work for the benefit of humankind and
for the well-being of our peoples. Our leaders here at the
United Nations agreed on the Sustainable Development
Goals and committed to responding to the aspirations
of the international community to ensure that no one
is left behind. In that regard, the embargo against
Cuba represents an obstacle to its people in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and runs counter
to our commitment to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The OIC therefore joins the call of the overwhelming
majority to put an end to the embargo against Cuba. The
OIC member States support draft resolution A/75/L.97,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, and calls on other Members
to vote in favour of the draft resolution, as they did in
previous years.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba. I would like to express our deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1) on the necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the Republic of Guinea,
Azerbaijan and Singapore on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
6/27

23/06/2021

and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
respectively.
For almost three decades, the General Assembly
has consistently adopted, by an overwhelming majority,
annual resolutions calling on the United States to end its
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba. However, those long-standing and consistent
appeals of the international community have been
rejected time and again.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba runs counter to international law and
the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. It is the most unjust and prolonged
system of unilateral sanctions ever imposed against a
country in our modern world history. It has inflicted
enormous damage on all sectors of the Cuban economy
and therefore caused untold hardship for generations
of Cubans.
Viet Nam’s consistent policy is to oppose any
imposition of unilateral embargoes or coercive
measures on a sovereign State. We share the view
that the continuation of the embargo against Cuba
is unjustifiable. Now that we are all focusing on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the embargo is a serious obstacle to the
efforts and endeavours of the people and the Government
of Cuba to fully participate in that process.
Having experienced the tremendous suffering
caused by a trade embargo, Viet Nam fully understands
the difficulties and damage that it causes. Having
established a comprehensive partnership with the
United States, Viet Nam also fully recognizes that
only constructive dialogue and engagement can foster
mutual trust and bring positive change. Today, Viet
Nam will therefore vote in favour of draft resolution
A/75/L.97.
By voting in favour of the draft resolution, Viet
Nam joins the international community in calling on
the United States to put an end to its unilateral embargo
against Cuba so that Cuba may be free to participate
equitably and fairly in economic and trading systems,
in accordance with international law. We also urge the
United States Government to reverse its current policy
trend towards Cuba, not only for the benefit of the
people of the two countries but also for peace, stability
and development in the region and the world at large.
21-16114

23/06/2021

At the same time, we appreciate Cuba’s desire to
continue respectful dialogue and cooperation on topics
of mutual interest, as well as negotiating outstanding
bilateral matters with the United States on the basis
of equality, reciprocity and respect for the national
sovereignty and independence of each other.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Viet Nam’s
strong support, friendship, cooperation and solidarity
with the brotherly people of Cuba and to renew our
unwavering commitment to safeguarding the principles
of international law, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, in today’s meeting. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for preparing the report on ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba (A/75/81
and A/75/81/Add.1).
Together with the overwhelming majority of the
international community, Russia firmly supports the
immediate lifting of the United Stated illegal embargo
against Cuba. All the unilateral restrictive measures
that Washington imposes on Havana limit the natural
inalienable rights not only of Cuban citizens, but also
of those of the United States; they are completely
illegal and are in flagrant violation of the fundamental
principles and norms of international law. The sanctions
war unleashed by Washington to achieve its main
objective of ousting an undesirable Government is a
typical example of open external political pressure in
the spirit of the notorious Monroe Doctrine, a blatant
interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign State
and clear disregard for human rights and humanitarian
values in general.
That is becoming particularly clear in the
current situation. Amid the spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), it is important that all countries
demonstrate political will, wisdom and foresight, reject
trade wars and sanctions and join efforts to fight that
common scourge on the basis of mutual understanding,
solidarity and support. Unfortunately, at the height
of the pandemic, we saw Washington take inhumane,
sometimes odious, steps towards Havana. The numbers
speak for themselves: the total damage that the United
States sanctions inflicted on Cuba’s economy in 2020
increased by almost 30 per cent as compared to 2019

A/75/PV.85

and, for the first time, exceeded $5 billion, while the
overall damage that the United States restrictions have
caused over their more than 60-year history equals
$144 billion.
Over the past years, the United States leadership
has aggressively fuelled the anti-Cuban sanctions
hysteria. The decision to include Cuba on the list of
State sponsors of terrorism taken by the previous
United States Administration on 11 January was the
height of absurdity.
We believe that the campaign to discredit Cuban
doctors and the sanctions against biopharmaceutical
industry, which threatened the health of thousands
of ordinary people in many countries of the world,
were completely unscrupulous and inhumane. It is
encouraging that, even amid such conditions, Havana
remains remarkably resilient and continues to provide
assistance to other countries by dispatching its
doctors — teams of Cuban doctors were sent to 40
States — providing medicines and, in parallel to that,
developing its own vaccine for the coronavirus disease,
including to cover the needs of third countries. The
main goal by which our partners have been guided is
clear: it is the selfless provision of medical assistance
amid the global challenge posed to humankind by
COVID-19.
We take this opportunity to welcome the reported
success of Cuban scientists, particularly with regard
to achieving the required level of effectiveness of one
of the vaccines that they developed. That deserves
particular respect given the context of the embargo.
Unfortunately, so far we have not seen any visible
changes in the Cuba track of Washington’s foreign
policy under the current Administration of Mr. Joseph
Biden. Speculations that the White House is allegedly
considering various options to change its strategic
approach are not seen in practice. We hope that the
United States Administration will demonstrate common
sense in the spirit of previous statements.
To reiterate our unwavering position, we will
again vote in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.97,
which demands the lifting of the embargo without
preconditions. At the same time, we are guided by
the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations regarding the inadmissibility of any
discriminatory measures, infringement of national
sovereignty and interference in the internal affairs of
sovereign States.

21-161147/27

A/75/PV.85

We call on all Member States to show solidarity
with the Cuban people in their struggle for equal
conditions to ensure socioeconomic development and
to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We greet with affection and respect
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba, who is with
us at this meeting.
For almost 60 years Cuba has faced an economic,
commercial and financial blockade that is illegal
because it violates every rule of international law, that
is inhumane because it violates the human rights of an
entire people and, worse still, that is criminal because
it is a policy of calculated cruelty that seeks to cause
pain and suffering among the civilian population. It is
an aggression that uses economic instruments. It is a
collective punishment that, due to its systematic and
deliberate nature, constitutes a crime against humanity.
The unilateral coercive measures illegally imposed
on Cuba have a greater scope and impact amid the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The Government of
the United States of America has therefore become a
sponsor of economic terrorism by using the pandemic
as a weapon of war to advance its narrow national
interests and its ambitions for colonial domination.
Despite all this, Cuba has renewed its international
solidarity, providing health assistance and technical
support. Since last year, as the world has been fighting
the worst of the pandemic, Cuban medical brigades have
been working on the ground in more than 35 countries
in Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa, Europe
and the Middle East to save the lives of millions of
people. This fact will go down in human history: while
the United States has thousands of officials engaged
in blackmailing dozens of countries with disease and
suffering, Cuba has thousands of doctors in the world
to protect health and life.
We greet with admiration the news that Cuban
scientists have succeeded in developing the Abdala
vaccine, with 92.28 per cent certified effectiveness
against the coronavirus disease. With brotherly pride,
we welcome that achievement of the Cuban people,
who, amid hardship, have achieved one of the greatest
victories in the struggle for their freedom and for
peace, health and life. That is another great lesson for
the world: humankind needs more vaccines, not more
blockades by the United States.
8/27

23/06/2021

The policy of suffocation imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba represents the most
unjust, harsh and prolonged system of unilateral
coercive measures ever applied against any country in
modern history. It is a crime that affects us all, for it is a
denial of the political, economic and cultural diversity
of the planet and of our right to national sovereignty. It
is the imposition of the United States national Power
over the rights of dozens of countries. It is an attack on
the entire system of international relations.
Today economic violence has become the preferred
weapon of the United States Government to expand its
perpetual war against a third of the world’s population.
Today the United States is a threat to the security of all
humankind, as it is proving that economic aggression
has a destructive impact comparable to conventional
wars. That practice is an increasing danger to the entire
international community. By demanding respect for the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, in
the case of Cuba we are therefore defending the right to
the security and peace of all the nations of the world.
In conclusion, in Venezuela tomorrow we will
celebrate the very day on which, 200 years ago, we
achieved our national independence with enormous
sacrifices. That struggle is not over. Today we are
fighting for our freedom against a coalition of Powers,
led by the United States, which is attacking us in order
to bring us back to the status of a colony. That struggle
is the same one that Cuba is living through today. That
is why, on behalf of the free and sovereign people of
Venezuela and as a supportive and responsible member
of the international community, we will vote in favour
of resolution A/75/L.97, which sets out the need to put
an end to the embargo imposed against Cuba, while
demanding that the Government of the United States of
America end its colonial aggression and comply with
its obligations under international law. Today we will
vote for the independence of Cuba.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of the
General Assembly, the highest multilateral forum, to
consider the issue that brings us together today, since its
periodic review, by its nature, is of great importance to
the United Nations, the Latin American and Caribbean
region and, of course, my country.
Allow me to reiterate that Mexico pursues a foreign
policy based on upholding multilateralism, international
cooperation for development, friendship, respect for all
21-16114

23/06/2021

countries, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
self-determination of peoples.
In that regard, we reaffirm that, in the context
of relations among sovereign nations, any unilateral
measure of an economic or financial nature intended as
a means of political pressure to achieve changes from
outside in the decisions of another State contravenes
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
undermines international peace and stability.
As it has always done, Mexico categorically
condemns the economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed for more than five decades against
Cuba, as well as the decision to implement Title III of
the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act — a
law that conceals the true intention of the Helms-Burton
Act and which has affected not only the sovereignty
of the Cuban people but also the national interests of
third countries.
Mexico will emphasize as many times as necessary
that it is not possible to resolve global problems or
undertake major regional changes without international
cooperation based on the unconditional principle of the
self-determination of peoples.
Given a pandemic such as the one facing us due to
the coronavirus disease, putting an end to the blockade
on Cuba cannot be postponed. Mexico is convinced
that this will contribute not only to reversing the
difficult economic situation of the Cuban people, but
also to improving the regional environment. We urge
the international community to show its solidarity and
support so as to promote the well-being, the economic
growth and the sustainable development of all nations,
without exception.
Mexico reiterates its call on the United Nations
to continue to uphold multilateral institutions, the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
prevalence of international law, not only because of the
principle we share, but also because a more relevant and
effective multilateralism will benefit all States and our
own national interests.
Mr. Mimouni (Algeria): Algeria aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM), the Group of 77 and
China, the Group of African States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

A/75/PV.85

At the outset, allow me to convey my warmest
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Today’s debate on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba reflects the extreme
importance of this issue, which mobilizes the entire
international community during each session of the
General Assembly and appeals to us collectively
regarding the necessity of upholding the guiding
principles and the ideals enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, which lies at the core of
our Organization.
The consecutive annual adoption by an
overwhelming majority of Member States of a
resolution calling for ending the embargo against Cuba
is a powerful message not to be ignored, as it reflects
the strong and steadfast support of the international
community to lifting the unjustified and unnecessary
embargo imposed on Cuba for six decades now.
Algeria reaffirms its solidarity with Cuba and
reiterates its stand on the continuation of the tightening
of the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba, in particular in the context of the
unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, with its socioeconomic
and health impacts. Such unjustified sanctions have
not only exacerbated the suffering of the Cuban people
by depriving them of their basic human rights but also
obstructed the economic development of Cuba and
hampered its efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Let me recall that Algeria has always stressed that
Cuba, like any other Member State, has the right to
freedom of trade and navigation and to expand trade
on a mutually agreed basis with any economic partner.
Algeria also fully shares NAM’s position, which has
regularly rejected the imposition of unilateral acts or
extraterritorial regulations impeding the development
of any country and all forms of coercitive economic and
trade measures. That position reflects the unwavering
principles of Algeria’s foreign policy, and that is why
Algeria expresses its full support and solidarity with
the Government and the people of Cuba.
We continue to believe that it is important to rebuild
the momentum generated in a few years. Engaging in
a constructive bilateral dialogue in full respect of the
principles of international law and the Charter of the

21-161149/27

A/75/PV.85

United Nations will certainly chart a new way forward
for the full normalization of relations between Cuba
and the United States and lead to the lifting of the longstanding, unnecessary embargo, for the mutual benefit
of the peoples of both countries and of the whole region
and beyond.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At
the outset, I extend greetings to His Excellency Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba, who is with us today.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its
unwavering support and solidarity to the Government
and the people of Cuba. We also align ourselves with
the statements of the Caribbean Community, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and China.
Since 1992, the States Members of the Organization
have collectively reaffirmed their support for the
Government and the people of Cuba by calling for
an immediate end to the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States. Today
my delegation stands in full solidarity with our sister
Caribbean nation and reiterates its unequivocal support
in favour of resolution A/75/L.97, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
The unambiguous message of the draft resolution
and the near-unanimous support it enjoys does not only
signal the international community’s rejection of an
antiquated policy; it also represents the overwhelming
majority’s firm adherence to the sacrosanct principles
of international law, as enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. The blockade against the indomitable Cuban
people was unjustifiable, illegal and illegitimate at its
inception, and six decades later that still holds true.
President Obama acknowledged that fact and took
a courageous and historic decision to put an end to the
anachronistic policy of confrontation and isolation.
During the past four years, however, there have
been efforts to undermine and reverse the small yet
significant progress achieved under President Obama’s
administration while at the same time progressively
and systematically intensifying an aggressive United
States policy against Cuba.
We deplore those policies, inclusive of the extension
of the economic blockade to permit, under Title III of
the Helms-Burton Act, the possibility of taking legal
10/27

23/06/2021

action in United States courts against entities dealing
commercially with properties legally nationalized in
Cuba during the 1960s, as well as including Cuba on
the unilateral list of State Sponsors of Terrorism of the
Department of State, as announced in January.
By any measure, the blockade imposed on Cuba
remains an unmitigated failure and serves only to
aggravate the suffering of the Cuban people. It is also
not merely a bilateral issue between Cuba and the
United States, but, owing to its extraterritorial nature,
it violates the sovereign rights of many other States. We
trust that President Biden will continue with President
Obama’s bold decision to normalize relations. We
hope that he can inspire members of Congress to find
solace in their hearts and, in their infinite wisdom, lift
the blockade.
In the midst of the pandemic and against disruptions
arising from human failings and folly, Cuba continues
to demonstrate its resolve and determination to forge
ahead. Our Caribbean sister nation epitomizes the spirit
of solidarity, integrity and cooperation that is central to
our rules-based international system.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, our Caribbean
Community brothers and sisters and, indeed, the
majority of the Members of the United Nations have
benefited and continue to benefit significantly from
Cuba’s solidarity and support, especially in the area
of health care and humanitarian assistance. We are
forever grateful.
The continuation of the blockade would only
exacerbate Cuba’s financial woes, complicating
its ability in the upscaling of the manufacturing of
vaccines to respond appropriately to the pandemic,
at a time when the international community has been
calling for equitable access to vaccines. In that respect,
we applaud the Government in its development of
vaccines, including the Soberana and Abdala, with a
92 per cent efficacy, to respond to the pandemic.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines enjoys friendly,
robust and mutually respectful relations with both
Cuba and the United States of America. We believe
that dialogue and constructive engagement between
our friends are essential for our hemispheric relations,
regional integration and multilateral diplomacy. In
that respect, we encourage Cuba and the United States
of America to rebuild their relationship and continue
towards normalization, which we hope will result in the
complete elimination of the blockade.
21-16114

23/06/2021

A/75/PV.85

We will continue to strenuously advocate for the
complete lifting of the economic, commercial and
financial blockade, which is critical for the people and
the Government of Cuba to achieve full prosperity. We
are confident that today’s draft resolution will receive,
once again, the overwhelming support of the Assembly
and serve as a clarion call for the United States to take
a just path and correct this unlawful policy. I wish the
Assembly peace profound.

I need to emphasize that the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States against Cuba
are contrary to the international trend of peace,
development and win-win cooperation. Those measures
violate the international consensus on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and undermine the rights
to survival and development and the basic human rights
of the peoples of all countries. Those measures must be
stopped immediately.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence of Foreign Minister Rodríguez
Parrilla at today’s meeting.

It is regrettable that the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
against Cuba, instead of being ended, has, on the
contrary, recently been intensified. That represents a
serious contravention of the purposes and principles of
the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, severely restricted the access of the Cuban
people to the medicines, vaccines and supplies needed
to fight the pandemic. It has also severely hindered the
efforts of the Cuban people in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, including poverty eradication, and
deeply affected Cuba’s normal economic, financial and
development cooperation with other Member States.

China associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
The coronavirus disease pandemic continues to
ravage the world and is having a serious impact on the
socioeconomic development of all countries and in
particular developing countries, making it all the more
difficult to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. All countries should keep in mind that
commitment to a shared future for all humankind and
join hands in fighting the pandemic so as to promote a
better recovery for common development.
However, some Western Powers have resorted to
abusive unilateral sanctions, in violation of international
norms and the international order, thus having a toxic
effect on international relations. The countries of the
world all have all the right to adopt countermeasures
to resolutely resist and counterattack those unilateral
sanctions so as to effectively safeguard their own
legitimate rights and interests.
For 28 consecutive years, since 1992, the
General Assembly has adopted a resolution, by an
overwhelming majority, on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba, urging
all countries to abide by the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms governing international law,
revoke or repeal any form of laws and measures the
extraterritorial effects of which affect the sovereignty
of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or
persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom of
trade and navigation. That represents the just call of
the international community and must be effectively
implemented.

China has always advocated respect for the
independent choices of all countries in terms of their
social systems and development paths, safeguarding
the international order underpinned by international
law, defending international fairness and justice and
opposing the use of unilateral coercive measures
against other countries by military, political, economic
or other means.
China and Cuba have always maintained frequent
economic trade and personnel exchanges. Friendly and
mutually beneficial cooperation in various fields has
been continuously developed. Following the outbreak
of the pandemic, the Chinese Government and the
relevant businesses and community organizations on a
number of occasions donated supplies to Cuba to help
the Cuban people fight the pandemic.
All the countries in the world are a community
with a shared future. Dialogue on an equal footing
and friendly consultation is the best way of addressing
differences. Unilateralism, protectionism and bullying
will ultimately backfire. China urges the United States
to immediately and completely lift the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and
develop normal State-to-State relationships with other
Member States in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the

21-1611411/27

A/75/PV.85

basic norms governing international relations. That
is in line with the common interests of the people of
the United States and Cuba and is also conducive to
regional peace and stability.
China will once again vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Cuba (A/75/L.97) under this
agenda item. We are convinced that the draft will again
be adopted by an overwhelming majority.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): At the outset, we
welcome and acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla.
South Africa aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Group of African States,
the Group of 77 and China, and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(A/75/81) on the implementation of the resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. The imposition of unilateral
coercive measures by the United States has caused
immeasurable damage to Cuba and its people. That can
never be justified.
South Africa is eternally grateful for Cuba’s
significant contribution, at great sacrifice, to the
liberation of our country. We will continue to honour the
fallen Cuban combatants who sacrificed their lives for
the attainment of a free and democratic South Africa.
The embargo continues to stifle the socioeconomic
growth and potential of the Cuban people, causing
immense hardship and denying them the most basic of
rights. That injustice is even more acute in the context
of the devastating health and socioeconomic impact of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that we
are all confronting. It has imposed additional hardships
on Cuba at a time when the principles of human
rights and of acting in humankind’s common interests
are paramount.
Despite those additional burdens, Cuba continues
to make a remarkable contribution to the fight against
the COVID-19 pandemic through the deployment of its
international medical brigades. Cuba’s solidarity and
internationalism are an inspiration to humankind.
The continued illegal blockade of Cuba by the
United States and the extraterritorial application of the
sanctions on third countries, through the Helms-Burton
12/27

23/06/2021

Act, continue to severely curtail the potential of Cuba,
at great cost. The more recent unjust United States
designation of Cuba as a State sponsor of terrorism,
together with a repudiation of the suspension of the
enforcement of Title III of the United States HelmsBurton Act, is even more damaging.
Despite the immense obstacles that it faces, Cuba
has shown tremendous resilience, making great strides
in addressing the socioeconomic and development
challenges that it faces, playing a leading international
role in championing the rights of developing countries
and pioneering advances in health. One can only
imagine what more this small country could achieve
were its true potential allowed to be realized.
South Africa remains unwavering in its support for
the legitimate struggle of the people of Cuba to enjoy
unobstructed freedom to develop, prosper and provide
its people with a life of hope and dignity, which is the
inherent right of all nations and peoples.
We call on the new Administration of the United
States to urgently reconsider its policies towards Cuba
and to remove the unjust yoke it has placed around its
neck as a shameful relic of decades past. It is time for
constructive dialogue, not further isolation.
South Africa reiterates its principled position in
support of draft resolution A/75/L.97, and it calls upon
all Member States that believe in human rights to join
in this cause and work towards a new chapter of hope
and prosperity for Cuba and her people.
Mr. Thomas (Antigua and Barbuda): Antigua and
Barbuda aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the Caribbean Community, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 and China.
It has been decades since the United States, a close
ally and friend of Antigua and Barbuda, instituted
its blockade against Cuba. Time and time again,
the international community, through the General
Assembly, and such Caribbean countries as Antigua
and Barbuda, through their several regional institutions,
have long called upon the United States to lift this trade
barrier on Cuba and allow its citizens to take part in
and benefit from their fair share of globalization. This
blockade, which has endured for more than 60 years,
has caused more harm than good to the people of Cuba
and has brought about much distress to many families
and individuals within its shores.
21-16114

23/06/2021

Despite all the difficulties the Cuban people face,
especially during the height of the outbreak of the
coronavirus, they continue to show a resilience and
spirit and solidarity with other countries by providing
doctors and nurses to augment the armies of health
workers of these nations arrayed against the virus.
The Cuban people have shown that, despite the odds
against them owing to the blockade, they can continue
to make a major international contribution in the global
fight against the virus, not only by providing personnel
support to others but also by developing their own
vaccine. As an island nation, Antigua and Barbuda is
indeed proud of and congratulate the Cuban people for
their tenacity and spirit of will.
Once again, we are calling for a stop to the policy
of the blockade. It is time to turn a new page of
peace, cooperation and understanding. The economic,
financial and commercial siege applied against Cuba
is the main obstacle to the sustainable development of
the country. The international community’s call for
leaving no one behind must be applied to Cuba. To
fulfil this promise, Antigua and Barbuda once again
calls for an end to the blockade. Antigua and Barbuda
looks forward to the day when it may expand trade with
Cuba and build upon the generosity that Cuba exhibits
in providing technical assistance.
As Antigua and Barbuda has done in numerous
previous General Assembly statements, we are yet again
calling on two of our friends and partners, the United
States and Cuba, to come to the table of diplomacy
to discuss peacefully an end to their differences and
forge a relationship based on mutual respect and
shared responsibility.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): The Philippines aligns
itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Group of
77 and China and the Non-Alignment Movement.
For the twenty-ninth year, we have witnessed again
today a clear expression of solidarity with the Cuban
people through an overwhelming support for the draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/75/L.97).
From 59 votes in favour in 1992, to 173 in 2002, 188
in 2012 and 187 in 2019, the international community
once again calls for an end to the 58-year-old embargo,
which is an unjust and unjustified economic sanctions
policy. It is also the twenty-ninth consecutive year that

A/75/PV.85

the Philippines will support the draft resolution on
ending the Cuban embargo.
The extraterritorial nature of the blockade continues
to intensify, exacerbated by the decision by the United
States to include Cuba in the list of State sponsors
of terrorism. It has been reported that, at current
prices, damages to Cuba’s economy during almost six
decades of implementing this policy have reached over
$147.8 billion, including around $5.6 billion between
April 2019 and December 2020.
The blockade presents a main obstacle to Cuba’s
socioeconomic development. It poses a serious challenge
for Cuba’s implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It violates international law
and runs contrary to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.
With cultural and economic ties to the Philippines
dating as far back as the Manila-Acapulco galleon
trade in the early sixteenth century, Cuba and its
people will always have the support of my country.
The United States should lift the embargo against Cuba
unconditionally and once and for all.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Namibia welcomes the
participation in person at this meeting of the Cuban
Foreign Minister, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo
Rodríguez Parrilla, who is in the General Assembly
Hall with us today.
Namibia aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Group of African States, the Group of
77 and China and the Non-Aligned Movement.
In our national capacity, I wish to add the following.
My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary General
for his report on the implementation of resolution 74/7,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1).
My delegation wishes to place on record our strong
support for draft resolution A/75/L.97, which calls for
the unconditional lifting of the embargo against the
Republic of Cuba.
For 63 years, the Cuban people have been subjected
to an unfair blockade in clear contravention of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
This blockade obstructs the implementation of Cuba’s
national economic and social development plan, which
was put in place to accelerate its implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We

21-1611413/27

A/75/PV.85

must also not ignore that, at a time when we faced
an unprecedented pandemic, more limitations that
exacerbate and impose further hardships on the Cuban
people were put in place.
The embargo imposed by the United States hinders
the normal development of international relations
and seriously harms the legitimate interests of many
States, institutions and individuals around the world.
As a country that upholds the peaceful coexistence of
nations, respects the sovereign equality of States and
believes in fair and open trade among nations, Namibia
cannot condone this. Therefore, as my delegation has
done for decades, we continue to stand with and reiterate
our firm and unwavering support for the people and the
Government of Cuba.
We regret that the aggressive actions imposed by
the previous Administration of the United States in
2020 continue to be in place, including Cuba being
placed on the list of State sponsors of terrorism. This
is contrary to the spirit and position expressed by
the United States in 2016, when we all welcomed the
change in the United States policy and expressed hopes
that the blockade would finally come to an end.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
constitutes a global challenge to the world that deepens
pre-existing inequalities and exposes vulnerabilities
in social, political and economic systems, which in
turn amplify the impacts of the pandemic. Obstacles
to obtaining medicines and supplies through standard
trade channels have made the challenge of fighting
COVID-19 particularly severe for countries targeted
by unilateral sanctions. Accordingly, we note that
the impact of unilateral sanctions on human rights is
exacerbated by the deteriorating economic situations
in the targeted countries, the impossibility of buying
or delivering necessary equipment, food or medication,
and the increasing level of overcompliance when banks
and organizations refuse to deal with targeted State
entities out of fear of violating sanctions regimes.
For Namibia, the Cuban people are family.
Notwithstanding all the challenges the Cuban people
have had to face and have endured over all these years,
we know them to be a resilient people. Cuba has spared
no effort in contributing to the welfare of millions
of people around the world through her selfless
contributions in so many cases where natural disasters
or adversity had struck or through science, technological
advancements, training and capacity-building support
14/27

23/06/2021

to the international community and the sending of
medical professionals across much of the developing
world. Therefore, for us, an end to the Cuban blockade
means a fair chance for the Cuban people to unleash
their extraordinary talents, their skills and innovation
potential to realize their developmental aspirations.
One of the principles under which Namibia is
governed is a strong philosophy that reminds us every
day that exclusion spells conflict, while inclusiveness
spells harmony. My country will continue to stand
by the Cuban people and vote in favour of the draft
resolution. We appreciate the long-standing solidarity
and support of the overwhelming majority of Member
States for this important resolution over the years,
and we call on all of us as a community of nations to
continue to stand on the side of seeking a normalization
of relations between the United States of America and
Cuba and to seek a better future for the Cuban people
by voting in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.97 today.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to participate in welcoming His Excellency
the Foreign Minister of Cuba, Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla,
who joins us today.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements delivered by
the representatives of Guinea, Eritrea, Azerbaijan and
the Niger on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
Group of African States, the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
I would like also to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba (A/75/81 and
A/75/81/Add.1).
I reiterate Egypt’s firm position in support of the
people and the Government of Cuba, as the unilateral
measures imposed in the form of the embargo on
Cuba have a negative and direct effect on vital
economic sectors as well as radical repercussions for
the socioeconomic welfare of the Cuban people. The
embargo obstructs access to food, medicine, education
and state-of-the-art technology.
The unilateral measures imposed on Cuba have
restricted the country’s ability to prepare for and respond
to the coronavirus disease pandemic, limiting access to
the medical equipment necessary to prevent and contain
the virus, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report. In
21-16114

23/06/2021

this regard, Egypt stresses the importance of upholding
the principles of multilateralism, the Charter of the
United Nations and international law as well as the need
to respect the numerous relevant Assembly resolutions
that were adopted by overwhelming majority of the
international community.
Egypt reiterates that the continued embargo
imposed on Cuba for more than five decades now will
not deter the international community from repeatedly
calling for the lifting of these measures that run counter
to international law.
In conclusion, Egypt urges for the full and
immediate lifting of the embargo imposed on Cuba to
enable the Cuban people to effectively join international
endeavours undertaken by the peoples of the world with
a view to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Singh (India): India associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Guinea and
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
We welcome the Foreign Minister of Cuba, His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, who is
with us in the General Assembly Hall today. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the issue
(A/75/81 and A/75/81/Add.1).
Every year, the General Assembly has rejected the
imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact and all other forms of coercive economic
measures that hurt the progress and prosperity of people
the world over. Last year 187 Member States voted
in favour of resolution 74/7, expressing their strong
support for lifting the embargo (see A/74/PV.28).
The General Assembly has also called upon all
States to refrain from promulgating and applying — and
to repeal and invalidate — laws and measures that
have extraterritorial effects affecting the sovereignty
of other States, in conformity with their obligations
under the United Nations Charter and international law.
There can be little doubt that the continued existence of
this embargo, in contravention of overwhelming world
opinion as expressed by this Assembly, undermines
multilateralism and the credibility of the United
Nations itself.
As the world’s largest democracy and a country
with an abiding faith in multilateralism, India stands in
solidarity with the General Assembly in its unambiguous
rejection of domestic laws having extraterritorial impact.

A/75/PV.85

Embargoes such as that against Cuba have the effect of
impeding the full achievement of economic and social
development by the population of the affected country,
in particular women and children. They also hinder the
full enjoyment of human rights, including, inter alia,
the right to development, food, medical care and social
services. Successive reports of the Secretary-General
have also established — and this year’s report is no
exception — that the embargo, particularly through
its extraterritorial effects, has adversely affected the
Cuban people and the developmental efforts of the
country with particularly devastating effects owing to
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
At the same time, we would like to acknowledge
the notable socioeconomic and developmental
achievements of the Cuban people, in particular the
high Human Development Index ranking of Cuba and
its achievement of the several relevant Sustainable
Development Goals.
In 2015, while launching the transformative 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, world leaders
again strongly urged all States to refrain from any
unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in
accordance with international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Continuing the embargo will severely
impact Cuba’s ability to implement the comprehensive
2030 Agenda. Cuba’s expertise in health care, achieved
despite these conditions, enabled it to respond quickly,
effectively and in a substantive manner to tackle the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
People-to-people
contact
holds
immense
possibilities for fostering better understanding among
nations. The international community has to intensify
its efforts to promote an environment free of sanctions
and embargoes. India hopes that the embargo will be
withdrawn at the earliest and supports draft resolution
A/75/L.97, proposed by Cuba.
Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of our sister republic of Cuba, and
his delegation, with us here today. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/75/81 and
A/75/81/Add.1).
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and Guinea,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

21-1611415/27

A/75/PV.85

The Government of Bolivia will continue to lend
its support by rejecting any unilateral measures by
the United States designed to impose economic, trade
and financial blockades or to use unilateral coercive
measures, smear campaigns and misinformation
against any State. Today, after the 2019 coup d’état in
my country, Bolivia is once again joining the free and
sovereign nations of the world to condemn and reject,
in the strongest terms, the unilateral, immoral and
criminal economic, trade and financial blockade that
the Government of the United States has imposed on
Cuba for more than half a century.
The issue under consideration by the Assembly
is one of the most important on the agenda of the
United Nations. It has received a great deal of attention
because it encapsulates the raison d’être and the very
nature of our Organization, as well as the challenges
to it. Our most important debates today focus on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development
and
achieving
the
Sustainable
Development Goals, and of course on recovery in the
wake of the coronavirus disease pandemic, with a
slogan that says no one is safe until everyone is safe.
All of that is proof of the importance of international
cooperation and the solidarity needed to deal with such
challenges. However, the United States Government is
maintaining its old practices of punishing those who
do not agree with its views and imposing an unfair
blockade on free peoples who have decided to chart
their own future. The criminal blockade of Cuba
violates the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the human, economic and social
rights of the Cuban people.
The blockade on Cuba is illegal. It is not a
bilateral issue but a threat to multilateralism itself. It
is aggressively extraterritorial and a gross violation
of international law that threatens the sovereignty of
all States. It infringes international trade rules and
freedom of navigation. The inclusion of medicines and
foodstuffs in the blockade also undermines the most
basic human rights and international humanitarian law.
The blockade on Cuba is unfair. The harm that it
does to people is incalculable. It causes suffering and is
a gross, flagrant and systemic violation of human rights
that affects international cooperation and Cuba’s health
care, food and education. It harms its foreign trade and
investment, construction, tourism and transport sectors,
its civil aeronautics industry and its sugar industry.
16/27

23/06/2021

According to international law, the blockade qualifies
as an act of genocide as well as one of economic war.
The blockade on Cuba is anachronistic. It
undermines the right of the Cuban people to selfdetermination and the efforts of the Cuban Government
to combat poverty and inequality. If there is genuine
willingness to resume multilateral efforts to eradicate
poverty and promote inclusion, as well as to implement
the targets outlined in the Sustainable Development
Goals, as a matter of priority, we must call for the
effective implementation of the resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, which call on the United States
Government to put an end to its blockade against Cuba
without any conditions.
The United States Government’s disregard for the
resolutions conveying the international community’s
almost unanimous rejection of the unilateral blockade
on Cuba demonstrate that there are countries that have
had a privileged status within the Organization since
its founding. They do not respect decisions that do not
suit them.
It is time for the Assembly and the United Nations
to enforce the decisions they have taken. Bolivia once
again staunchly supports draft resolution A/75/L.97,
which is before the Assembly. However, we also want
to take this opportunity to express our gratitude for
the solidarity that has saved thousands of lives in my
country. The Cuban people have demonstrated their
solidarity all over the world, not just in my region. I
believe today’s meeting is more than a demonstration
of solidarity with Cuba. It is a way of thanking Cuba
for its enormous, excellent and exemplary solidarity
with the peoples of the world. We should therefore
once again condemn the injustice and demand that the
illegal, unfair and anachronistic blockade of Cuba be
lifted once and for all.
Today we are not only voting against an immoral
economic, trade and financial blockade, we are casting
a vote for hope and for the possibility of building a
fairer world. For that reason, Bolivia joins the voices
of the free peoples around the world demanding that
the inhumane and unilateral blockade imposed by the
United States be lifted.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.97.
21-16114

23/06/2021

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
In 2020, like the rest of the world, Cuba had to face
the extraordinary challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Government
of the United States used the virus as an ally in its
merciless unconventional war. It worked deliberately
and opportunistically to increase the measures in its
economic, trade and financial blockade of Cuba, which
led to losses for our country amounting to approximately
$5 billion.
President Donald Trump applied 243 unilateral
coercive measures to restrict the entry of visitors from
the United States and harm third-party tourist markets.
He took wartime-style measures to deprive us of fuel
supplies. He denounced the health services that we
provide in many countries. He increased United States
efforts to stymie trade and financial transactions in
other markets and intimidated foreign investors and
trade entities by applying Title III of the Helms-Burton
Act. He also impeded the regular and institutionalized
flow of remittances to Cuban families, dealing heavy
blows to both the public and private sectors and
creating obstacles to ties with Cubans living in the
United States and to family reunification. All those
measures remain in force today and are being fully
applied. Paradoxically, they are informing the conduct
of the current United States Government at a time when
Cuba is experiencing its largest increase in the number
of people infected with COVID-19, as well as the
highest number of related deaths and greatest adverse
economic impact as a result of the virus.
In its election campaign, the Democratic Party
promised voters that it would work to swiftly reverse
actions taken by the Government of Donald Trump, and
specifically that it would end restrictions on travel to
Cuba, remittances and bilateral migration agreements,
including limits on the issuance of visas. It has been
shown that a majority of the people of the United States
support lifting the blockade and allowing them the
freedom to travel to Cuba. They believe that Cubans
in Cuba want to enjoy normal relations with the United
States and ensure their families’ well-being. Some blame
the pernicious inertia on electoral ambitions associated
with Florida or on the transparently visible ties between
the political and legislative elites in Washington. What
will those who voted for President Joseph Biden think
of what is happening now?
The harm that the embargo has caused the people
is incalculable. No Cuban family has escaped this

A/75/PV.85

inhumane policy’s effects. No one can honestly say
that the blockade is not having a real impact on the
population. In the area of health care, it continues to
be impossible to access technology, devices, treatments
and appropriate drugs, since we cannot get them from
United States companies but have to obtain them at
exorbitant prices, using intermediaries or replaced by
less effective generic drugs, including for newborns
and sick children. But the insidious hit to our financial
sector and COVID-19-related expenditures now stands
at 2 billion pesos, or $300 million. That means that the
medicines for use in hospitals are in short supply, and
they represent the difference between life and death.
Every day it is a challenge for people to obtain insulin,
antibiotics, antidepressants and drugs for high blood
pressure, allergies and other chronic diseases in a
timely fashion.
Cuba has tried to protect everyone from the
virus. We activated our robust universal health-care
system and counted on its highly skilled personnel’s
selflessness. We mobilized our national scientific
potential and world-class biopharmaceutical industry
and were fully supported and endorsed by our people,
especially young people and students, who were
quick to volunteer in high-risk areas and contribute to
epidemiological research. That enabled us to swiftly
develop highly effective national protocols to treat
people infected or suspected of being infected with
COVID-19. We found space in our hospitals for all
infected with COVID-19, guaranteed the full continuity
of our intensive care system and isolated those who had
been in contact with the sick. We were able to ensure
free antibody and polymerase chain reaction tests and
set up molecular biology laboratories in every province
of the country.
When the embargo cruelly blocked the supply of
pulmonary ventilators, we developed our own national
production of ventilators using our own prototypes. All
those national efforts have enabled us to keep pandemic
death rates relatively low, especially among health-care
personnel, children and pregnant and breastfeeding
women. It is noteworthy that a small island operating
under a blockade has produced five candidate vaccines
and approved three of them through intervention studies
and health-care interventions. We have administered at
least one dose to 2,244,350 Cubans, and we intend to
vaccinate at least 70 per cent of the population by the
end of the summer and 100 per cent before the end of
the year, despite the fact that the blockade is a severe

21-1611417/27

A/75/PV.85

obstacle to our ability to increase our industrial vaccine
production. All this is a demonstration that we have put
science at the service of our people and that our public
service is effective.
It was during the pandemic the United States
Government launched a smear campaign against our
medical cooperation efforts. Cuba sent 57 specialized
brigades from the Henry Reeve International Medical
Brigade to 40 countries and territories, in addition to
the more than 28,000 health-care professionals who
were already serving 59 nations.
The blockade has also deprived Cuba of the funding
it needs to import food production components, which
has led to a decline in our production of pork and
other goods. Food imports from the United States
are strictly licensed and conducted in discriminatory
conditions, and the quantities are insignificant given
the blockade’s extensive damage to the financial sector
and the impact of its extraterritorial application in third
markets. I am a witness to the suffering and anxiety
that Cuban families are enduring because they cannot
obtain the most basic items to survive, clearly visible in
the long queues they have been compelled to stand in
daily during the pandemic. Despite the Government’s
enormous efforts, the tightened blockade measures
have also had a major impact on the lack of goods and
runaway price increases amid a pandemic and a global
economic crisis. As General Raúl Castro Ruz said on
16 April,
“The damage these measures do to the living
standards of the population is neither accidental
nor a collateral effect; it is the result of a deliberate
attempt to punish the Cuban people as a whole”.

23/06/2021

cumulative damage caused over the past six decades
stands at $147.853 billion at current prices. In gold, it
amounts to $1.377 trillion.
On 10 June, our banking and financial system
was forced to temporarily suspend its acceptance
of deposits in United States dollars, which was an
essential measure, given the obstacles that the blockade
created to disposing of or using that currency. It was
a step we wanted to avoid, but one that we simply
could not put off any longer. This is an economic war
of extraterritorial scope being waged against a small
country that has already been dealing recently with the
effects of the global recession and the economic crisis
caused by the pandemic, which has stripped us of vital
revenue, including from tourism. As President Miguel
Díaz-Canel stated on 19 April,
“No one with a modicum of integrity or with
economic data that is available in the public
domain can ignore the fact that the blockade is the
primary obstacle to our country’s development of
the country and its quest for prosperity and wellbeing”.
I wonder what would happen to other economies,
including those of rich countries, if they were subjected
to similar conditions. What would be the political and
social effects on them?
The blockade is a politically motivated act, as
perfectly described in the infamous memorandum
of Lester Mallory, then Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter-American Affairs, on 6 April 1960.
It reads,

The blockade is a gross, flagrant and systematic
violation of the human rights of the Cuban people, and
constitutes an act of genocide according to article 2,
sub-paragraph (c) of the 1948 Geneva Convention.

“We must quickly implement all possible measures
to weaken economic life, thereby depriving Cuba
of money and supplies so as to reduce both nominal
and real salaries. The goal is to cause hunger and
despair, and to topple the Government”.

The United States authorities are cynical in their
attempts to plant the idea that the Cuban system is
failing and that the Cuban Government is inefficient.
They say that the coercive measures do not harm
the people and have no significant impact on Cuba’s
economy. But if we look at the data, from April 2019
to December 2020 the blockade resulted in losses of
$9.157 billion at current prices, and damage to the
economy equivalent to an average of $436 million each
month. Over the past five years, the losses caused by the
blockade were equivalent to more than $17 billion. The

That was maliciously complemented by an intense
campaign of political interference in Cuba’s internal
affairs with subversive agendas, for which the
Government of the United States earmarks tens of
millions of dollars of its federal budget every year, as
well as additional covert funding. The goal is to sow
political and social instability in Cuba in the light of the
economic hardship that the United States Government
itself causes. It reckons that if it can subject the Cuban
people to hardship, promote artificial leaders and
encourage disorder and instability, it will be able to

18/27

21-16114

23/06/2021

whip up a virtual political movement on social media
and bring it into the real world. It is employing vast
resources, social laboratories and high-tech tools
in a frenzied campaign to discredit Cuba through
the disgusting use of lies and manipulation of data.
It is stepping up its smear campaign of ideological
intolerance, with brutal attacks on those who defend
the truth.
Some dream of sowing social chaos, disorder,
violence and death. That is not surprising, because those
are political weapons that have already been used in
other countries, with devastating consequences. A few
fantasize about provoking irregular and uncontrolled
migration flows between Cuba and the United States.
That is a dangerous game. We have warned the United
States Government about the dangers of that idea, as it
has the legal and moral obligation to honour migration
agreements, in particular with regard to the issuance of
visas. It is a delicate issue that costs lives.
The States represented here today are the
victims of the extraterritorial impact of a blockade
that undermines their sovereignty, violates national
legislation, subjects them to United States court rulings
and harms the interests of their companies that are keen
to establish relations with both countries. The blockade
is a violation of international law. It is neither legal nor
ethical for the Government of a world Power to subject
a small nation to decades of an endless economic war
with the aim of imposing a different political system
and installing a Government that it has designed for it.
It is unacceptable to deprive an entire people of the
right to peace, development, well-being and human
progress. It is intolerable that the Government of the
United States has ignored the successive resolutions of
the democratic and representative General Assembly
for 28 years. In September 2000, Commander-in-Chief
Fidel Castro said, from this rostrum,
“It must be firmly stated that the principle of
sovereignty cannot be sacrificed to an exploitative
and unfair order in which a hegemonic superPower, backed by its own might, seeks to have its
say on everything.” (A/55/PV.4, p.19)
Cuba demands to be left in peace, to be allowed
to live without an embargo and to see an end to the
persecution of our commercial and financial ties
with the rest of the world. We demand an end to the
manipulation, the discrimination and the obstacles that
Cubans living in the United States face in terms of their

A/75/PV.85

links to their relatives in Cuba and to the country where
they were born. We recognize the efforts of those who,
at this difficult time, have persisted in communicating
with and supporting their families on the island in the
face of hatred and political persecution. Even within
the Government of the United States, many argue
pragmatically that the blockade should be ended because
it is an anachronistic and ineffective policy that has not
and will not achieve its objective, but has ultimately
discredited and isolated the United States itself.
It is also unacceptable to manipulate the fight
against terrorism for political and electoral purposes.
In January, nine days before the inauguration of the
current Government, President Trump’s Administration
included Cuba on an arbitrary and unilateral list of
States that allegedly sponsor international terrorism,
with significant repercussions for the global financial
system. No one can honestly claim that Cuba is a State
sponsor of terrorism. Recent revelations have made
a mockery of the latest of those pretexts. Even so, on
14 May, the United States Department of State once again
labelled Cuba — as the previous Administration did in
2020 — a country that does not cooperate sufficiently
with the United States’ anti-terrorist efforts. Cuba has
been the victim of acts of terrorism organized, financed
and executed by the United States Government or from
United States territory, acts that have cost 3,478 Cubans
their lives and left 2,099 injured or disabled. There is
more than enough evidence of efforts to cooperate, as
well as of effective acts of cooperation in recent years
between the authorities in both countries. Our position
on terrorism is well-known. We condemn it utterly in
all its forms and manifestations.
By sovereign decision and for the good of the entire
nation, Cuba has been making sustained efforts for
years to update its model and its socialist State, based
on law and social justice, with the support of a very
large majority of its citizens through a free, direct and
universal referendum. That is a bold and highly complex
task in any circumstances, made far more difficult
in the face of the persistent hostility of United States
imperialism, which will nonetheless neither hinder us
nor bend the will of current and future generations
of Cubans.
I am deeply grateful for the solidarity and aid of
our compatriots and Cuba’s friends in many parts of
the world, including the host country, something that
demands great determination in the face of Government
opposition and that we very much appreciate. We are

21-1611419/27

A/75/PV.85

encouraged by the support of the thousands of people
all over the world who have gathered to demand that the
United States Government put an end to the blockade,
among whom are numerous Cubans raising the flag of
the Lone Star even here.
On behalf of my country and its worthy and generous
people who are resisting and advancing heroically, I
submit draft resolution A/75/L.97, “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against
Cuba”, for consideration by the General Assembly.
Like the virus, the blockade suffocates and kills, and
it must cease. We stand for homeland or death, and we
shall overcome.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
on the debate on this item. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/75/L.97.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
or position before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. Let me first acknowledge the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
The economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba has a
damaging impact on the country’s economic situation
and a negative effect on the living standards of the
Cuban people. External trade and foreign investment
can play a crucial role in setting the country on a path
towards modernization, reform and sustainable growth,
as well as helping it to overcome the economic hardship
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The EU therefore considers that lifting the
embargo could facilitate the opening of the Cuban
economy to the benefit of the Cuban people.
We acknowledge that the human rights situation in
Cuba remains worrying, particularly as regards civil
and political rights. We are concerned about that and
therefore reiterate our call to the Cuban Government
to grant its citizens their internationally recognized
civil, political and economic rights and freedoms
in full, including freedom of assembly, freedom of
expression and free access to information; to ratify the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
20/27

23/06/2021

and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights; and to extend a standing invitation
to all United Nations special procedures to visit Cuba.
We also believe that empowering civil society is
essential to the promotion and protection of all human
rights and call on the Cuban Government to open
spaces for constructive and inclusive dialogue, without
preconditions, with the whole spectrum of civil-society
actors on the island. A broad spectrum of civil society,
both Cuban and European, should also be involved
in the implementation of the European Union-Cuba
Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement.
The EU believes that positive change in Cuba
is best brought about by closer engagement at all
levels — Government, economy and civil society — but
also through people-to-people exchanges. We therefore
deeply regret the previous United States Administration’s
introduction of additional restrictions on its relations
with Cuba since the Assembly’s adoption of its most
recent resolution, on 7 November 2019 (resolution
74/7). The measures that further restrict travel, such
as the elimination of authorizations to travel to Cuba
for professional meetings, conferences and other public
activities, curtail the possibility for engagement with the
Cuban people even further. The same Administration’s
redesignation of Cuba as a State sponsor of terrorism
without presenting any new facts has created obstacles
to international financial transactions with the island.
Moreover, the embargo has restricted Cuba’s ability
to import pharmaceuticals, medical devices and other
supplies needed to combat the COVID-19 pandemic.
Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo on
ordinary Cubans, United States sanctions and other
administrative and judicial measures are also negatively
affecting EU economic interests. We have firmly and
consistently opposed any such measures, due to their
extraterritorial application and impact on the European
Union in violation of commonly accepted rules of
international trade. We cannot allow such measures
to impede our economic and commercial relations
with Cuba. The EU strongly rejects the United States’
activation in April 2019 of Titles III and IV of the HelmsBurton Act. It breaches the commitments made by the
United States in the United States-EU agreements of 1997
and 1998. We will draw on all appropriate measures to
address the effects of the Helms-Burton Act, including
in relation to our World Trade Organization rights and
through the use of the EU Blocking Statute, which
protects against the extraterritorial application of those
21-16114

23/06/2021

United States sanctions on EU citizens, businesses and
non-governmental organizations operating in Cuba.
For the EU, international cooperation, dialogue and
closer engagement, even if it is critical, are the way to go
with Cuba. The provisional application of the EU-Cuba
Political Dialogue and Cooperation Agreement is now
in its fourth year. The agreement has put our bilateral
relationship on a new and solid legal footing and sets
out an agenda for critical engagement with Cuba that
will enable us to support and accompany Cuba on its
path towards reform and modernization. We are also
enhancing dialogue and cooperation on issues on which
we still have fundamental differences. To that end, the
Agreement has established a human rights dialogue as a
key pillar of our relationship. The third formal meeting
of that dialogue was held in February.
Following Cuba’s adoption of a new Constitution,
and in order to overcome the current economic crisis,
we call on it to pursue a comprehensive reform
and modernization agenda, extending economic,
judicial and social reforms and implementing them
in a manner that will address the key concerns of the
Cuban population, as well as meeting the legitimate
aspirations of the Cuban people for more opportunities
to participate in shaping the country’s future.
With the EU-Cuba Political Dialogue and
Cooperation Agreement, the EU offers Cuba a
consistent and reliable partnership to support it as it
seeks to reform its political and economic model, pursue
sustainable development and find common solutions
to global challenges while we continue to vigorously
promote democracy and respect for human rights. It
is our considered view that the United States embargo
does not contribute to promoting those aims but rather
impedes their achievement. Against that background,
the States members of the European Union will vote
unanimously in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.97.

A/75/PV.85

of tools in our broader efforts with regard to Cuba to
advance democracy, promote respect for human rights
and help the Cuban people exercise the fundamental
freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. We therefore oppose draft resolution
A/75/L.97.
We recognize the challenges the Cuban people
face. That is why the United States is a significant
supplier of humanitarian goods to the Cuban people,
as well as being one of Cuba’s principal trading
partners. Every year, we authorize billions of dollars’
worth of exports to Cuba, including food and other
agricultural commodities, medicines, medical devices,
telecommunications equipment, consumer goods and
other items to support the Cuban people.
Advancing democracy and human rights remain at
the core of our policy towards Cuba. We are engaging
directly with a large swathe of Cuban civil society,
empowering the Cuban people to determine their own
futures. We are also engaging directly with the Cuban
Government to denounce abuses and push for reform.
The United States stands with all who defend freedom
in Cuba. Cubans, like all peoples, deserve the right
to freedom of expression, assembly and culture. No
Government should silence its critics through violations
of their human rights. We celebrate the diverse
backgrounds and ideas of Cuban artists, entrepreneurs,
religious leaders, human rights defenders, journalists
and environmental activists — just a few of the many
people in Cuba with a strong voice and a desire to
be heard.
The United States opposes today’s draft resolution.
We encourage the Assembly to support the Cuban
people in their quest to determine their own future.

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The
United States stands with the Cuban people and seeks
to support their pursuit of freedom, prosperity and a
future of greater dignity.

Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): In our explanation of vote, we align ourselves
with the statements made earlier by the representatives
of Guinea, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
and Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Like other Member States, the United States
determines its conduct of economic relationships
with other countries in accordance with its national
interests. Sanctions are a legitimate way to achieve
foreign policy, national security and other national and
international objectives. The United States is not alone
in that view or in that practice. Sanctions are one set

Nicaragua joins the peoples of the world in once
again reiterating its rejection of the criminal, illegal
and immoral economic, commercial and financial
blockade imposed by the United States on our brother
country Cuba and its Government and people. That
extraordinary people has waged a titanic battle for 60
years, resisting invasions, acts of terrorism, economic

21-1611421/27

A/75/PV.85

sanctions, blockades and all the webs of imperialism
and its destabilizing actions.
We welcome the presence of our brother and
comrade Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, who has travelled here in
this extraordinary time of pandemic to share with us
the evidence of the deplorable economic, commercial
and financial devastation wreaked on the Cuban
people by this evil blockade. In spite of the fact that
every year since 1992 a vast majority of countries in
the General Assembly has called for the elimination
of those measures, this obsolete and retrograde policy
has continued and intensified. Nicaragua, together
with every developing country and the international
community as a whole, has seen with concern how the
sanctions, unilateral coercive measures and embargo
imposed during the pandemic have become a crime
against humanity. The blockade directly affects the
brave Cuban people’s right to development, violating
all human rights and undermining the country’s
efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
Cuba has demonstrated how the financial impact
of the embargo was exacerbated between April 2019
and March 2020 in sensitive sectors such as health,
education and sport and culture to the tune of more
than $5.5 billion. That figure exceeds the amount
recorded in the previous year, from April 2018 to
March 2019, by approximately $1.2 billion, bringing the
accumulated damages in the nearly six decades since
this anachronistic policy was first implemented to more
than $144 billion. We denounce the five packages of
measures adopted in 2019 with a view to monitoring
and imposing punitive measures on companies, ships
and shipping companies transporting fuel to Cuba. The
embargo has undermined the efforts of the noble country
of Cuba to combat the pandemic, particularly through
its extraterritorial component, in order to deliberately
deprive the Cuban people of mechanical pulmonary
ventilators, masks, diagnostic kits, protective goggles,
suits, gloves, reagents and other supplies necessary for
the management of the disease.
It is admirable that in its struggle against the
blockade and in the face of acts of aggression and
policies of defamation, Cuba has been able to send 57
teams from its Henry Reeve contingent to prevent and
combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
in 40 countries and territories in Europe, Africa, the
Middle East and Latin America and the Caribbean.
22/27

23/06/2021

True to the motto “doctors, not bombs”, that army of
white coats has joined the 28,000 professionals who
were already selflessly assisting 59 nations in solidarity
with victims of earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes and
floods or dealing successfully with the dengue and
Ebola epidemics. Scientists at the Center for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology of a pandemicstricken Cuba have developed five vaccine candidates
against COVID-19. Cuba has therefore become the
first country in Latin America to manufacture its own
vaccine and distribute it, universally and free of charge,
to its people. It is no coincidence that its vaccines are
named Soberana, Mambisa and Abdala in honour of
José Martí.
We send a message of love and solidarity to our
Cuban brothers and sisters, the Government and people
of Cuba and the more than 11 million Cuban hearts for
their internationalism and their selfless contribution
to all of our campaigns and social programmes in
Nicaragua, whether in health, education, sport or many
other fields. We are firm in our resolve that our peoples
will forever be united in our cause until victory is ours.
We believe that no State has the right to dictate its
will to others through unilateral coercive economic
measures that violate international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. Such practices are illegitimate
and illegal and devalue the progress achieved in
global economic governance. Nicaragua hopes that
the General Assembly’s numerous resolutions will be
complied with and respected once and for all in order to
put an end to this illegal policy towards Cuba. It is time
to lay the foundations for a respectful dialogue aimed
at resolving the pending bilateral issues between the
two countries involved, based on the principles of the
equality of States, reciprocity and respect for Cuba’s
sovereignty and independence.
We are fully convinced that international solidarity
with Cuba will continue and that today the Assembly
will once again condemn the criminal blockade and
all the extraterritorial measures and ramifications that
continue to be intensified against our sister republic
of Cuba. We want to share a recent statement by our
Commander, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra,
who said,
“We stand in solidarity with President Miguel
Díaz-Canel, Commander Raúl Castro and the
people of Cuba. We will accompany the people
of Cuba in their struggle for peace, a struggle in
21-16114

23/06/2021

which the people of Cuba are drawing strength from
weakness, sending entire brigades to various parts
of the world to help in the field of health. They have
done it before and they are doing it right now in the
face of the pandemic. There are brigades of Cuban
doctors going out to distant areas where brigades
from developed countries are nowhere to be seen.
They are nowhere to be seen, but our brothers, the
brigades of Cuban doctors, are there.
“In spite of that act of solidarity and generosity
and their struggle for peace, the illegal embargo
is being maintained with the same intensity and
brutality as when it was tightened by President
Trump, and it is being tightened further still. But
who is suffering? It is the Cuban people who are
suffering under the embargo.”
Nicaragua will always be united with the formidable
spirit of Martí, Fidel, Raúl, Díaz-Canel and the great
people of Cuba. As it does every year, Nicaragua will
vote in favour of draft resolution A/75/L.97. Today,
through its united adoption of the draft resolution
presented by Cuba, the General Assembly will be
defending multilateralism and the Charter of the United
Nations, seeking the understanding and peaceful
coexistence among nations that we all desire and
promoting the culture of peace that we all speak of and
yearn for.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.97, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic

A/75/PV.85

of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Colombia, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/75/L.97 was adopted by 184
votes to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution 75/289).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats.

21-1611423/27

A/75/PV.85

Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the Permanent Representatives of Azerbaijan,
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
and Guinea, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
At the outset, I welcome the presence here today of
His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and commend
his participation and remarkable statement on this
important General Assembly agenda item. I would now
like to explain Syria’s vote.
I would like to once again emphasize the steadfast
and continued support of the Syrian Arab Republic and
its leadership and people for the resilience of our Cuban
brothers and sisters in the face of the unjust and illegal
United States embargo that they have endured since
1962. We value the positions expressed by our brothers
in Cuba that have supported my country in the face of
the massive terrorist war that has been waged against
us for nearly a decade. The Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates its full commitment to and support for the
United Nations resolutions calling for an immediate
end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed on Cuba. That unjust embargo constitutes
a grave violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law, as well as of the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy.
As it has in all previous General Assembly sessions,
my delegation is proud to have voted in favour of
resolution 75/289 today. The result of the voting at the
international level was almost unanimous, sending a
strong message to the current and former United States
Administrations that they should lift the unjust blockade
of the Cuban people and change their policies, which are
based on pressuring and imposing unilateral sanctions
on States whose independent national policies do not
suit United States agendas and interests. In addition,
the previous Administration used a means of war that
is both new and old, placing Cuba on the list of States
that it claims are sponsors of international terrorism, a
policy that my delegation firmly condemns.
The periodic reports of the Secretary-General and
the monthly reports of the Cuban delegation circulated
to Member States are more evidence of the suffering
of the Cuban people amid the coercive measures that
have been imposed on them for many decades. The
numbers clearly and explicitly illustrate the harm
caused to Cuba and its people on a daily basis as a result
24/27

23/06/2021

of the suffocating embargo, now exacerbated by the
global spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and its destructive impact on peoples and
economies around the world. That must not continue
against the Cuban people, who have always stood by
international law and the principles of right, justice and
equality while responding to calls for humanitarian and
medical assistance from all over the world, in which
the latest of their achievements is their manufacture of
a vaccine against COVID-19. In addition, their medical
teams have fanned out across more than 35 countries,
with efforts that play an important role in saving lives.
Mr. Konfourou
the Chair.

(Mali),

Vice-President,

took

The Syrian Arab Republic, along with Cuba and
other countries, continues to be the target of the many
illegal unilateral coercive measures imposed outside
the framework of the United Nations and international
legitimacy by the United States and many other
European Union countries. Such measures are acts of
economic terrorism that complement the criminal acts
committed by terrorist organizations in my country,
affecting the daily life of all Syrians by depriving
them of their basic needs and limiting the ability of the
Syrian Government to provide services and support for
those in need.
My country reiterates its call for an immediate
and indefinite end to policies that impose coercive
measures, while recalling the calls of the SecretaryGeneral and senior United Nations staff, as well as
rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council, in that
regard. We also recall the right of the Cuban people
to realize their economic development and ensure their
social welfare.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, we would like to acknowledge the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, at this meeting.
In that regard, we express our gratitude for the strong
statement he made.
I would also like to align myself with the statements
made by the representatives of Guinea, on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, Azerbaijan, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and the Niger, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Unilateral embargos and coercive sanctions are
only two of a number of methods designed to achieve
21-16114

23/06/2021

national policy objectives that in turn have an adverse
impact on the promotion of peace, both regionally and
internationally. They are fundamental impediments to
establishing not only a peaceful and prosperous world
but also a just and equitable international order, which
is a vital prerequisite for sustainable development.
For many years, the General Assembly has
expressed its overwhelming support for and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Cuba through its
decisive votes in favour of its annual resolution calling
for the lifting of the embargo imposed by the United
States on Cuba. Despite those strong calls, and its
defiance of both international law and its commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations over the course
of the past six decades, the United States has continued
to impose an economic, commercial and financial
embargo on Cuba. Such measures serve no purpose
other than to inflict tremendous hardship and suffering
on the people of Cuba, especially women and children.
We are all aware of the wide-ranging detrimental
repercussions of the embargo, not only on the Cuban
economy’s financial, banking, trade, investment and
tourism sectors, but also on the country’s health,
nutrition, water quality, education and culture.
My country has been experiencing unlawful United
States sanctions since the 1979 Islamic Revolution. In
the past four decades, the rate of unilateral coercive
measures it has imposed on the Iranian people has
exponentially increased to the extent that it has even
targeted imports of medicine and medical equipment.
Moreover, it has even introduced unilateral coercive
measures against other States for implementing their
commitments under Security Council resolutions. A
clear example in that regard is the conduct of the United
States with respect to Security Council resolution 2231
(2015). In addition to reimposing its unilateral sanctions
against Iran — a gross violation of its obligation under
the Charter, as well as its strict commitments under
resolution 2231 (2015) — the United States currently
continues to threaten other States to either violate the
resolution or face punishment.
It is regrettable that the new United States
Administration has continued the same practice since
January. At a time when all nations are mobilizing
their efforts to overcome the challenges arising from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak that
continues to ravage many parts of the world, those
coercive measures have severely hampered our effort
to combat COVID-19. They have limited our access to

A/75/PV.85

our financial resources in other countries, restricting
our ability to purchase the medicine, vaccines and
medical equipment necessary in the fight against the
novel coronavirus.
We firmly believe that the international community
must work to find solutions to counter such destructive
interventions and unilateralism. Iran strongly believes
in cooperating with friendly countries, including
Cuba, to prudently counter those challenges. Lastly,
my delegation would like to reiterate that the United
States must immediately and fully comply with its
international obligations and cease the application of
all unilateral coercive measures.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea voted in favour of resolution 75/289,
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. The Assembly has adopted
this annual resolution for nearly three decades with
the support of almost all States Members of the
United Nations.
In spite of that, the United States has ignored
the demands of the international community and
continues to impose its embargo on Cuba, creating
difficulties for the people of Cuba in their efforts to
achieve socioeconomic development. Even in the midst
of the catastrophic coronavirus disease pandemic, the
sanctions and measures imposed by the United States
remain in place in various areas, including finance,
economy and trade. The United States has gone so far
as to exclude Cuba from the list of countries eligible
for humanitarian assistance, blocking even the delivery
of essential medicines and medical equipment and
thereby seriously threatening the lives and safety of
Cuban people.
The unanimous demand of nearly all Member
States — including Cuba itself, which aspires to
sustainable development in a peaceful environment — is
an immediate end to the unilateral and extraterritorial
embargo against Cuba. The resolution adopted once
again today, which enjoys the support of an absolute
majority of the United Nations membership, is a
reflection of the desire of the international community
to stand firm in support of the just struggle of the
Government and the people of Cuba.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea strongly urges the United States

21-1611425/27

A/75/PV.85

to lift the unilateral and extraterritorial embargo of
Cuba immediately and in accordance with all the
relevant General Assembly resolutions. We want to
take this opportunity to emphasize our firm support
for and solidarity with the Government and people of
Cuba in their just struggle to safeguard the dignity
and sovereignty of the nation and to achieve further
economic development.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): First of all, I would
like to acknowledge the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba. I also commend the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting to once
again address this vitally important issue, which has
lasted for decades despite the efforts and appeals that
have been made at the international level.
Angola voted in favour of resolution 75/289, as it has
always done for this annual resolution, with the aim of
seeing the matter of the embargo on Cuba resolved once
and for all. Despite the fact that this subject has been
addressed numerous times within our Organization and
in other international forums, no real progress has been
made and Cuba has not been able to emerge from the
situation imposed on it more than 60 years ago. Today,
75 years after the creation of the United Nations, it
is regrettable that we are still witnessing unjust and
deplorable situations such as the embargo on Cuba
at a time when the international political framework
could already be more balanced and when old political
disagreements that made no sense before and make
much less sense now should be resolved and left in the
past. Year after year, resolutions in favour of ending
the embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba are
adopted by an overwhelming majority. However, none
of those resolutions have been implemented, in clear
disregard for the basic principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the positions expressed by most
Member States.
During President Barack Obama’s historic visit
to Havana in March 2016, it seemed that an opening
had been created for a less rigid political climate that
might eventually have led to the end of the embargo.
However, the process stalled and subsequently receded,
returning to the status quo. The economic and financial
embargo imposed unilaterally on Cuba affects not only
the Cuban people but all those who decide to have trade
relations with Cuba. The blockade imposed on Cuba
completely deprives its people of their fundamental
26/27

23/06/2021

right to development and constitutes a violation of the
full enjoyment of human rights by the Cuban people.
We must commend the resilience of the people
of Cuba, who have suffered the consequences of the
blockade for years without losing the spirit of solidarity
that leads them to help other countries whenever and
however they can. My country, Angola, and the Angolan
people are eternally grateful for the help provided
by Cuba at times when we needed it most — first in
the military area and later in the fields of health and
education, in which Cuba excels despite the obstacles
caused by the embargo.
The whole world has suffered from the coronavirus
disease. The effects of the pandemic will continue to
be felt by all of us, and in countries like Cuba, where
the economy was already dangerously weakened by
the embargo, the Cuban people have been denied the
possibility of developing economically and socially and
maintaining normal exchanges with the rest of the world.
The embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba is
the most severe in modern history. Angola would like
to reiterate its strong support for the Cuban people and
for all resolutions and efforts to end the economic and
financial blockade against Cuba, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter and with respect for the
principles of State sovereignty and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, as well as the maintenance
of international peace and security.
I would like to commend the Member States that,
like Angola, voted in favour of the resolution on the
need to end the embargo on Cuba. We call on other
States to express their support for Cuba and condemn
the embargo, as well as to join in collective efforts to
ensure that the resolution on the need to end the embargo
is implemented and the blockade lifted in its entirety.
Ms. Sweeb (Suriname): At the outset, I would
like to extend my warmest welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Cuba.
Suriname aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Niger, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
Guinea, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
and Haiti, on behalf of the Caribbean Community.
We would like to add the following remarks in our
national capacity.
21-16114

23/06/2021

Suriname voted in favour of resolution 75/289,
joining the international community in calling on the
Government of the United States to put an immediate
end to its obsolete policy and to lift the economic,
commercial and financial blockade of Cuba. My
delegation disapproves, in the strongest terms, of the
economic, financial and commercial embargo on Cuba
and its people. Year after year, decade after decade,
an almost full majority of Member States take a stand
against the embargo, as it impedes the unlocking
of the sovereign nation of Cuba’s full potential for
economic and social development. Those unilateral
coercive measures with extraterritorial implications
contravene the principles of sovereign equality and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as
expressed in international law and enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Those principles have
guided us in our collective commitment to achieving
peaceful and sustainable development for all nations.
As the blockade has been in effect for decades, it
has continued to cause unnecessary hardship for the
people of Cuba. The imposition of additional measures
by the United States in the midst of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic is further undermining
Cuba’s efforts to achieve sustainable development
and socioeconomic well-being, at an effective total
detrimental cost of $147.8 billion, as has been reported.
Despite those enormous setbacks, the Cuban
people, led by their steadfast Government, have
been able to develop excellent expertise in medical

A/75/PV.85

science and services, among other things, and have
graciously shared their health-care professionals in
great numbers with the international community. Such
a compassionate act of solidarity should be praised
rather than punished in a way that produces oppressive
suffering. We also congratulate Cuba on their latest
achievement of successfully developing the Abdala
COVID-19 vaccine. Suriname, too, has benefited from
the generous support of Cuban medical knowledge and
services for many years. Most recently, the Henry Reeve
medical contingent offered its expertise and assistance
in our regional hospitals and health centres. We are
deeply appreciative of those expressions of solidarity
from our sister nation of Cuba.
My Government regrets that the renewed
continuation of the economic and financial blockade
has set back the normalization of relations between
Cuba and the United States. We call for an end to the
economic and financial blockade and for a resumption
of peaceful negotiations towards the normalization
of relations between the two countries. That will
also contribute to enhanced peace and stability in the
Caribbean, which is so necessary to the development
of our region.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote for this
meeting. We will hear the remaining speakers at 3 p.m.
in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

21-1611427/27
