UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/1033
4 November 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 3 NOVEMBER 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
3 November 1998, which I have received from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

(Signed)

98-33660 (E)

041198

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/1033
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the
Secretary-General

With reference to the Security Council request for the International Atomic
Energy Agency to provide a briefing on the implications of Iraq’s decision of
31 October 1998 to stop all forms of interaction with the United Nations Special
Commission, I would be grateful if you could arrange to transmit the attached
letter to the President of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Mohamed ELBARADEI

/...

S/1998/1033
English
Page 3

Appendix
Letter dated 3 November 1998 from the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed to the
President of the Security Council

At the emergency session of the Security Council held on 31 October 1998,
the Council indicated its intention to ask the Secretary-General, inter alia, to
arrange for briefings by the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implications of Iraq’s
31 October decision to stop all forms of interaction with UNSCOM and to halt all
its activities inside Iraq, including monitoring activities.
In that context, I can report that so far IAEA has been able to continue
its schedule of monitoring inspections. The IAEA Nuclear Monitoring Group in
Iraq currently totals nine persons, comprising six nationalities. The basic
routine activities of the Group involve carrying out up to two monitoring
inspections per day as well as up to two land-based radiation surveys. In
addition, it is planned that the Group will carry out a campaign of wide-area
environmental sample collection.
IAEA is able to carry out the technical aspects of its monitoring
inspections independently but, in the context of the assistance and cooperation
called for in paragraph 13 of resolution 687 (1991), IAEA relies upon UNSCOM for
logistical services and facilities in Iraq, which continue to be provided in
such areas as:
-

Air transport between Bahrain and Baghdad;

-

Air transport within Iraq (helicopter);

-

Office and laboratory accommodation, including secure areas;

-

Communications, including audio/video network;

-

Road vehicles and maintenance services;

-

Maintenance of joint-use video surveillance systems;

-

Installation of in-field environmental monitoring equipment;

-

Miscellaneous domestic services.

The efficiency and effectiveness of the ongoing monitoring and verification
activities of IAEA are dependent upon the continuing availability of such
assistance and cooperation.
It will be recalled that, as recorded in my October progress report to the
Council (S/1998/927), the IAEA activities in Iraq continue to be limited by
Iraq’s decision on 5 August 1998 to restrict its cooperation with IAEA. Again,
as recorded in that report, the inability of IAEA to exercise its right to full
/...

S/1998/1033
English
Page 4

and free access under its ongoing monitoring and verification plan has resulted
in a significant reduction in the level of assurance that can be provided by
that plan.
Subject to further guidance by the Security Council, IAEA is continuing
with the limited implementation of its ongoing monitoring and verification plan
and remains ready to provide such additional information or clarification as may
be requested by the Council.

(Signed)

-----

Mohamed ELBARADEI
