S/PV.8649

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8649th meeting

Tuesday, 29 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila/Mrs. Pandor/Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen/Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Müntefering
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Towards the successful implementation of the women, peace and security
agenda: moving from commitments to accomplishments in preparation for the
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000)
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2019/800)
Letter dated 8 October 2019 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/801)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-33809 (E)
*1933809*

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Towards the successful implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda: moving
from commitments to accomplishments in
preparation for the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000)
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2019/800)
Letter dated 8 October 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/801)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
2/33

29/10/2019

Empowerment of Women; Ms. Bineta Diop, African
Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security;
Ms. Lina Ekomo, on behalf of the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and the
African Women Leaders Network; and Ms. Alaa Salah,
civil society activist and community leader.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Ms. Clare Hutchinson,
Special Representative of the NATO Secretary-General
for Women, Peace and Security; Her Excellency
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principal Adviser on Gender
and the Implementation of United Nations Security
Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women and Peace
and Security of the European External Action Service;
His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and Ms. Amarsanaa Darisuren,
Senior Adviser on Gender Issues of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/800, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security, and document S/2019/801, which contains
a letter dated 8 October 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2019/841, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia, Canada,
Denmark, Georgia, Indonesia, Ireland, Jordan, Liberia,
Morocco, North Macedonia, Norway, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, San Marino, South
Africa, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2493 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements on the resolution
just adopted.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The
United States joins other member States in support
of resolution 2493 (2019), on women and peace and
security. We remain deeply committed to this issue.
I commend South Africa for the cooperative spirit in
which it led this process.
However, the resolution refers to previous documents
that include references to sexual and reproductive
health. I must note that we cannot accept references
to sexual and reproductive health or any references to
safe termination of pregnancy or language that would
promote abortion or suggest a right to abortion. The
United States has stated clearly on many occasions,
consistent with the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development Programme of Action
and its report, that we do not recognize abortion as a
method of family planning nor do we support it in our
women’s global assistance initiatives.
The United Nations should not put itself in a
position of promoting or suggesting a right to abortion,
whether in its humanitarian or development work. A
new resolution on women and peace and security offers
an opportunity to highlight the great personal risk that
women face and to emphasise efforts to support and
protect women peacebuilders. We are pleased that this
resolution includes elements of the women and peace
and security agenda related to peacekeeping because,
as we all know, women improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions.
However, the resolution falls short of putting the
full weight and support of the Council behind the
women who are putting their lives on the line every
day to build peace. The resolution also leaves out key

S/PV. 8649

aspects of the Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which emphasizes that Member States
need to collectively ensure that a gender perspective is
integrated into all stages of peace processes.
While we appreciate the fact that the resolution
notes the system-wide gender parity strategy, we are
disappointed that it fails to highlight the aspects of
the strategy that are aimed at increasing the number
of women in the military and police contingents of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Individually,
we should all be taking steps to address the persistent
barriers that women peacekeepers face and to overcome
these barriers in our systems. We continue to urge all
troop- and police-contributing countries to adopt and
promote policies to achieve these objectives.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution
2493 (2019), which South Africa proposed today, and
we are very grateful for your efforts, Sir, to secure
Council consensus on the resolution and the efforts of
your Mission.
We welcome the resolution’s focus on
implementation. Implementation is the United
Kingdom’s main priority on women and peace and
security as we look forward to the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) next year. We
believe that today’s resolution represents the final push
that the Council needs to provide on implementation.
From the United Kingdom’s perspective, our focus
should now be on delivering on the ambition of the full
existing framework of women and peace and security
resolutions and not on producing more texts.
Turning to the text itself, we endorse its confirmation
of the Council’s call for full — and I stress the word
“full” — implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
its encouragement of increased engagement by Member
States and United Nations agencies, as well as increased
support for civil society.
The emphasis on full implementation — and again,
I stress “full” — is vital. The implementation gap is
visible right the way across the women and peace and
security agenda. We have not seen sufficient progress
in ensuring women’s meaningful participation, in
increasing the number of women in peacekeeping or
in building an effective response to conflict-related
sexual violence.

19-338093/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

29/10/2019

In all cases, this needs to include sexual and
reproductive health services. I know that not all
Member States agree with this, but from the perspective
of the United Kingdom sexual and reproductive health
services are a vital part of public services for women in
all countries and a vital part of ensuring that women can
play a truly equal role in the building of their countries.
We welcome the resolution’s support for the creation
of safe and enabling environments for civil society, as
well as the importance of funding, which we consider to
be essential for organizations and individuals to carry
out their work free of interference and free from fear.

As with previous Council debates on related issues,
we would also like to highlight that it is clear that
the full implementation of resolutions on women and
peace and security means fully implementing all the
provisions of all of the Council’s resolutions pertinent
to this agenda item, including provisions on sexual and
reproductive health.

However, I have to say that the United Kingdom
was disappointed that the Council did not seize
the opportunity to draft a resolution that was more
ambitious in scope.

Ms. Müntefering (Germany): We thank South
Africa for highlighting the importance of the women
and peace and security agenda with today’s resolution
2493 (2019). With its adoption, the Security Council
has once more underlined the crucial role it attaches to
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in prevention, peace processes and relief and recovery.
This is the tenth time that the Security Council has
adopted a resolution on women and peace and security,
which has been a German priority since the very first
time, 19 years ago. We agree that implementation is key
in making progress, but we still have a long way to go.

First, we believe that the resolution would have
broken new ground if it had included explicit language
on women human rights defenders and their protection
and security. The work of women human rights
defenders is essential to the functioning of democracy
and the maintenance and achievement of peace.
Secondly, we regret that it was not possible to
include broader recognition of civil society’s roll in
implementation. We talk a lot about implementation
in meetings and events in New York, but civil society,
and especially women at the grass-roots level, are
responsible for making the Council’s resolutions a
reality on the ground. They are the ones on the front
lines, and they need increased recognition and support
in order to effect greater and more effective change.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium congratulates South Africa on
the adoption of resolution 2493 (2019), on women and
peace and security. Our vote in favour of the resolution
reflects my country’s full commitment to the agenda
and the empowerment of women. On the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we welcome the stress placed on the importance
of implementing our joint commitments.
However, we regret that it was not possible today to
adopt a resolution that would have underlined the key
role of human rights defenders in the implementation
of the women and peace and security. In addition, we
regret that the Security Council was not in a position
to call on countries to adopt measures to protect civil
society and safeguard critical thinking and the freedom
of expression.
4/33

In this spirit, we eagerly look forward to engaging
with all members in the course of the year during which
we will mark the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000).

The resolution serves as a reminder that it is our
obligation as Member States to redouble our efforts
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and all subsequent resolutions that form part of
the women and peace and security agenda, with all
their provisions. The resolution highlights a crucial
element of the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, namely, the role of civil society.
That includes international and local non-governmental
organizations, formal and informal community women
leaders, women peacebuilders, political actors and
women human rights defenders, all of whom play an
indispensable role in the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda.
We are strongly concerned about attacks and
reprisals against women activists, human rights
defenders and civil society in general, as well as about
the concerted efforts by some States to backtrack on
the women and peace and security agenda and on the
universality of all human rights. We stand united with
many Member States of the Council and the United
Nations — as we heard from the representatives of
Belgium and the United Kingdom — as well as with
civil society to resist such efforts.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks South Africa for its efforts in a difficult context
and welcomes the Security Council’s unity. This is a
victory for the women and peace and security agenda,
which will mark its twentieth anniversary next year.
France welcomes the fact that resolution 2493 (2019)
calls for the full implementation of all resolutions on
this agenda, which are mutually reinforcing and to
which France is committed in all their aspects.
We would have liked the role of civil society and
women human rights defenders to be fully recognized.
Indeed, how can one envisage implementing the women
and peace and security agenda without civil society and
those women on the ground who try to change the status
quo to demand the role that belongs to them.
It is regrettable that the Security Council
continues to be silent on the crucial issue of sexual and
reproductive health and rights, without which women’s
rights remain in jeopardy and we cannot respond to
the most basic needs of the victims of sexual violence
throughout the world.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that
France will continue to support the full — and
demanding — implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, including the full complement of
all related resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: The women and peace
and security agenda is clearly one of the top priorities
of the United Nations as a whole. We see that in the
adoption of a great many resolutions by the Security
Council, including landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
and its many follow-up decisions. We see it in the global
recognition of the central role that women must play in
preventing and resolving conflicts. And we see it when
we gather to discuss the issue. That is always when the
Chamber is at its fullest and the list of speakers is the
longest. We have exactly that same situation today.
Given such strong support and common
understanding, an observer might be forgiven for
thinking that things are substantially improving. But
the sad fact is — and we must be blunt about it — that
the commitment that is always reflected around this
table is not translating into real change around the
world. It is not coming fast enough or far enough.
Change is coming at a pace that is too slow for the

S/PV. 8649

women and girls whose lives depend on it, and for the
effectiveness of our efforts to maintain international
peace and security.
Nearly two decades after resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted, women still face exclusion from many
peace and political processes. Peace agreements are
adopted without provisions that consider the needs and
priorities of women and girls. A pitifully small 0.2 per
cent of bilateral aid to fragile and conflict-affected
situations goes to women’s organizations. The number
of attacks against women human rights defenders,
humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to increase.
Sexual and gender-based violence continues to be
used as a weapon of war, with the survivors of such
violence often left without justice or support. This year
alone, millions of women and girls were in need of
life-saving sexual and reproductive health services, and
millions more required interventions to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence. There is also a growing
number of armed groups for which gender inequality
is a strategic objective, and misogyny part of their core
ideology. And, of course, we know that women and
girls continue to suffer the consequences of conflict in
general. To cite just one example, in north-east Syria,
we saw thousands of women and children fleeing the
latest violence. But despite this grim litany, we will not
give up. This, for me, is an absolute priority.
We can report at least some progress. In Yemen,
where women were absent from the formal rounds
of consultations, my Special Envoy established a
Yemeni women’s technical advisory group to ensure
that the perspectives of Yemeni women are included.
In Guinea-Bissau, women played a direct role in
breaking the political impasse last year, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund. They led unprecedented
mobilization for parity laws requiring a minimum of
36 per cent of women on the ballot, and they were key
to the success of the elections this year. There were
record numbers of women candidates and voters, and
the country achieved parity among ministerial posts. In
Syria, women make up approximately 30 per cent of the
new Constitutional Committee, including some from
the Women’s Advisory Board that has been working for
peace all these years.
Within the United Nations itself, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations are implementing a new and stronger
policy on women and peace and security. All heads of
special political missions and my Special Envoys have

19-338095/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

been instructed to report regularly on their efforts to
promote women’s direct participation throughout all
stages of peace processes, in ways that ensure they have
influence over the outcomes. An objective related to
women and peace and security has now been included
in all senior managers’ compacts related to peace and
security mandates. In our peacekeeping operations, we
are working to end sexual exploitation and abuse and
increase women’s participation. Incidents of sexual
exploitation and abuse have been reduced by half, and
we are finally moving the needle on the percentage of
women in the military and the police components of
our operations. I have appointed many more women as
heads and deputy heads of missions, and we are pursuing
emergency measures to achieve gender balance.
Women and peace and security is one of the
eight priority pillars of our Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, endorsed now by more than 150 countries. I
have also requested peacekeeping and special political
missions to improve their monitoring and reporting of
threats and violence against activists, including women
human rights defenders, and for that to be built into
early warning signs of escalating conflict or instability.
Without a gender analysis, we are operating on partial
information and are unable to anticipate and respond
effectively to early warnings.
Today we recognize both progress and how much
more we must do. When we fall short, women, girls
and all members of society suffer the consequences. A
failure to act on women’s rights and the principles of
the women and peace and security agenda bring about
enormous costs. Let us work together to change the
narrative and improve, through implementation, the
situation on the ground.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: There is a common message
coming from women affected by conflict and actors
who are concerned about women and peace and security
matters — whether it be women in Afghanistan, Libya,
the Sudan, Burundi, the Philippines, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Yemen or Colombia; whether
it be Kurdish or Yazidi women, or young women who
are here for this week or global focal points on women
and peace and security from different countries;
whether it be women peacekeepers like the ones from
South Africa who shared their touching stories with us
6/33

29/10/2019

yesterday, highlighting the need to increase the number
of women in uniform — the loud and common message
is that progress is too slow, political will is not strong
enough and pushback against the needs and interests
of women is threatening the progress we have made,
and is pushing further away those who most need our
resolve and support. That is despite the many good
words, agreements, discussions and events. Change is
not as real as it needs to be.
As I address the Security Council today, I urge
that we heed the call of those women. As we discuss
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800), we
must aim to close the gap between words and action,
as articulated by the Secretary-General. Even though
we agree on so much, the collective scorecard is not
where it should be. There is a stark contrast between
the expressed support from Member States and regional
and international organizations for the women and
peace and security agenda, and reality.
The correlation between gender inequality and
a society’s propensity for civil or inter-State conflict
is now well-established. The link between the
participation of women and more durable peace has
also been established. And yet we still live in a world
that tolerates and excuses women’s continued exclusion
from peace and political processes and institutions.
Violent misogyny is on the rise. We are witnessing
record levels of political violence targeting women.
Sexual violence continues to be used as a weapon of war
and terror, while its survivors are left without justice
or support, and the support they need is sometimes
even minimized by decisions that we take here. After
conflict, economic recovery for women is primarily
limited to micro-credit and micro-enterprises, while
large-scale reconstruction is dominated by men and
overwhelmingly benefits men. Feminist organizations’
repeated calls for disarmament, arms control and
shifting military spending to social investment still go
unanswered. It seems easier to use arms than to deliver
clean water and energy or heal the women in northeast Nigeria from the recurring tremor, as noted last
week by Assistant Secretary-General Åsa Regnér. The
list of examples of people who should be, but are not,
benefitting from this resolution is way too long.
Last year, the Secretary-General tasked UN-Women
with commissioning an independent assessment of
progress in the implementation of the gender-related
recommendations of the three peace and security reviews
that the United Nations conducted in 2015. Its findings
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

are summarized in the Secretary-General’s report. Of
the recommendations that targeted the United Nations
specifically, 50 per cent have been implemented or are in
progress and 10 per cent have either regressed or are not
progressing. From 1990 to 2018, fewer than 20 per cent
of peace agreements included provisions that addressed
women or gender, and last year none of the agreements
reached in United Nations-led processes included such
provisions. The United Nations-led processes are also
supported by Member States; therefore, together, we
have a responsibility to do better.
Many of the countries that will speak here today
generously support mediation and peace negotiation
efforts. But we need all of those countries to also
advocate for the full deployment and use of women with
tremendous skill that are committed to the agenda. We
need them to demand women’s direct and meaningful
participation in all phases of peace talks.
Women’s absence from peace tables is still
commonplace, but it no longer goes unnoticed. Partners
that support peace talks also do not include women, or
are represented by very few women. This is not from
lack of trying on our part. As we speak, in all ongoing
peace processes, fewer than 8 per cent of agreements
reached contained gender-related provisions, down
from 39 per cent in 2015. In the recent past, even
where agreements include specific gender provisions,
ensuring implementation remains a challenge.
The 2016 peace accord in Colombia is a landmark
agreement, and great efforts went into putting it
together. But a recent analysis shows that around half
of the gender-related provisions in the agreement have
not been initiated and that gender provisions are being
implemented at an even slower rate than the rest.
I have some promising news, however, and I
recognize that it is not nice to give such a gloomy
report. The independent assessment identified areas
where progress is under way, such as in the stronger
integration of gender considerations in preventing
violent extremism. However, we still face challenges
when national counter-terrorism legislation often
adversely affects women’s civil society organizations.
The Secretary-General’s report urges Member States to
review such legislation and to take action.
UN-Women has just supported two research
projects conducted by Monash University in four
countries — Indonesia, the Philippines, Bangladesh
and Libya. In all four, hostile sexist attitudes towards

S/PV. 8649

women were the factors most strongly associated with
support for violent extremism — far more than age,
degrees of religiosity, level of education or employment.
That is a significant finding, especially because the
vast majority of studies on terrorism ignore gender. We
appreciate the close collaboration among the agencies
that are working in this area and are grateful for the
Member States that collaborate with us.
In addition, the number of countries that have
adopted a national action plan on women and peace
and security increased by 50 per cent since 2015. We
welcome and applaud those countries. But that still
represents fewer than half of the countries in the world,
and only 22 per cent of all plans included a budget at the
time of adoption. We urge countries with new plans to
make sure that they include budgets.
Women’s economic empowerment is key to
sustaining peace. Women need to be given priority
in efforts to respond to crises and to plan for peace.
Without shelter, food, support for education and health
needs, woman’s lives continue to be frozen in lowintensity warfare. Discrimination against women and
their access to assets and productive resources violate
women’s human rights and leave them vulnerable to
extreme poverty, gender-based violence and trafficking
in all countries. Family members are also at risk of
being drawn into terrorism and of being in harm’s way.
The marginalization of women in decision-making
and in the political economy of foreign aid,
reconstruction and economic revitalization is part
of the problem that the Security Council can solve,
and together we can move the needle. In fragile and
conflict-affected countries, only 4 in 10 women are in
paid work, compared with 7 in 10 men. Creating work
opportunities for women is therefore an important
contribution. In countries experiencing prolonged
crisis, such as Afghanistan, Syria and Yemen, the
gender employment gap is 50 or 60 points. In contrast,
in 2016 and 2017 only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid
to fragile and conflict-affected situations went directly
to women’s organizations.
Investing directly in women is also critical. In 2018,
total world military expenditure reached $1.8 trillion.
Some of that money contributed to deepening crises
in the same fragile countries that we are meant to be
helping through resolution 1325 (2000). It is important
to say that the overall share of aid promoting gender
equality in some form has increased to 42.6 per cent,

19-338097/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

which is higher than ever before, but less than 5 per cent
of it goes to programmes with the primary objective of
improving gender equality and women’s empowerment.
This support comes from a small group of countries,
which we can really expand.
In the United Nations, only a few entities have
to date committed to achieving minimum targets on
allocation and expenditure on gender equality. The
Peacebuilding Fund remains the bright spot thanks to
the consistent championing by senior leadership and
to collaborative efforts that we can all learn from.
The Secretary-General’s report on women and peace
and security urges United Nations entities next year
to benchmark targets and put in place accountability
mechanisms. The Security Council’s active support in
that direction would go a long way to help.
I would further ask members to address the issue
of the participation and inclusion of women in all
peace processes, as well as the inclusion of women in
uniformed armed services. This is one of the important
components of resolution 1325 (2000), and Council
members can also do more to help us enforce and
implement it.
As I said last year, the United Nations and Member
States should not be giving support to peace processes
that exclude women, because if they take a stand on this
matter things will change. We know that such processes
have limited chances of bringing durable peace. It
is therefore important that the Council intervene
decisively. Choosing to exclude women therefore means
that we may be choosing to compromise our collective
desire for lasting peace.
Tomorrow, most representatives here will be at
the global forum for survivors of conflict-related
violence, led by Nobel laureates Denis Mukwege
and Nadia Murad and my colleague Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Thanks to many efforts
undertaken during the past decade, this is no longer
history’s greatest silence. We know women are not just
victims. They continue to lead and to stand up, even
after terrible experiences. Nadia is living testimony
to the resilience of women who defy all odds, and I
applaud her contribution — which has been made in
partnership with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the International Criminal Court,
Justice Rapid Response and others — to ensuring the
thorough investigation of crimes and that these crimes
8/33

29/10/2019

are documented. I want to make sure that as we move
forward and prepare for the twentieth anniversary
celebration next year, we can close some of the gaps
within the year ahead of us.
In a few minutes, the Council will be listening
to women’s voices and stories. Alaa Salah from the
Sudan is one of the many women who are leading the
change in her country. She represents the young women
of courage. The Council will hear about Congolese
women describing the political representation barriers
they faced in the lead-up to the country’s first election
in 2011. Council members will also hear about South
Sudanese women and have listened in the past to
Afghani, Libyan and Yemeni women demanding
respect for women’s rights and for the meaningful
participation of women in negotiations and decisions
that will determine the future of their countries.
On International Women’s Day just a few months
ago, Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial, one of the members
of the South Sudan Women’s Coalition, told the
Council that,
“We need not just to be consulted, but to be heard.
When we raise concerns about tensions mounting
or the need for services, we speak from an informed
position” (S/PV.8480, p.6).
There is lot of trust in and expectations for the
Council, and I hope that we will be able to rise to
the occasion. Between now and October 2020, on the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), let us
take big steps to close the gap. That is what women are
asking us to do. There is a lot we can do even in this
year. The Council’s action can move the needle and set
the example of political courage — not just the courage
of people who have much less to give and much more to
lose. All of us together can take action.
The President: I thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop: Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, and through you the Republic of South
Africa, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October as we commemorate
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). I thank you for
inviting me, as Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission, to brief the Council
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in Africa. I convey the best wishes of
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

Commission Chairperson, His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, for a successful women and peace and
security month under your leadership.
Twelve days ago, the AU Peace and Security
Council held its annual open session on women, peace
and security. The institutionalization of this issue is
a clear indication of the attention that the Peace and
Security Council accords to the women and peace
and security agenda. Indeed, the Peace and Security
Council adopted the Continental Results Framework for
Reporting and Monitoring on the Implementation of the
Women, Peace and Security Agenda in May 2018, with
the aim of supporting member States in accelerating the
implementation of the agenda and of making the report
part of the global discourse on advancing the agenda.
During the open session, I presented the first report of
the Chairperson, based on data provided by member
States using the Continental Results Framework. The
Executive Director of UN-Women was also present and
addressed the Council on that occasion. Highlights of
the report include the following.
Africa continues to lead in the adoption of
national action plans on women, peace and security.
There are presently 25 countries in Africa that have
adopted national action plans, constituting 30 per cent
of all such plans globally. In addition, South Africa
organized recently a validation forum and I am sure
it will soon adopt its own national action plan. The
recent development of national action plans in Africa
incorporated lessons learnt from the first-generation
national action plans. The lessons include the security
sector ministries taking a leading role and the
recognition of sector-wide responsibility in financing
the agenda.
Despite the existence of advanced instruments,
implementation continues to lag behind. Out of the
25 countries, only 7 have reached the 30 per cent
threshold of women’s participation in parliament and
only two have reached parity at cabinet level. Violence
against women continues unabated, including the use
of women and girls as suicide bombers, as seen in the
Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. Female peacekeepers
require gender-sensitive strategies for deployment, as
evidenced in yesterday’s presentation by South Africa
on the plight of women who have been deployed in
peacekeeping missions but who are resilient and still
want to contribute to building peace in our continent.

S/PV. 8649

The report calls on Member States to use the
Continental Results Framework, identify gaps, build
on good practices and scale up actions, especially in
the light of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), the AU Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
and Beijing +25 forum. Among key practices is the
inclusion of women at the peace table. When we take
a look, we see that they are not present. When we
look at the discussion concerning the Sudan currently
under way in Juba, we see that women are missing.
That is why the AU Commission has established the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, commonly known as FemWise, to enhance
the role of women in mediation at all levels, including
the community level. Women mediators have been
deployed to AU liaison offices in conflict-affected
countries. At the same time, the AU Gender Peace
and Security Programme is deploying gender advisers
to enhance capacity on gender equality and women
empowerment.
As for strengthening the nexus between peace and
development, the AU and the United Nations, with the
support of Germany and UN-Women — and I thank
my sister Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka — have joined
forces to build a movement of women leaders, the
African Women Leaders Network, to play a decisive
role in the transformation of the continent, in line with
the Agenda 2063 of the AU and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Through joint solidarity
missions, the AU and the United Nations have adopted
an action-oriented approach with the aim of listening
to women at the community level and bringing their
actions to the forefront. Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed led our delegation. That was the
third time we went to the field. She will brief the
Security Council in the coming days on the outcomes
of the latest mission to the Horn of Africa that visited
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.
Community-supported peace operations is an area
in which I think we need to do more. The African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia, which I
was with last week, has provided technical expertise
to the Government of Somalia on drafting its national
gender policy and community watch programmes for
the prevention of violent extremism.
Time does not permit me to talk about
implementation and what we have found at the country,
regional and continental levels, but let me conclude my
remarks with a few recommendations.

19-338099/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Member States need to scale up the adoption of
national action plans for the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda, with a clear
accountability framework. We need to measure through
data collection and the sharing of good practices;
otherwise, we cannot know what we have achieved.
With a view to the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) next year, the African Union Commission
aims, together with the United Nations, to have at least
50 per cent of United Nations Member States adopt a
national action plan, so that we can follow effective
implementation on the ground.
Women’s organizations experience the realities of
women and girls in our various countries on a daily
basis. They take care of survivors, providing legal
services, psychological support and economic recovery.
They are there to restore the dignity of women who
have been affected by conflict. It is crucial to provide
support to those organizations in working hand in hand
with Member States, the United Nations and the AU
in addressing the gaps identified in the delivery of the
women and peace and security agenda.
In a recent intergenerational dialogue on women’s
leadership held in Kenya, we heard the demands of
young people, like Alaa Salah, for a bigger say and role
in building peace in Africa. We need to hear them, we
need to include them, and we need to let them take the
lead on women and peace and security.
Let me again thank the Secretary-General for
supporting the women and peace and security agenda.
He came to Africa in January and he supports FemWise
and the African Leadership Forum. He has the support
of his brother Moussa Faki Mahamat. Let me also
recognize Norway, the United States, Ireland and South
Korea, just to name a few that have been supporting
our agenda, AU member States — for instance South
Africa — as well as UN-Women, the United Nations
Development Programme, and the United Nations
Population Fund, among others.
No more words. The time to act is now.
The President: I thank Ms. Diop for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ekomo.
Ms. Ekomo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Central African women leaders for peace, I would
like first of all to extend my sincere congratulations
to the Government of South Africa on assuming the
presidency of this organ and to thank, in particular,
10/33

29/10/2019

the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, who
kindly gave us the opportunity to make the voice of
Central African women and girls heard in the Chamber.
The Central African Republic has a national plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, women have been excluded from the Central
African peace initiative from the outset, despite the
many pleas made by leaders of women’s organizations
to national authorities, guarantors and facilitators.
Those who were invited to finalize the talks between the
Government and the armed groups did not have access
to the negotiating table. Nevertheless, women have
persisted in their advocacy, resulting in United Nations
and African Union support for efforts to disseminate
in the prefecture capitals the peace initiative and the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, and to integrate women into
implementation and monitoring mechanisms.
However, the women who are involved in the
monitoring of the peace agreement were not involved in
the negotiations. Their involvement in implementation
monitoring mechanisms does not yet give them the
right to participate in assessments or decision-making
on policy and strategy. The peace agreement signed by
the Government and the 14 armed groups is a political
document that includes concessions on the part of the
leadership to assuage the armed groups.
Its implementation is not living up to the
expectations of the population. In particular, women and
other victims of armed groups find it hard to understand
how their tormenters are officially promoted within
the country’s ruling class without any legal vetting as
to their eligibility under the principle of impunity, as
recommended by the National Forum of Bangui. The
justice that the population yearns for is therefore being
sorely tested. The Special Criminal Court has clearly
been weakened in carrying out its mandate, and the
same concern applies to the Commission on Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, were it to
become operational.
In the name of the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the social dimension seems to have
been relegated to the background, because in prioritizing
the interests of armed groups, all the policymakers
forget that there are people who are suffering; that fires
in villages have led to the deaths of hundreds of people
and the displacement of thousands of families and left
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

many others without roofs over their heads, living in
inhumane conditions; that women and girl victims of
rape and sexual violence have been abandoned without
assistance; that hundreds of young people have been
tortured and are living with disabilities; that women
can no longer farm their fields; that heads of households
can no longer carry out their daily tasks, as they are
all afraid of being abducted, tortured, raped and even
killed; and that young women, who are living in hiding
for fear of being abducted and raped, can no longer go
to school.
Seven months after the signing of the Political
Agreement for Peace, we are seeing 60 to 70 violations
committed every week by armed groups, according to
the report of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic. The armed
groups remain very active on the ground. They
are preventing the deployment of State authorities,
imposing hardship on the population and continuing to
procure heavy weapons. In general, the fulfilment of
their obligations as set out in the Political Agreement
for Peace is showing extremely weak progress.
The worrisome situation that I just described
requires overhauling strategies for implementing the
Political Agreement. To that end, the Government
must be encouraged to create the necessary conditions
to foster positive inclusive dialogue that will promote
genuine ownership of the Agreement and diffuse the
already discernible social and political tensions in
the country.
In terms of perspective, I would respectfully call
the Council’s attention to the following challenges. The
holding of peaceful elections in 2020 and 2021 will be
a significant challenge for lasting peace in the country
and will not be possible without the support of women.
Within the framework of civil society organizations,
we have begun to train women to be both voters and
candidates, but the majority of women live in remote
areas of the country that are the strongholds of armed
groups and therefore difficult to access. Re-establishing
security in remote areas of the country is urgently
needed so that the elections can be effective.
There is a constant need to strengthen cooperation
with civil society to take into account the real
aspirations of women and girls, rather than prioritizing
institutional partnership, which does not always ensure
that the assistance delivered to populations is efficient.
Indeed, there is a genuine gap between the commitments

S/PV. 8649

made by partners and the Government with regard to
the universal vision for the participation of women in
the peace process. The absence of a comprehensive and
coherent support programme for women’s civil society
organizations in a country in conflict where everything
must be done to restore women’s dignity and hope is a
relevant indicator.
Moreover, the challenges faced are many and can
be clearly seen across the pillars set of resolution 1325
(2000) — conflict prevention and the protection of
civilians. In this regard, cooperation between women
and young people was created through the contribution
of those groups to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015). This momentum for joint
actions needs to be underpinned not by sporadic support,
but as part of a long-term programme framework to
change mindsets and thereby achieve a lasting impact.
With respect to gender-based violence, the
situation is well known and documented with alarming
indicators, but there remains an absence of an expanded
programme for providing psychosocial support for
either victims or communities that continue to live
with their traumas. Furthermore, support for victims
and prevention initiatives need to be bolstered in the
provinces. To this end, it is necessary to increase the
number of women Blue Helmets deployed on the ground
in the communities.
With regard to providing assistance to conflictaffected populations, the Central African Republic
has more than 4.5 million inhabitants, and a half of
the country’s population is in need of emergency
assistance, according to reports from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the Central
African Republic. The majority of displaced persons
say that they feel abandoned to their tragic fate without
the necessary assistance to enable them to restore their
human dignity. Frustration is increasing on a daily
basis and could generate social tensions.
As one displaced woman in the town of Bria
in the north-western part of the Central African
Republic asked,
“How can I go and speak of peace when I am not
even living in peace — after the murder of my
son, the burning down of my house that made
me lose everything I owned, and the rape of my
daughter — and I am receiving no assistance to
rebuild my livelihood after those tragedies?”

19-3380911/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Indeed, thousands of families simply want to receive
a minimum amount of assistance to return home and
begin a new life.
The establishment of the national chapter of the
African Women Leaders Network (AWLN) allowed
for the establishment of a coordination framework for
all the leaders of women’s organizations in the Central
African Republic. These women leaders organized
joint missions to all of the provinces of the country
and saw first-hand the suffering facing populations in
conflict areas. The women leaders who are members of
AWLN must work in their civil society role as partners
for the implementation of urgently needed assistance
programmes for women in remote areas.
With regard to the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, the participation of women remains
limited to raising awareness of the Agreement itself,
but there are substantial difficulties in terms of
implementation owing to the active presence on the
ground of the signatory armed groups. In such an
environment, it is important to rapidly come up with
a strategy allowing for women’s leadership to play
a substantial role in calming tensions, promoting a
cessation of hostilities and initiating dialogue among
the parties to the conflict.
As part of cooperation with civil society, it is
important to develop a more strategic approach to be able
to capitalize on the investments by partners in the area
of training by involving civil society in negotiations,
mediation and lobbying. Such collaboration should also
allow for balance and consistency to be established
between the national tools and the operational agendas
of partners in the country and also take into account the
level of financing needed for civil society actors.
Lastly, I remain convinced that such collaboration,
if it is indeed to be effective, will make it easier to
monitor performance indicators, promote the ownership
of initiatives by the population and consolidate the
effectiveness of assistance to the Central African
Republic in terms of peace and security.
In conclusion, we women leaders of civil society
working on questions of peace and security in the
Central African Republic need to work more closely
with partners to alleviate the suffering of the population,
including women and young girls.
12/33

29/10/2019

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Ekomo for her briefing.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to Ms. Salah.
Ms. Salah (spoke in Arabic): I am honoured to be
here in the Security Council from the Sudan, which is
today full of hope for peace, freedom and justice. My
name is Alaa Salah. I am 22 years old and I grew up
in Khartoum. Before the revolution, I was a student
of architectural engineering. I did not grow up around
politics, but in an ordinary middle-class family. My
mother is a designer, and my father owns a construction
company. As I would walk to university every day, I
would see my fellow citizens around me struggling to
obtain food and medicine, half of the country living
in poverty. How could I not become political? Our
struggle for bread became a struggle for our freedom
in December 2018.
I stand before the Council today to tell my story,
which is one shared by thousands of women and men
of the Sudan who left their homes, schools and daily
work to take to the streets and face bullets and tear gas,
risking their lives and their livelihoods to demand the
end of the dictatorship. My journey here was forged by
countless Sudanese women who fought for peace and
justice in our communities for decades, well before we
arrived at this important moment for the future of the
Sudan. I would not be here if it were not for them.
I address the Council as a member of MANSAM,
a coalition of Sudanese women’s civil and political
groups, and on behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security. My statement will focus on
two key issues: first, women’s meaningful participation
and the protection of women’s rights; and, secondly,
accountability and disarmament.
Women of all parts of the Sudan have played an
important role at pivotal moments in our history — in
opposing colonial rule and fighting for the right to vote
as well as in recent struggles against the dictatorship of
Omar Al-Bashir. It also took extraordinary courage to
fight for basic rights — to wear trousers, to leave their
hair uncovered, to voice their opinions on social media
without fear and to share a meal with male friends. All
of those acts were criminalized by the former regime’s
public-order laws. Those laws were designed to quash
dissent and target women, particularly from the most
marginalized and working-class communities, such as
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

tea- and food-sellers, whose working tools could be
confiscated without explanation, who faced fines and
who could be jailed.
Women and young people were at the forefront
of the recent protests, often outnumbering men and
accounting for 70 per cent of protesters. I was one of
many women chanting, singing and walking with my
fellow male and female citizens through the streets.
Women led resistance committees and sit-ins, planned
protests and disobeyed curfews, even in the midst of a
declared state of emergency that left them vulnerable
to security forces. Many were tear-gassed, threatened,
assaulted or thrown in jail without any charge or a fair
trial. Both women and men also faced sexual harassment
and were raped. Women also faced retaliation from
their own families for participating in the protests.
Women served as key members of the Forces of
Freedom and Change and helped shape coalitions such
as MANSAM and an initiative against the oppression of
women. As part of the Forces of Freedom and Change,
women helped to develop a road map for the Sudan’s
transition from military to civilian rule.
However, despite that visible role, despite their
courage and their leadership, women have been
side-lined in the formal political process in the months
following the revolution. Even in the past, when we
achieved a seat at the table — women represented 31 per
cent of parliamentarians in 2018 — they were often
without real influence and left out of decision-making
circles. Despite women standing ready to actively
contribute to the political negotiations that began in
April between the Military Council and the Forces of
Freedom and Change, only one woman participated in
the talks, and only after strong advocacy by women’s
groups. Now, unsurprisingly, women’s representation
in the current governance structure falls far below our
demand of 50 per cent. We are sceptical that the 40 per
cent quota on the still-to-be formed legislative council
will be met.
For the past 30 years, women’s bodies and rights
were policed, and the backlash was swift and violent
when patriarchal norms were challenged. Women
activists, politicians, human-rights defenders and
peacebuilders continue to be systematically attacked
and targeted, including through sexual violence, which
has forced many women out of the country entirely.
Moreover, women’s organizations are on the front
line of meeting basic needs and protecting rights

S/PV. 8649

in conflict-affected areas, but security restrictions
and obstructive administrative requirements prevent
critical work from being carried out, in areas such
as Blue Nile and the Nuba Mountains in particular.
Humanitarian access to Jebel Marra, a conflict area in
Darfur notorious for the routine use of mass rape by
security forces to terrorize women and girls, continues
to be a major challenge to the provision of life-saving
services for those communities.
Given women’s pivotal role in working towards
peace and development, promoting human rights and
providing humanitarian assistance to communities in
need, there is no excuse for us not to have an equal seat
at every single table. If we are not represented at the
peace table, and if we do not have a meaningful voice
in Parliament, then our rights will not be guaranteed,
discriminatory and restrictive laws will remain
unchanged and the cycle of instability and violence
will continue. After decades of struggle and everything
we risked to peacefully end Al-Bashir’s dictatorship,
gender inequality is not, and never will be, acceptable
to the women and girls of the Sudan. I hope it is equally
unacceptable to the members of the Security Council.
The Sudan is one of the most highly militarized
countries in the world. We do not need more firearms.
Yet many Governments continue to sell weapons that
directly contribute to and perpetuate conflict, ongoing
violations of human rights and forced displacement.
The widespread availability of weapons in my country
is one of the factors fuelling violence and insecurity for
all people, including women and girls.
As members of the Council are well aware,
accountability and access to justice have been all but
absent in my country. The existing discrimination
and inequality women face, coupled with conflict and
violence over decades, have resulted in women being
subjected to a wide range of human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence on an epic
scale. Those crimes contributed to the indictment of our
ousted President for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. But violence against women did not
end with the end of Al-Bashir’s reign. As recently as
early September, seven women living in the Shangil
Tobaya camp for displaced persons in Darfur were
raped by armed men. Those women join the thousands
of women and girls who have borne the brunt of the
violence carried out across the country. Now women
are saying, “Enough”. It is time for accountability and
justice for all crimes committed before, during and

19-3380913/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

29/10/2019

after the revolution. This is the least that can be done to
honour those killed or who suffered atrocities.

law, including to perpetrate sexual and gender-based
violence, in line with the Arms Trade Treaty.

The strength of the revolution came from the
representation of diverse voices from across the
country. That inclusion is now integral to the legitimacy
of the transition process. Unless the political process
reflects the diversity of our society, women’s civil
society groups, resistance groups, ethnic and religious
minorities, those who have been displaced and people
with disabilities, then no agreement will reflect our
collective aspirations. In conclusion, I urge the Security
Council and the international community to take the
following five steps.

In conclusion, I would like to leave the Council
with a slogan that rang out during our recent protests:
“Freedom, peace and justice — revolution is the
people’s choice”.

First, press the transitional Government, the Forces
of Freedom and Change and movements of armed
struggle to support the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women. We call for at least 50 per cent
representation of Sudanese women across all peace
processes, in current negotiations and at all levels of
Government. We urge the international community to
support our demands in all its engagements with the
transitional Government.
Secondly, actively monitor the situation in Darfur
and halt the scaling down of the peacekeeping mission
until the security situation stabilizes, the protection
of civilians — including those in internally displaced
camps — can be ensured and the conditions for safe and
voluntary returns are met.
Thirdly, support accountability and end impunity.
The transitional Government must fully support an
independent international fact-finding mission to
investigate and hold to account all perpetrators of
human rights violations, including sexual and genderbased violence. Omar Al-Bashir must immediately be
transferred to the International Criminal Court. The
transitional Government must ratify the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women without any reservations.
Fourthly, support civil society and ensure that
women human rights defenders are able to carry out
their work unhindered and without fear of reprisals.
Stop the use of lethal and excessive force against male
and female protesters.
Fifthly, stop fuelling conflict. We implore all
countries to stop exporting arms to our country when
there is a risk that they will be used in violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights
14/33

The President: I thank Ms. Salah for her briefing,
and I thank the guests present here for their applause.
I had been wondering whether people applaud at the
United Nations, because I am a stranger to this organ.
I am therefore very pleased to see that there is a human
element present. I notice that many participants are
looking at their cell phones as the discussion continues.
I hope that they are tweeting that they support all the
demands that have been put to them this morning.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.
My name is Naledi Pandor, and I wish to begin by
acknowledging the Security Council for its adoption of
resolution 2493 (2019), just a few moments ago. We are
absolutely thrilled at the unanimity that was indicated
in that adoption. I am told that that is a welcome return
to consensus in the Council, and we are extremely
pleased at that.
I wish to thank everybody here for participating in
our discussion today. In particular, I wish to thank all
those who provided us with such significant briefings
in the course of our deliberations. As we have heard,
women from diverse contexts across the world continue
to face obstacles and resistance. They continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflict, and their personal, economic,
civil and political security is persistently undermined.
Women’s efforts to ensure their participation
in peace processes continue not to receive a positive
response. If we fail to address the barriers in the next 20
years and beyond, then we will have to face the fact that
we are falling far short of our ambitions to realize the
objectives that we set as an international community.
Together, the United Nations, Member States, regional
organizations, civil society and other actors supporting
peace processes must hold each other accountable to
maintain and go beyond current progress in the area of
women and peace and security and its agenda by 2020.
Everybody’s participation today in this important
meeting confirms the significance of the women and
peace and security agenda. The myriad and complex
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

conflicts in the world serve to underscore the need to
reinforce the implementation of that agenda and its
related actions. Resolution 1325 (2000), which was
adopted 19 years ago in October, and its subsequent
resolutions underpin the women and peace and security
international normative framework.
We in South Africa view the women and peace and
security agenda as a means for women to mediate in
conflict situations and as an essential tool for ending
the use of force as a means of settling disputes. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800) that we
have before us provides us with a useful overview of
the successes and gaps in the implementation of that
agenda. It gives us concrete recommendations that
can move us from rhetoric to action, so that we can
effectively implement the commitments that we have
set ourselves. Women are tired of us talking. Women
want action. Women want change.
It is within that context that we in South Africa
saw it fit to present a draft resolution (S/2019/841)
focused on the full implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. Resolution 2493 (2019) now
recognizes that, although there has been progress, there
is still a great deal that we must do.
As we exchange views on how to strengthen
implementation, particularly as we move towards the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), it is also imperative for us as the international
community to take into account the findings and the
recommendations of the 2015 Global Study on the
Implementation of United Nations Security Council
resolution 1325 — the study commissioned by this very
organ needs to be taken into account. We believe that
some of those recommendations from 2015 are still
relevant in terms of elaborating practical and attainable
deliverables. It is also for that reason that we in South
Africa have advocated for its inclusion, in order to
embolden the message on the full implementation of the
agenda outlined in resolution 1325 (2000).
Our deliverables must be visible and discernible.
They must be clearly aimed at ensuring the meaningful
participation of women at all levels of peace processes;
increasing the number of women in uniformed and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations;
investing in women as peacebuilders, such as in
mediation and negotiation; protecting the human rights
of women, particularly sexual and reproductive health

S/PV. 8649

rights; and advancing accountability for heinous crimes
such as sexual violence.
South Africa has been a proponent of the women
and peace and security agenda since its inception. We
remain committed to implementing the agenda so that it
can support and contribute to silencing the guns across
the world, as well as work towards saving succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, as we committed to
do at the founding of this very Organization. Our country
has been engaged in training women across all of these
areas. We are therefore optimistic that operationalizing
the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediators
Networks will advance some of these objectives. We
are not speaking empty rhetoric when we refer to the
participation of women — we have women here from
our various armed forces in South Africa and our police
service who have served in peacekeeping missions.
They are here to observe our continued commitment
to serving areas of the world in which there is conflict.
I would like to ask those women in uniform to stand.
They have served and therefore deserve recognition. I
know that I am breaching all diplomatic rules, but it is
unfortunate that they appointed a novice as Minister for
Foreign Affairs.
On peacekeeping, South Africa will continue to
ensure the meaningful participation of women in peace
support operations. Currently, our national defence
force comprises 30 per cent women. That has enabled
South Africa, as a troop-contributing country to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, to deploy more females
on the front lines of armed conflicts. The South African
contingent of the Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is composed of
14.5 per cent women, and the officer commanding the
South African force is a woman. During our side event
here at the United Nations on women in peacekeeping,
which was held yesterday afternoon, these women
shared experiences on how to achieve the goals we have
set to increase the representation of women in peace
support operations. We are pleased that the United
Nations uniformed personnel gender-parity strategy
clearly indicates the quotas and time frames that must
be reached to increase the number of women deployed
as military, police, corrections and justice personnel. As
a supporter of collective approaches to address issues
that affect us all, South Africa will continue to actively
participate in existing global initiatives, such as the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network; the

19-3380915/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations; and the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
We find these initiatives useful in that they also serve
as instruments to raise awareness on the importance of
the women and peace and security agenda.
As I conclude, let us agree to commit today to
continue to advance the cause of women and of peace
and security and the agenda thereto by ensuring that
we implement the recommendations and guidelines
emanating from existing resolutions. Our contributions
all indicate that we know what must be done — perhaps
we need to devote a sharper focus on why we are failing
to act in pursuit of agreed objectives. Once we have
identified the real barriers, we will probably then begin
to make greater progress.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other Council
members who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany.
Ms. Müntefering (Germany): Women’s rights are
human rights, and human rights are women’s rights.
That is what we are fighting for and that is why we are
here today. This is also at the centre of my Government’s
foreign policy.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for their comprehensive briefings.
We appreciate the focus of Ms. Diop on her work in
Africa. I want to thank Ms. Ekomo for her important
work with FemWise-Africa and the African Women
Leaders Network. I would also like to express my special
appreciation to Ms. Salah, who came from Khartoum to
give her testimony to the Security Council today.
Knowing the situation on the ground is the soul
of the service. Briefings by representatives from
civil society also ground our discussions here in the
Security Council, as they bring the much-needed
insight and expertise from the grass-roots level.
Representatives from civil society, including human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and local activists,
especially women, need to be an integral part of the
Security Council’s discussions.
Let me assure the representatives of civil society
and all like-minded Member States that Germany will
remain by their side in their endeavours. We remain
16/33

29/10/2019

by the side of women human rights defenders, women
peacebuilders, civil society actors and activists who
work every day — and often even risk their lives — to
make the full, effective and meaningful participation
of women, their full empowerment and respect for
women and their rights a reality. That is why, in April,
we invited a record number of 11 women and two men
representing civil society to brief the Council. The
outcome, in our view, was inspiring and helpful. We
hope to walk down that road together with all those
here today.
Resolution 1325 (2000), as you mentioned, Madam
President, was adopted 19 years ago. The adoption itself
changed not only the way the Council works but also how
the United Nations and the international community
approach peace and security issues. We all know that
it constituted long overdue recognition of the important
role that women play in creating peaceful societies.
There is no lasting peace without women. There is no
lasting peace without bringing representatives of half
of the population to the table and safeguarding their
involvement. Most important, perhaps, the involvement
of women changes the process itself by changing its
dynamics. That is one reason that peace treaties tend to
last much longer when women participate.
Today, more than a generation later, we are
taking stock of what has been achieved. We have to
acknowledge that, while progress has been made,
essential parts of the agenda remain neglected and
underfunded. Even today, there are very few women
negotiators and mediators. Very few peace processes
benefit from the meaningful participation of women.
Women and children are still the most affected by
sexual and gender-based violence. Survivors of
sexual violence receive little or no psychosocial care,
counselling or health care, including services regarding
sexual and reproductive health and rights. That which
could save the lives of survivors is often not available
owing to limited funding or ideological boundaries.
We want a world without these barriers — a world
where women and men participate equally politically,
socially and in economic life. I call on all fellow
members of the Security Council, all States Members
and the United Nations system as a whole to finally
fully implement what the Council has agreed upon 10
times since the year 2000. We made a promise to our
generation and to all those that will follow, namely,
nothing less than the full, effective and meaningful
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8649

participation of women in all aspects of peace
and security.

representation. Let me briefly underline three points
that I deem critical in their approach.

We
demand
accountability
for
its
full implementation. In April, Germany and the
United Kingdom, together with UN-Women, invited
Member States to pledge their renewed commitment in
implementing the full women and peace and security
agenda before its twentieth anniversary, next October,
and we will follow up on it. We all need to work harder
to translate our words into actions. Germany is already
implementing 10 of our 12 commitments and has fully
completed the implementation of three.

First, there is a need for capacity-building to
enhance women’s qualitative participation. Secondly,
a bottom-up approach is needed, from the grass-roots
level to the local and national levels. I particularly
welcome the establishment of the Group of Friends;
to date eight national chapters have been established,
with the target of reaching 25 before the end of 2020.
Thirdly, we must achieve the integration of youth in this
work through dialogue between young and experienced
women leaders, for example.

In Afghanistan, like in any other country, lasting
peace and stability can be achieved only if women’s
voices are both heard and considered. In the framework
of the intra-Afghan dialogue, which we co-hosted
together with Qatar in Doha this July, we brought
Afghan women and other stakeholders of Afghan
society together, including the Taliban. Even a tense
security situation and threats to their lives could not
prevent Afghan women from exercising their rights.
They have our full support.

The countdown to the twentieth anniversary for our
common agenda starts today. The time is now, and time
can be on our side if we make best use of it.

In April, under the German presidency, the Security
Council managed to adopt the ninth resolution on the
women and peace and security agenda. Resolution
2467 (2019) is a major step forward for the prevention
and fight against the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence. For the first time, the Security Council places
a clear focus on the rights and needs of survivors of
sexual violence. Delivering justice and accountability
is key for survivors of sexual violence.
In the context of Iraq and Syria, criminal
prosecution of crimes committed by Da’esh is a priority
for my Germany. My country has also welcomed more
than 1,100 Yazidi refugees. Our Government is well
ahead in its proceedings against members of Islamic
State and the Syrian regime.
Last but not least, allow me to make some remarks on
behalf of the 61 member States of the Group of Friends of
the African Women Leaders Network, which Germany
proudly co-chairs with Ghana. Since its establishment,
in 2017, the African Women Leaders Network (AWLN)
has brought women’s leadership and their participation
in peace, security and sustainable development in
Africa to the fore. The meaningful participation of
women in peace, security and peacebuilding processes
requires moving beyond the numbers to real qualitative

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for coming here today. I also thank you and
the German Minister for creating an environment
where over two thirds of the people sitting around the
table are women. That is fantastic, a taste of things to
come. I hope you will visit us often.
I also wanted to congratulate you, Madam, for
South Africa’s fantastic record, with that 30 per cent
figure you gave us and your military colleagues, sitting
in the Chamber. That is incredibly impressive. I thank
you for your commitment to carry on producing women
for peacekeeping operations. The United Kingdom
joins you in that commitment. Sadly, we are only at
17 per cent, so you have the match on us. But I think,
nevertheless, there is more that all of us can do in
that regard.
As other speakers have said, this is a timely debate,
a year ahead of the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). It is a good opportunity for us to reflect on
the achievements and challenges in fully implementing
the resolution. But as we have heard from all the
fantastic briefers today and as the Executive Director
of UN-Women eloquently made clear, we must raise our
ambition, we must commit to even more radical change
and we need to ask ourselves, 20 years and 10 resolutions
later, why is there still such a stark implementation gap
when all the evidence suggests that incorporating the
gender perspective helps achieve sustainable peace
and security?
I think, again, as the Executive Director of UNWomen said, that is a question we need to ask ourselves
all the time as we design any peace process, international

19-3380917/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

mechanism, project or programme. How can we make
sure that we are living up to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)? That obviously means putting a
particular focus on designing inclusive processes from
the outset. Arms and territory should not be the only
reason that negotiators get a seat at the table. That is
not right morally, it is not sensible economically and it
is not sensible or feasible if one wants a just and lasting
peace settlement.
This year the United Kingdom funded Gender
Action for Peace and Security to deliver consultations
with civil society in our nine national action plan
focus countries. We did that because we wanted to
better understand how we can identify, and therefore
overcome, those gaps. We are taking concrete steps
to promote and protect women peace builders and
human rights defenders. We are providing sustainable
multi-year funding. And we are ensuring that we
practice what we preach in terms of representation
and policy.
As I look ahead to 2020, I hope we can have an effort
across the United Nations, not just in New York but right
across the whole United Nations system, both in the
field and in the other Headquarters buildings, to focus
efforts on the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). For our part, we will be particularly working
on increasing women’s meaningful participation in
peace processes, notably in Afghanistan, South Sudan
and Yemen. The German Minister explained very
eloquently what was happening in Afghanistan, so I
will not repeat that. In Yemen, the United Kingdom
is funding a gender adviser and senior inclusion
position within the United Nations Special Envoy’s
Office so that we can build on its work to take forward
women’s participation in the peace process. Ahead of
the November deadline for a transitional Government
in South Sudan, we are continuing to work with local
women’s groups to advocate for an inclusive process.
And, of course, with my very good friend and colleague
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, we have
also set up a women’s group in New York, of which
the United States Ambassador is also a part, to take
forward the participation of women in that very
important peace process.
If I can turn to the United Nations —again, a number
of speakers mentioned the United Nations — obviously,
it has a huge role to play in implementing resolution
1325 (2000). On the nineteenth anniversary, with a year
to go to do something about it, the United Kingdom
18/33

29/10/2019

would like to invite the United Nations to make progress
in three particular areas.
First, establishing a strong formal working
relationship with the Global Alliance of Women
Mediators Network will ensure women mediators
have access to key peace actors and are systematically
considered for deployment as negotiators, mediators
and advisers. Secondly, United Nations processes
need to set the gold standard for inclusion, and United
Nations Special envoys should be held to account on
their commitments to implement resolution 1325
(2000). Finally, we must ensure that United Nationsled peace processes are closely supported by gender
experts to guarantee gender perspectives; this needs
to be integrated throughout the mission. This is not a
desirable; it is not a “nice to have”; it is an intrinsic part
of any successful peace process.
In conclusion, 2020 is not just about resolution 1325
(2000). Next year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Platform for Action, the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, the fifth anniversary
of the youth, peace and security agenda, and 10 years
until the deadline to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals. We cannot let this moment slip through our
fingers. Now is the time to make progress on women
and peace and security as well as gender equality,
and the United Nations and its Member States have a
responsibility to deliver on all of this next year.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): Before
making a formal statement, I want to assure participants
that, although I belong to the group that makes up one
third of those seated at this table, my colleagues and
I will do our best to promote gender equality and the
development of the cause of women.
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres; UN-Women Executive
Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka; and the African
Union Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop, for their respective briefings. We also
listened attentively to the statements made by Ms. Lina
Ekomo and Ms. Alaa Salah.
China welcomes the adoption of resolution 2493
(2019) by the Council and appreciates the efforts made
by the Government and the Permanent Mission of
South Africa.
Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the Security Council agenda on women and peace
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

and security, which coincides with the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The
international community should capitalize on this
opportunity to review and take stock of the achievements
and shortcomings with respect to the women and peace
and security agenda so as to identify the right direction
for future cooperation and strengthen consensus.
China stands ready to actively support and participate
in the comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and work with all parties to
promote the work of the United Nations in the field
of women and peace and security so that it can reach
new heights.
Over the years, thanks to the vigorous efforts of
the Council and all parties concerned, women have
played an increasingly prominent role in the field of
peace and security and become increasingly important
participants in and contributors to peace processes.
More and more women hold senior positions at
United Nations Headquarters and in field missions,
and the number of women peacekeepers and police is
gradually increasing.
In conflict-affected countries, women play an
indispensable role in preventing conflict, conducting
mediation and peacebuilding, and measures to protect
and assist them have been continually improved. The
international community should continue to strengthen
coordination and give full play to the important role
of women in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
First, we should commit to seeking political solutions
to hotspot issues through dialogue and consultation
as well as create an international environment that is
conducive to the survival and development of women.
The Security Council should effectively implement
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, not only by taking
effective measures to provide comprehensive security
and protection to women affected by conflict and
carrying out humanitarian relief work, but also, and
more importantly, by energetically moving forward the
political process and promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes so as to shield women from the suffering
caused by war and conflict and the harm resulting from
terrorism and violent extremism.

S/PV. 8649

It is imperative to secure women’s full right
to participation and decision-making at all stages
of the peace process, while ensuring that women’s
representatives involved in peace processes truly
reflect the voices of women on the ground.
Chinese women peacekeepers and medical teams,
in defiance of all odds and hardships, have been actively
safeguarding peace in conflict areas and helping and
taking care of women and children. They truly are
beautiful sights to behold.
Secondly, we need to address both the symptoms
and root causes of conflicts, effectively strengthen
women’s capacity-building and ensure their effective
participation in the peace process. It is imperative
to help women achieve equal development, escape
poverty and access quality education, which constitute
important conditions for their effective participation
in the peace process. It is essential to actively help
the countries concerned to carry out post-conflict
reconstruction, focusing on capacity-building, and
ensure that development benefits all, not least women.
Support should be provided for gender equality and
women’s empowerment in conflict-affected countries,
and special funds should be earmarked to support
capacity-building projects for women. Over the years,
China has provided substantial support to countries
in conflict in such areas as women’s empowerment,
counter-terrorism and conflict prevention, through
platforms that include as the China-Africa Cooperation
Forum and the China-Arab Cooperation Forum.
China is actively fulfilling the commitments made
by Chinese President Xi Jinping at the 2015 summit,
the Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment: A Commitment to Action, by
providing assistance to women and girls in developing
countries in health, education, vocational and technical
training, and other fields.
Capitalizing on the opportunity presented by the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, we are deepening our
cooperation with all parties in an effort to advance
women’s empowerment.
Thirdly, we need to fully respect the sovereignty
and will of the countries concerned and ensure
that the various United Nations agencies can create
synergies while leveraging their respective strengths.
The countries concerned must shoulder their primary

19-3380919/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

responsibility for the promotion of women’s effective
participation in peace processes and take appropriate
measures in the light of their national conditions.
The relevant bodies, including the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and UN-Women should, in accordance
with their respective mandates, bring their strengths
into full play and intensify their coordination in a joint
effort to promote the important role of women in the
field of peace and security.
Regional and subregional organizations are best
informed and can therefore provide targeted solutions.
The autonomy and unique role of the relevant regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States, should be fully
respected, and policy exchanges should be strengthened
and best practices shared. Non-governmental
organizations are expected to play a constructive role
by observing the laws of the countries concerned,
respecting the ownership of the host Government and
fully consulting with them. China therefore reserves
its position vis-à-vis paragraph 6 of resolution 2493
(2019), which we have just adopted.
China has taken note of the efforts of the Council’s
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security, but notes that the Group is not an official body
of the Council and that the work it does in the name
of the Council must respect the views of all Council
members in a manner consistent with the Security
Council mandate and the rules of procedure, or its
decisions will not be authoritative or morally binding.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to begin by thanking all of the
briefers for their participation and their contribution to
this debate.
Next year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the women and peace and security agenda, which
together we have built over the years. If we look at the
resolutions that have been adopted, we will realize what
we have accomplished. Tomorrow we will celebrate
the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We have established monitoring,
analysis and reporting agreements within the United
Nations. We have created the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, which is a highly
effective instrument that assists the Security Council
in incorporating the aspects of the women and peace
20/33

29/10/2019

and security agenda into the various mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Advisers on issues affecting
women work to promote a gender-sensitive approach in
missions and when liaising with United Nations entities
on the ground.
But while the Council has produced texts and
developed road maps on paper, it is implementation
on the ground that is most important. To cite just one
example, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict has signed
formal agreements with the Governments of the
countries concerned that represent a crucial step in
overcoming the culture of silence surrounding conflictrelated sexual violence. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, that cooperation framework
has enabled the prosecution of more than 1,000 people
since 2013. Those are genuine changes on the ground for
women who have often endured horrific experiences.
Promoting gender equality and the political, social
and economic advancement of women, based on dignity,
respect and empowerment, remains a key element of the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. Two weeks ago, Belgium had the honour to
present a joint statement in the Third Committee on
behalf of 75 countries, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination Against Women. That shows
the strength of the global support for women’s rights,
and while it is important to respect cultural sensitivities,
it is clear to us that no law, tradition, religion, custom
or culture can justify discrimination against women
and girls.
Like some 80 other countries, Belgium is
implementing a national action plan on women and
peace and security, in fact our third such plan. It includes
numerous measures for improving the situation of
women’s rights in conflict areas. Among other things,
in the spirit of seeing our commitments concretely
implemented on the ground, Belgium also supports
FemWise-Africa in training female African mediators.
In April of this year the Council adopted
resolution 2467 (2019), which calls for a survivorcentred approach. That requires political measures and
financial resources. In that regard, Belgium contributed
€2 million to the Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery. We also support the Trust Fund for
Victims established by the International Criminal
Court, which helps ensure women’s access to justice.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

In that context, Belgium underscores the importance of
health, and sexual and reproductive health in particular,
for all women. Medical care is what victims of sexual
violence need most urgently. In addition, my country
will continue its efforts to ensure that women who must
make the difficult choice of having an abortion can
do so.
We thank South Africa for its commitment to the
rights of women and underscore that the fight for a
world in which women can show their ability to lead
peace efforts is a fight that can and should unite us all.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to thank South Africa for
convening today’s open debate and the briefers for their
briefings and recommendations.
Gender equality, the promotion and protection
of women’s rights and women’s full political, social
and economic participation and empowerment play a
key role in preventing and resolving armed conflicts.
Furthermore, the role of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, the prevention of sexual violence and the
protection of women and children is not only necessary,
it is crucial. Alaa Salah and her extraordinary story
provide us with an example of how the voices of young
women carry a powerful and transforming force.
Despite the resolutions that have been adopted
and the indisputable progress that has been made,
we continue to face challenges in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda. Although it
has acquired normative force since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we believe that it is vital to
strengthen the commitments already made by all actors
so as to promote the agenda in their own countries
and advance its full implementation. In that process,
it is fundamental to ensure that we cooperate with
and support the members of civil society, including
women peacebuilders, young women and human rights
defenders, who play a central role in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. However, the threats,
intimidation and violence to which they are subjected
make it a matter of urgency to establish and strengthen
mechanisms to protect them. In Syria’s nascent political
process, thanks to facilitation by the United Nations and
the Security Council, the makeup of its Constitutional
Committee, which is called on to bring about a national
political transformation, is about 30 per cent women.
It is crucial to assure them of a safe and inclusive

S/PV. 8649

environment at this critical juncture in building peace
in Syria.
The Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security has served as a key platform for
improving the implementation of the agenda on the
ground. We remain committed to working to facilitate
a more holistic approach to the work of the Council,
including in its resolutions, reports and field visits. In
countless contexts, gender inequality, exacerbated by
the indiscriminate actions of armed groups and the
proliferation of weapons, constitutes one of the principal
causes of violence, particularly gender-based violence.
We defend the importance of linking the rights
of women to peacebuilding. For that reason, it is vital
to train peacekeepers and to take gender issues into
account in the design, planning, implementation and
evaluation of peace operations, as well as the increase
in the number of women deployed as troops. It is
crucial to include gender-disaggregated data in mission
reports, deploy gender advisers and women’s protection
advisers and strengthen zero-tolerance policies for
acts of sexual violence or discrimination on the basis
of gender.
We commend the work of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department
of Peace Operations and UN-Women and take this
opportunity to praise the initiative to strengthen
cooperation, which enables access to political and
technical skills pertaining to the issue of women and
peace and security, in support of the collective efforts
of the United Nations system.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the Dominican
Republic will continue its efforts to advance the women
and peace and security agenda, in the belief it will
lead to lasting peace and social transformation, with a
view to ending gender inequalities, which undermine
peace and security and fuel grievances, extremism
and conflict.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and his report
(S/2019/800) on women and peace and security. I also
thank all the other briefers for speaking so candidly.
We recognize the candour of the report and share its
sentiment. I would also thank Foreign Minister Pandor
for convening us to discuss the women and peace and
security agenda.

19-3380921/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

When it comes to conflict resolution, women are
indispensable. The truth was reinforced for me by a
gathering of women that I met in Malakal, South Sudan,
following the Security Council’s trip to Juba. These
women have endured and are continuing to endure
more than most of us can possibly imagine. What is so
difficult for such women is not what the terrible secrets
that they carry but the fact that they cannot even share
the simple truths of what has happened to them because
doing so would put their families in danger. One of the
very brave women in Malakal walked for more than two
hours just to sit with us and share in confidence in a
place of safety.
Those women and so many like them have
important matters to express. Are we ensuring that
they have a voice? Are we paying attention when they
speak? The United States believes that the role of
women is so essential that in 2017 we signed a standalone women, peace and security law — the first and
only one of its kind in the world. In 2019, the President
released the United States Strategy on Women, Peace
and Security. The Strategy outlines how we plan to
safeguard women’s participation in peace and security
matters and advance the women and peace and security
agenda domestically and abroad.
Participation begins with having a seat at the table.
How are we doing in that regard? As we speak, in the
United States we are hosting nearly 80 women leaders
to build a cross-cultural understanding on advancing
the women, peace and security agenda. Earlier this
month, the United States hosted a high-level forum on
women and peace and security in the Middle East with
dozens of female participants, including women from
Syria. Those actions align with the aims of resolution
1325 (2000), including mandatory increases in the
representation of women at all decision-making levels
and the provision for the special needs of women and
girls in conflict.
However, ensuring a seat at the table for women
is only the bare minimum. We must also see to it that
women are empowered once they have that seat. That
is why we are so proud to have supported the travel
of Ms. Alan Salah to the United States. Briefings such
as hers strengthen the role of civil society in civic
life and underscore for us the role that women play in
conflict resolution. While we want to empower women
abroad, we must also attend to the issue at home. We
are therefore ensuring that our own national security
institutions are fully prepared to support women. The
22/33

29/10/2019

United States is enhancing training for our diplomats,
development experts and military personnel so that our
public servants actively promote gender equality.
Lastly, our partner Governments must work towards
full equality for women, including girls, and securing
women’s inclusion in all stages of conflict resolution.
The NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security recently and rightfully called on us to defend
the legitimacy of the work of human rights defenders
and their role in promoting peace and security. We read
its open letter to Member States with great interest
and agree that women’s full, effective and meaningful
participation in all aspects of peace and security must
be non-negotiable and safeguarded.
One place where we can heed that call is in the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2019/780), which
stresses the need to address killings of human rights
defenders and social leaders and the specific risk
faced by women leaders. We can also heed the call by
responding to the Secretary-General’s request for more
Member States to create national action plans to advance
the women, peace and security agenda as Colombia is
now doing through a joint partnership with the United
States. The United States is ready to support all Member
States in crafting and implementing women, peace and
security action plans and strategies. But if there is one
lesson that I have drawn from the past few weeks, it is
that the entire Council has a moral obligation to follow
through. So many women in Malakal in South Sudan
and in conflict zones around the world are faithfully
walking the road to peace but they need to know they
are not alone on that road.
I therefore need to ask two final questions. Will we
all commit to ensuring that all women have a voice?
Will we pay attention to what they are telling us?
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We commend South
Africa for convening this important debate. We
welcome the focus of the debate on the implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda and on making
our common commitment a reality. We congratulate
South Africa on its leadership and efforts in bringing
about a new resolution on women, peace and security
(resolution 2493 (2019)). Poland was pleased to support
the resolution adopted today.
The need to include women in peacebuilding,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution has been
gradually acknowledged by the international arena.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8649

The women, peace and security agenda has been
greatly enriched over the past 19 years, including by
highlighting the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, the great benefits of
enhancing the involvement of women in conflict
prevention and disarmament initiatives, as well as
peace processes, and the absolute necessity to tackle
the scourge of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence as a tactic of war. It is also widely understood
that women and men have different experiences and
needs both during and following conflict and that
women have a unique set of challenges related to
peacebuilding and security.

women’s empowerment. It is also a security imperative.
Evidence shows that security efforts are more
successful and sustainable when women contribute to
prevention and early warning, as well as peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict resolution and
rebuilding. The central role of women in many families
and communities affords them a unique vantage point
from which they are able to recognize unusual patterns
of behaviour and signs of impending conflicts, such as
arms mobilization and weapons coaching. Women are
well-placed to detect the early signs of radicalization
because their rights and physical integrity are often the
first targets of fundamentalists.

There is no doubt that despite such achievements,
much remains to be done. There has been a marginal
increase in the number of women involved in formal
peace talks. Consequently, women’s concerns are rarely
on the agenda of peace talks. According to UN-Women,
in recent years women’s participation in negotiating
delegations in peace processes supported or tracked by
the United Nations has not improved. In 2018, out of six
active processes led or jointly led by the United Nations,
women were included in 14 out of 19 delegations.
Between 1992 and 2018, women constituted 13 per cent
of negotiators, 3 per cent of mediators and only 4 per
cent of signatories in major peace processes tracked.
The meaningful, full and equal participation of women
in political processes regarding peace and security
is not only about ensuring the equal representation
of women and men but also about the quality of their
participation. It concerns women’s leadership. We need
to identify and support policies that strengthen women’s
voices and women’s engagement in decision-making
from the initial phase of the peacemaking process to the
establishment and development of local and national
governmental institutions.

Including women at the peace table can also increase
the likelihood of reaching an agreement, as women are
often viewed by negotiating parties as honest brokers.
One study found that the substantial inclusion of
women and civil society groups in a peace negotiation
makes the resulting agreement 64 per cent less likely to
fail, and, according to another study, 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. Moreover, women, being
disproportionately affected by sexual and gender-based
violence, are more likely to advocate for accountability
and services for the survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence.

We are aware that there is a huge number of
highly qualified women who are adequately prepared
and available for high-level positions, including those
of negotiators and mediators. A major challenge is to
raise the awareness of decision-makers that women’s
participation provides a great added value and is a
crucial element needed to bring about change in postconflict environments. Realizing that change requires a
mind shift by politicians, negotiators and mediators on
how they view the role of women in conflict prevention
and peacekeeping.
We must not forget that including women in peace
efforts is not simply a matter of human rights and

As a strong proponent of the women and peace
and security agenda, Poland is focused on ensuring the
meaningful representation of women in operations and
missions abroad and on strengthening their position
by increasing their presence in command-and-control
structures and leadership roles. One good example is
our newly deployed contingent to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), where the Polish
contingent will have a 7 per cent female ratio — one of
the highest in UNIFIL. We will seek to extend that to
the overall mission representation.
If we are serious about our commitment to a
more peaceful, sustainable and prosperous world,
there is simply no alternative to investing in women,
giving them a voice in all relevant decision-making
processes and supporting their political and economic
empowerment. We need to stop seeing women as
merely victims of war but rather look at them instead
as leaders for peacemaking and peacekeeping. Finally,
we need to reflect on not only what women can do
for peace but, even more, on what peace can do for
women. Sustainable development and lasting peace are
preconditions for women and girls to be able to grow,
study, work and use their potential.

19-3380923/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank South Africa for organizing this debate and for
its unwavering commitment to gender equality. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the various briefers
for their presentations.
As we approach the commemoration in 2020 of
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, and five years
since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, it is clear to everyone that we remain very
far from achieving the goals we have collectively set for
ourselves. Those anniversaries will unfortunately not
resonate as victories, as the initial progress registered
has been brought into doubt by a succession of crises, in
which women have often been the primary victims, and
by an unacceptable questioning of their rights. Those
commemorations should represent an opportunity
for us all to reflect on what we can do to concretely
translate our commitments into practice. The normative
framework is already there — we must implement it.
The review in 2020 of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture will be an important
step. Several significant measures have already
been undertaken. We welcome the initiatives of UNWomen, which is a driver of change at the United
Nations and to which we renew our full support. The
Secretary-General’s strategy on gender parity is also
essential and we must all mobilize to ensure that it
is fully implemented. The action plans adopted by
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Department of
Peace Operations and the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs should enable the greater
participation of women in peace operations and
negotiation processes.
Still in 2019, sexual violence continues to be used
as a weapon of war. That is intolerable and must no
longer be tolerated. As the Secretary-General states in
his report (S/2019/800), sexual violence is being used
in particular against women who are working for peace
and the defence of human rights. The Council must
therefore react more vigorously to combat that scourge.
I commend the adoption of the action plan of the South
Sudanese armed forces to combat sexual violence in
conflict. I also welcome the decisions taken by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel on the
matter. Those are encouraging first steps, highlighting
in particular how the Council can effectively guide the
fight against sexual violence in times of conflict. But
24/33

29/10/2019

these are only first steps and other examples should be
pursued by all.
Resolution 1325 (2000) initiated a movement that
now needs to be accelerated. We need to rebuild the
consensus that has been weakened this year on the need
for concrete action to improve women’s participation
in peace processes and their protection against sexual
violence. In that regard, the perpetrators of sexual
violence must no longer enjoy impunity and must all
be brought to justice. Resolution 2493 (2019), which
we have just adopted, should therefore represent an
opportunity to consolidate our achievements and move
forward together. We know that when it comes to
women’s rights, whenever we stop moving forward, we
go backwards — we are never at a standstill.
France has made the implementation of resolutions
on women and peace and security a strong axis of
its action. We have supported initiatives aimed at
providing medical, psychological and social support to
survivors of sexual violence, such as the initiatives led
by Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege to set
up a fund to support the survivors of sexual violence.
We will also continue to support Panzi Hospital and to
provide a full range of health care services, including
sexual and reproductive health care, for the victims.
Finally, I wish to remind the Council that in July
2020 in Paris, in partnership with Mexico and UNWomen, France will host the Generation Equality
Forum, which intends to give new impetus to women’s
rights and gender equality. The political and economic
autonomy of women, including women’s right to freely
decide about their own bodies, will be at the heart of
the Forum.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
and your delegation for having convened this important
open debate. I also wish to thank the briefers for their
valuable presentations and relentless efforts on behalf
of the effective implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, both within the United Nations
system and in the field.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the South
African delegation on today’s adoption of resolution
2493 (2019). We appreciate the efforts made by the
delegation of South Africa during the negotiations
on the resolution and reiterate the importance of
maintaining unity in the Council with regard to issues
on women and peace and security. That is a reflection
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

of our shared belief in the importance of the women and
peace and security agenda and the common priority we
accord to empowering women and effectively involving
them in achieving peace and security throughout the
world. In that regard, I should like to highlight a number
of fundamental issues.
First, we must promote the achievements made to
date and address the remaining challenges as we move
towards the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, we must emphasize the importance of
the empowerment of women and gender equality in
conflict resolution if we are to achieve sustainable
security and peace.
Thirdly, Member States should work in close
collaboration with the United Nations towards the
effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Over the past 19 years, starting with resolution 1325
(2000), the international community, represented by
the Security Council, has developed a robust normative
framework to empower women to enjoy their inherent
right to participate in achieving peace. We welcome
the achievements reached in this regard as 72 per cent
of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council in
2018 refer explicitly to issues of women and peace and
security. All the missions undertaken by the Council
this year included elements pertaining to women and
peace and security, including meetings with groups of
local women. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus is a role model of empowering women in
peace missions. The Head of mission is a woman who is
one of three responsible women representing the police,
military and civilian components of the mission.
Nevertheless, challenges persist in achieving the
full participation of women in the area of maintaining
international peace and security. One such challenge is
the persistence of violence in different manifestations
against women, including sexual violence in situations
of conflict. The humanitarian needs of women and girls
have not been fully met. The representation of women
in political processes, peace processes and leadership
positions is low.
Next year we will commemorate the anniversaries
of many reference frameworks and important events,
such as the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing

S/PV. 8649

Declaration and Platform for Action and the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), which stressed the critical importance of the
participation of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. All of those anniversaries constitute
very important and unique opportunities to synergize
efforts and build on the success that has been achieved
to date on the women and peace and security agenda,
while addressing the challenges that prevent us from
achieving that.
The fact that women are deprived of their basic
rights and not treated equally in conflict, pre-conflict
or post-conflict situations may constitute the main
obstacle to the efforts of the international community
to implement the women and peace and security agenda
with a view to achieving lasting peace. There is no doubt
that a lack of gender equality and continued violence
against women and girls may increase the possibility of
conflict break out.
It is unfortunate and unacceptable that women and
girls are disproportionately impacted by conflicts and
that their basic rights are violated only because of their
gender. That reality is compounded when women are
excluded and marginalized in efforts for peacekeeping,
peacemaking and sustainable peace, and when they are
prevented from truly participating in peace negotiations
and peace agreements. It has been proven that the
effective participation of women in peace agreements
increases the chances that a successful and sustainable
outcome will be reached. Undermining the role of
women means not only marginalizing them, but also
undermining efforts to achieve peace, empower women
politically, economically and socially, and strengthen
the pillars of security and stability.
We welcome the initiative of Member States in
introducing their national action plans on women and
peace and security in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
We reiterate that Member States should shoulder the
primary responsibility for ensuring respect for human
rights, putting an end to all forms of violence against
women and promoting their equal participation in all
phases of peacemaking. We also welcome partnerships
with the United Nations in building the capacities of
Member States to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, in line with their national priorities and
characteristics. We also commend the role of regional
organizations in this regard. In that connection, we also
commend the regional women and peace and security

19-3380925/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

agenda of the League of Arab States, as Arab women
have historically played a pivotal role in achieving
peace in the Middle East. The State of Kuwait supports
that agenda and its implementation.
In conclusion, empowering women, increasing
their role and ensuring their effective participation in
promoting peace, security, development and stability
will undoubtedly contribute to implementing the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
thank South Africa for bringing the Council’s attention
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, which is so dear to Indonesia. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers, some of whom have travelled quite far to brief
us — namely, Ms. Diop, Ms. Salah and Ms Ekomo. I
think that they have provided us with ample additional
information on this particular issue.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Philippines on
behalf of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
Indonesia’s foreign policy accords special attention
to the issue of women. That was also clearly stated
once again yesterday in a policy speech by Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, the first female Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, who was just re-elected last week. The issue
of women will continue to be a priority for Indonesia
in the future. Given that this issue is the focus of our
debate in the Chamber today, I would also like to point
out something very important — over the past 15 years,
more than 50 per cent of the diplomats who have been
newly recruited every year in have been women. That
will make male ambassadors like me extinct in the
near future.
But the good news is that we will have more women
diplomats working as mediators and peacekeepers.
They are the people who will continue the quest for the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in the future. While I am proud in that regard,
as we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), all of us here should
ask ourselves what we have achieved on this particular
26/33

29/10/2019

agenda. Are we moving forward? How far have we gone
in implementing the resolution to which we are proudly
committed? I note the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security (S/2019/800)
and commend the inclusion of women’s empowerment
and gender equality in most of the agreements reached
in peace processes.
However, just as all the briefers have reminded
us, the implementation of the agenda has proven
challenging. Much still needs to be done. Against that
backdrop, allow me to highlight three pertinent points.
First, we need to reaffirm our commitments
to accelerating progress on the women and peace
and security agenda, which is a strong platform for
transforming our words into actions. In many cases,
quotas for the representation of women have been in
place only in early stages and commitments to maintain
such quotas have not endured. Women are in fact not
only part of the solution, but have also been influential
in serving as a source of inspiration and as facilitators
of peace and security. We have experienced that in
Indonesia, and we will continue to pursue that agenda.
We feel and believe that women can have a positive
influence on their communities. We are therefore
committed to strengthening the role of women in
mitigating social conflict and countering violent
extremism. But commitments alone are not enough
if they are not coupled with detailed implementation,
a legal framework and on-the-ground action. In that
regard, we support the need for national action plans.
Secondly, we need to optimize available resources
and networks towards a whole-of-United Nations
approach, particularly in the current dynamic
landscape. In that context, we fully support the
initiative of the Global Alliance of Regional Women
Mediator Networks, which was launched last month
here at the United Nations. We believe that the Alliance
can make a significant impact in enhancing women’s
participation at all levels of peace processes. Indonesia
itself has taken the initiative to host in April the
regional training on women and peace and security for
ASEAN women mediators in order to strengthen their
capacities in peace negotiations. We will continue to
support such initiatives. Indonesia also established the
ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, which is a regional
pool of experts to mainstream the role of women in our
regional peace agenda.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

Thirdly, we should advance the role of women as
agents of peace. When women participate in peace
processes, the resulting agreement is 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years. It therefore makes sense
that if we want to resolve conflicts, women must
be involved. Indonesia is an enthusiastic supporter
of women peacekeepers. They can win the hearts
and minds of local communities. Civilians also find
greater comfort in them when they seek protection
against sexual violence. Indonesia has deployed 128
women peacekeepers among nearly 3,000 Indonesian
troops. I am proud to say that when we visited Juba,
I met with several of our Indonesian women police
peacekeepers who have been serving in South Sudan.
We will continue to contribute more. We are currently
training several hundred women peacekeepers at our
training centre in Sentul, West Java. I would like to
echo the President in paying tribute to all our women
peacekeepers, including the peacekeeper from South
African in this Chamber today. They have done all of
us here at the United Nations an honour, and we will
continue to support their work.
I once again congratulate us all on our successful
adoption today of resolution 2493 (2019), but what
is more important is that it is timely as we work to
implement our commitments with the support of the
available resources, networks and personnel on the
ground. We should ensure that its provisions will be
fully and faithfully implemented, particularly our joint
commitment to promote the full, equal — I emphasize
full and equal — and meaningful participation of women
in all stages of peace processes. In conclusion, I would
like to echo what our Foreign Minister, Mrs. Retno
Marsudi, has said on many occasions. She has always
reminded me that “investing in women equals investing
in peace”. It is time for us all to invest substantially,
seriously and generously.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the participation of Mrs. Naledi
Pandor, Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, and Ms. Michelle
Müntefering, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany, in today’s debate. We thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and appreciate the
relevance of his assessments. We also appreciate the
enriching contributions of the briefers — Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Bineta Diop, African Union Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Lina Ekomo, former

S/PV. 8649

Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic, on behalf of the Network of African Women
in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and the African
Women Leaders Network, and Ms. Alaa Salah,
Sudanese civil-society activist.
As the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) approaches, it is worrying to see, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/800) indicates, that despite
generally encouraging progress, the implementation
of the commitments agreed on to increase women’s
contribution to peace and security still has not yielded
the desired results. Many sociopolitical, economic
and cultural constraints continue to hamper women’s
full participation in strengthening peace and security,
including in many countries affected by armed conflict
or emerging from crisis. The fact is that although women
are among the primary victims of all types of violence
in armed conflicts, they continue to be confined to
peripheral roles in negotiations and in strategies for
emerging from crisis and peacebuilding, despite their
evident added value.
In the light of the achievements of the past 20 years
and the challenges that remain, my delegation believes
that we must continue efforts to include women in the
mechanisms for strengthening peace and security. To
that end, it is essential to further open the political space
for women in times of both peace and conflict and to
ensure their empowerment as agents of economic and
social development.
In recognition of the decisive role of women and
following our post-electoral crisis, the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire has worked to position them at the heart
of our national peacebuilding strategy by increasing
their representation in our national political parties
and political institutions such as the Parliament and the
Senate. In that connection, on 16 July the Parliament
enacted a law on the representation of women in elected
assemblies. Well before that, on 6 March, Parliament
decided to grant a subsidy to political parties in which
women’s level of representation in elected bodies — in
municipal or regional councils, for example — reached
30 per cent.
With regard to women’s contribution to conflict
prevention and resolution, the Government contributed
to the launch on 26 January 2018 of a national network
of women leaders, and in June 2017 committed fully to
the creation of the African Women Leaders Network,
which seeks to enhance women’s contributions to peace

19-3380927/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

29/10/2019

and stability on the continent. We have also supported
women’s contribution to peacekeeping operations
by including female personnel in Côte d’Ivoire’s
contingents in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and the Central African Republic.

implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
related subsequent resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122 (2013)
and 2242 (2015), which enshrine the fundamental
imperative of the role of women in conflict prevention
and the restoration of lasting peace and stability.

At the subregional level, my country supports
the actions of the Network on Peace and Security for
Women in the Region of the Economic Community of
West African States, which seeks to coordinate and
support women’s initiatives and the role of women
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, security and
the promotion of human rights, particularly those of
women and other vulnerable groups. At the regional
level, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the African Union’s
commitment to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the context of a coordinated approach with
the regional economic communities. The adoption in
March 2018 of the Continental Results Framework,
aimed at collecting quantitative and qualitative data on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), has made
it possible to coordinate and strengthen major initiatives
that have been undertaken, including promoting parity
in executive and legislative systems and enhancing the
role of women in mediation and prevention strategies.

Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
South Africa for convening today’s meeting. We are
also grateful for this morning’s important, detailed and
inspiring briefings.

Ensuring greater participation by women will first
require adequate education, health and empowerment
opportunities for women and girls. That will make it
possible to improve women’s social position and therefore
their more active participation in all sociopolitical
mechanisms for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
In the light of that imperative, Côte d’Ivoire — which
is so far still the only country to have been removed
from the list annexed to the Secretary-General’s reports
on sexual violence in armed conflict — attaches
particular importance to the empowerment of women.
Among other things, that commitment on the part of the
Ivorian authorities has materialized in the creation of a
Government department dedicated to the empowerment
of women and the allocation of funds for financing
micro-projects that help women. For example, a social
programme adopted by my Government in January with
a fund of F727.5 billion, equivalent to $1.455 billion,
places the empowerment of women at the heart of its
priorities and reinforces actions already undertaken by
the Support Fund for Women of Côte d’Ivoire, which
has so far enabled 170,000 women to emerge from
poverty by financing their projects.
In conclusion, my delegation urges all actors
concerned to take all necessary measures for the
28/33

Peru is firmly committed to the women and peace and
security agenda, as we are convinced that the leadership
and active participation of women as agents of peace
in all phases of conflict have a significant impact. The
statistics consistently confirm the advantages that the
presence of women on the ground brings, particularly
in interactions with host societies and in the effective
implementation of peaceful ways of settling disputes.
That is why we have been discussing the issue since
2000 with a view to establishing a progressive agenda
and generating good practices in this area, from the
historic original resolution 1325 (2000) to resolution
2493 (2019), which we have just adopted by consensus
today. In that connection, we commend and highlight
the efforts of the South African delegation to contribute
to implementing the international commitments linked
to this agenda. Nevertheless, we believe that there are
still barriers and challenges to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, and in
that regard, we would like to highlight five central
points on which we believe the Council should take
sustained action.
First, it should continue to promote greater
participation and empowerment of women in peace and
national reconciliation processes through its mandates
and to monitor compliance with them. The evidence is
clear and shows that women’s significant participation
at all levels of political life reduces the probability of
conflict and renders peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations and efforts to defend women’s rights far
more effective.
Secondly, it is essential to pay due attention to
the root causes of conflicts associated with gender
inequality and violence, as it facilitates a comprehensive
approach to conflict situations. It is also important to
take into consideration the different effects of conflict
on the protection of women and girls.
Thirdly, with regard to the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his latest report (S/2019/800), we
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

must redouble efforts to integrate gender specialists into
political and peacekeeping missions in order to apply
that perspective across every level of policy analysis,
planning and implementation, including on economic
empowerment. We are convinced of the advantages
inherent in increasing the number of women Blue
Helmets in peace operations, and we are committed to
that cause.
Fourthly, it is important to highlight and promote
active collaboration between missions and women’s
civil-society organizations. That also implies increasing
the participation of women speakers from civil society
in our meetings, as well as making detailed analyses of
information from the field in cases that come under the
Council’s agenda.
Fifthly, we must encourage the effective use of the
information and recommendations from the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
which will enable us to better monitor and coordinate
implementation activities, in line with resolution 2242
(2015). Peru is honoured to have held the responsibility
of co-chairing the Group since 2018 and to have shared
it with Sweden and Germany this year.
In conclusion, I want to affirm Peru’s belief that in
the current state of affairs, there is no more effective
instrument for the promotion of peace and international
security than the empowerment of women, which
involves recognizing their leadership, promoting
their participation in peace processes and ensuring
that commitments are given concrete expression on
the ground.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank Mrs. Naledi Pandor,
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation
of the Republic of South Africa, and Ms. Michelle
Müntefering, Minister of State at the Federal Foreign
Office of the Federal Republic of Germany, for
honouring us with their presence at this important
debate. We would also like to extend a warm welcome
to Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Bineta Diop, Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security of the African Union (AU),
Ms. Lina Ekomo, former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Central African Republic, on behalf of FemWise
Africa and the African Women Leaders Network, and
Ms. Alaa Salah, civil-society activist and community
leader. I thank them all for their informative briefings.

S/PV. 8649

We applaud South Africa’s initiative with regard
to resolution 2493 (2019), on women, peace and
security, which we have just adopted, as it is crucial
to the advancement of the implementation of this
important agenda.
Equatorial Guinea acknowledges the importance of
gender equality and actively promotes the participation
of women in all sectors. However, we note with concern
the Secretary-General’s latest reports on women and
peace and security (S/2019/800) and on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2019/280). As the speakers’
accounts have illustrated, despite the achievements that
have been registered, there is still much to be done to
ensure the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. In that regard, we support the
Secretary-General’s new strategy for achieving gender
parity among uniformed personnel in peace operations
by 2020, and we encourage continued support for
efforts to implement it.
As has been acknowledged many times in this
Chamber, we all agree with the initiative to improve
the quality and scope of the Security Council’s work
in situations of armed conflict. Under the presidency
of Equatorial Guinea in February, the Council
unanimously approved resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. The spirit of that
resolution is broadly reflected in the goal of gender
parity, in the objectives of the resolution we have just
adopted and in resolution 2467 (2019), adopted in
April under the leadership of Germany and intended
to promote the prevention and elimination of conflictrelated sexual violence. In that perspective, we reiterate
the importance of strengthening the relevant training
guidelines issued prior to and during peacekeeping
operations to ensure the effectiveness of missions
and the protection of civilians, especially the most
vulnerable, from any abuse and its consequences.
In that connection, we recognize the impact that
armed conflicts have on society’s most vulnerable
members, typically women and girls, who, despite
often being the victims of horrible acts, have repeatedly
demonstrated their ability to contribute, to peace and
security efforts and to peacebuilding and prevention
at every level. That is why we recognize United
Nations efforts to support those crucial groupings
and enhance their visibility, and to make clear the
direct relationship between gender equality, resilience
and conflict prevention. In that regard, we want to
highlight the high-level visit to Afghanistan led by

19-3380929/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and the
joint trips with the AU to South Sudan, the Sahel, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Niger and Chad,
and the visit to Cameroon in April this year. They serve
to highlight the efforts of States to combat impunity,
ensure accountability and achieve gender equality,
while always respecting State sovereignty.
The Council has recognized the linkages between
inequality, gender discrimination and conflict-related
sexual violence, on the one hand, and violent extremism
and terrorism, on the other. In our view, the equality
required to tackle the root causes of conflicts and
their increasing complexity goes well beyond gender
equality. It also encompasses and reflects the need to
ensure equality among States and the right of all States
to sustainable development. For that reason, I would
like to acknowledge the commitment and dedication
to mainstreaming this agenda that have been shown by
the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and
Security and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We also want to encourage the strategic initiatives
under the framework of cooperation agreement with
the African Union Commission on preventing and
responding to sexual violence in conflict in Africa,
which are bolstered by the support of UN-Women, the
African Women Leaders Network and FemWise-Africa.
Since Africa is the continent with the most
peacekeeping missions, it needs the cooperation of the
international community to ensure the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, especially those
relating to an agenda as important as women and peace
and security. That cooperation will be particularly
important for the adoption of the draft resolution on
financing peacekeeping operations in Africa that is
pending before the Council and which the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea hopes to see adopted before the end
of the year. Enhanced cooperation between the Security
Council and the African Peace and Security Architecture
of the African Union, which in turn strengthens
subregional initiatives for the implementation of
Council resolutions aimed at advancing the women
and peace and security agenda, among other things, is
an example of the kind of alliance that should receive
continued and more predictable support.
I would like to take this opportunity, as Equatorial
Guinea’s membership of the Council draws to a close,
to thank Council members for their leadership and
commitment to the implementation of the women and
30/33

29/10/2019

peace and security agenda. In 2020 we will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the tenth anniversary of the founding of
UN-Women, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action, and the seventyfifth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations. In that regard, we urge Council members to
continue working together to fully mainstream the
role of women in conflict resolution, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude for the convening of today’s meeting. We
thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
assessment of progress in the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. We listened
with interest to the briefing by Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women, on the
Secretariat’s contribution to enhancing the role of
women in preventing and settling armed conflicts, and
the remaining challenges in that area, as well as to what
the invited speakers had to say about their work on
the ground.
Today’s discussion confirms the relevance of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), adopted almost
two decades ago. A very important part of the Council’s
work in implementing that resolution is enhancing the
role and contribution of women in peace processes and
their protection from the violence they continue to face
in situations of armed conflict. It is chiefly women who
are the victims of sexual violence, which is often used
as a tactic of war. We are outraged by cases in which
women are used as a kind of human commodity to raise
funds for terrorist and criminal activities. We call on
the specialized agencies of the United Nations system
to coordinate more closely with the Security Council in
order to stamp out abhorrent practices such as sexual
violence and human trafficking in armed conflict.
We believe it is vital to avoid duplication in the
work of the various organs of the Organization and to
focus on situations that present an unquestionable threat
to international peace and security, in accordance with
the prerogatives of the Security Council. It is important
to remember that the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are
also part of the efforts to advance the role of women,
protect their rights and ensure gender equality.
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

The Russian Federation calls for concentrating on
specific measures in the interests of women in armed
conflict. That particularly has to do with developing
national action plans that should be specific to
particular situations of armed conflict, which makes for
instruments that are useful and effective instruments
and not just another paper pronouncement. The adoption
of such plans on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), especially when they are simply intended to
meet reporting requirements and tick boxes, cannot
serve as a criterion for assessing countries’ policies on
improving the position of women.
If the existing problems in this area are to be
effectively resolved, women themselves have to be
effectively involved. We are grateful to the SecretaryGeneral in that regard for his continued attention
to the problems of expanding women’s meaningful
participation and involvement of women in peacekeeping
operations, peace negotiations and political processes
in general. Russia is a stalwart partner of the United
Nations in the business of preparing peacekeepers,
including women, in certified training centres, and
we are actively involved in that cooperation through
the All-Russia Peacekeeping Training Centre of our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Domodedovo, which
also trains foreign specialists.
Today we supported the adoption of resolution 2493
(2019), prepared by South Africa, in our firm belief in
the importance of protecting and promoting the rights
of women in situations of armed conflict. However, we
feel obliged to point out that the resolution contains
a number of provisions that go beyond the Security
Council’s mandate. It is overloaded with issues relating
to the protection and promotion of human rights, which
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
already deal with successfully and effectively. We urge
the Security Council to adhere strictly to its mandate,
and we do not support attempts to justify its interference
in matters that are part of the remit of other organs.
In conclusion, we also feel obliged to share our
assessment of the first years of the activity of the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which
is mentioned in the resolution we adopted today. We
are compelled to conclude that that Group has not fully
succeeded in becoming a coordinating link in the chain
of the work in this area. It has been unable to avoid a
certain degree of politicization in its work or to develop
genuinely transparent and democratic procedures
for reaching and adopting decisions, which is an

S/PV. 8649

essential condition for sustaining dialogue between
Governments on such an important subject. It will be
crucial to address these shortcomings in order to meet
the expectations of States that are dealing with conflict.
We are ready to cooperate constructively with all
interested States on the harmonious promotion of the
subject of women on the Council’s agenda. In October
of next year we will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). We must
reach that anniversary from a position of solidarity that
demonstrates the Council’s significant achievements
and unity.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Søreide (Norway): I am speaking on behalf
of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway. I would like to
thank South Africa for initiating today’s debate and for
bringing women peacebuilders to this Chamber.
To understand conflicts, we need to understand
how they affect both women and men, and to solve
conflicts, we need to mobilize women. Women and men
have exactly the same right to take part in decisions
concerning their future. As Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Leymah Gbowee has so eloquently said, if women are
not observers to conflict, why should they be observers
to peace? We know that inclusive peace processes have
better odds of creating lasting peace.
The Nordic countries welcome the emphasis in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/800)
on women’s meaningful participation in preventing
conflict and sustaining peace. It is now critical to ensure
a concrete and practical follow-up. We will do our part,
nationally and multilaterally. The launch in September
of the Global Alliance of Regional Women Mediator
Networks was quite a milestone. The Alliance not only
highlights the large number of women with substantial
and varied experience in the field of peace and security,
it also shows their commitment to participating in
and leading such processes. We encourage other
countries to join the Commitment 2025 initiative
on women’s inclusion in peace processes, which was
launched during the United Nations high-level week in
September. We also urge the Security Council to ensure
that the situation and roles of women are reflected in its
resolutions and mission mandates.

19-3380931/33

S/PV.8649

Women and peace and security

Inclusion is also about including a variety of
women — rural and urban, young and elderly, differently
abled, indigenous women and women of different sexual
orientations. We are concerned about the widespread
violence and repression that women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders face, as well as the persistent
impunity for such violence. These women’s rights
and security are essential to democracy and peace.
Supporting women working on the front lines for peace
is essential. Here I would like to highlight the work of
the International Civil Society Action Network, the
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom
and the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders.
Research continues to link gender-based violence
and gender inequality to the level of a society’s
vulnerability to civil war and conflict. More must be
done to eliminate all forms of violence against women
and girls, including conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence. We must counter attacks on women’s
full and equal enjoyment of human rights, ensure
sexual and reproductive health rights and strengthen
services for survivors of sexual violence. We strongly
support the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and welcome the International Fund for Survivors of
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence led by Dr. Denis
Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad. In my national
capacity as Norway’s Foreign Minister, I would like
to announce that we will support the Fund. I would
also like to draw the Council’s attention to the recently
launched Women, Peace and Security Index, which
measures women’s situations globally in three key
areas — inclusion, justice and security.
Lastly, the handbook on prevention and response
to conflict-related sexual violence for use in United
Nations operations is forthcoming. In fact, it should be
available tomorrow.
We are focusing a lot of our attention on
resolutions. I think we need to focus equally on the
implementation of resolutions. With the support of a
non-governmental organization, the Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, and others, South Africa
was able to secure language on the full implementation
of former resolutions in resolution 2493 (2019), which
we adopted today. While we want to see stronger
commitments to safeguarding and enabling women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders, their role is
now recognized, as are States’ responsibilities towards
them. We were a sponsor of resolution 2493 (2019) and
32/33

29/10/2019

congratulate South Africa and the Council on reaching
a consensus vote.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries call on the
Security Council to preserve and build on the crossregional consensus that has been a trademark of the
women and peace and security agenda. There should
be full agreement around this table on the simple
fact that women’s participation is needed to achieve
sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Linde (Sweden): The adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) in October 2000 was a true milestone. It
reformed the way we see and conduct conflict analysis
and engage in peacekeeping. It was an answer to
generations of women who had been neglected as
peacemakers, negotiators, mediators and parties to
conflicts. Since then, deepened commitments by the
United Nations system and Member States, along with
important local, regional and international initiatives,
have moved the agenda forward, but we still have a long
way to go.
I would like to thank South Africa for
organizing today’s debate and for the strong focus
on implementation. As portrayed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/800), the challenges are
profound. To deliver more sustainable results, we need
leadership that keeps women’s rights and participation
at the top of the agenda, as well as the implementation of
concrete steps that matter in the field and accountability
to make sure that decisions are acted on. I would like
to elaborate briefly on each of those three components.
First, strong leadership is key to achieving full
integration. As Member States and as an organization,
we in the United Nations must take concrete steps
forward in 2020. We must counter attacks on women’s
human rights, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights, and we must defend our multilateral
achievements. Resources need to be committed and
messages need to be clear.
Secondly, with respect to implementation, practical
measures must be taken by national Governments,
multilateral institutions and individual missions. A
gender perspective should influence our work, what
we talk about and our next steps. We need a gender
perspective in conflict analysis and the inclusion of
sex-disaggregated data in all reporting. We welcome
19-33809

29/10/2019

Women and peace and security

the renewed commitments made by the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to adopting an integrated gender
perspective in all of its work, and we fully support the
suggestions presented by the Chair of the PBC to the
Security Council today.
Thirdly, with regard to accountability, we need
clearly defined responsibilities to implement the full
women and peace and security agenda. Follow-up
is essential to ensuring that analysis and data reflect
realities on the ground. Member States must have
strategies for women’s participation in peace processes
and decision-making bodies. The prevention and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence must
be central to peace efforts. I particularly want to stress
the role of civil society. During Sweden’s time on the
Security Council, more representatives of civil society
were invited to brief the Council than ever before,
which resulted in more inclusive and better-informed
discussions. Yesterday, in our Multi-stakeholder
Forum on Women, Peace and Security, civil-society
organizations expressed great concern about the fact
that progress on the women and peace and security
agenda is slowing down. They also stressed worries
about evidence of increased hostility towards members
of civil society in this arena, especially women
human rights defenders. Member States, and Security
Council members in particular, should take concrete
steps to implement decisions and include civil-society
representatives as partners. Not the least of these
aspects is civil society’s untapped potential for playing
a role in preventing conflict through early warning.
As we speak of the importance of civil society and
strong political leadership, I would like to highlight the
recent developments in the Sudan. As we heard from
Ms. Salah, Sudanese women’s strong participation was
critical in the movement for change. We are encouraged

S/PV. 8649

by the emphasis on women’s participation by the new
Government. We should all stand ready to support the
Sudanese people as they move forward on that path.
It is impossible not to mention what is happening in
north-east Syria. After years of defending their homes
and our countries against the terrorist sect Islamic
State/Da’esh, the women and men that make up that
region’s ethnic and cultural mosaic are now suffering
the consequences of the Turkish military offensive.
We know that women are among those hardest hit
by conflict, but in the fight against Da’esh they have
also been the ones fighting on the front lines. That is
especially true for Kurdish women. We have a moral
obligation to stand up for them in times like these.
After more than eight years of conflict, for which the
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility,
Syria and the region need peace. Sweden reiterates its
support for the United Nations-led political process, the
only path that can lead to sustainable peace.
Finally, let me express my appreciation for the
specific commitments in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/800). Many of the recommendations Sweden put
forward after two years as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council are addressed in the report. I am
proud of Sweden’s contribution to the women and peace
and security agenda during our time on the Council.
Let me assure the Council that Sweden will continue
to champion these issues in close coordination with
members and other partners.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

19-3380933/33
