A /68/PV.107

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

107th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 9 September 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/68/716/Add.11)
The President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/68/716/Add.11, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/68/716/Add.10, Yemen has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/68/L.57/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly adopted resolution 68/6 under agenda
item 14 and agenda item 118, entitled “Follow-up to
the outcome of the Millennium Summit”, at its 32nd
plenary meeting, on 9 October 2013, and considered
agenda item 14, jointly with agenda item 118 and

agenda item 125, entitled “United Nations reform:
measures and proposals”, at its 54th plenary meeting,
on 20 November 2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to make this
introduction on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
(G-77).
I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
for the commitment of all States members of the Group
and other States that helped to improve this important
draft resolution (A/68/L.57/Rev.1), demonstrating
thereby their genuine commitment to building an
international financial system in which the rules are fair
and favourable towards development, and promoting a
genuine global alliance in which developing countries
will be able to achieve sustainable development.
I would also like to thank the representatives of
the Member States among us today, and in particular
the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Argentina,
Mr. Héctor Marcos Timerman, for their presence here.
The Group of 77 and China is pleased to introduce
draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1, entitled “Towards
the establishment of a multilateral legal framework for
sovereign debt restructuring processes”. The operative
part of the draft resolution, inter alia, emphasizes
the special importance of a timely, effective,
comprehensive and durable solution to the debt

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-52899 (E)

*1452899*

A/68/PV.107

problems of developing countries in order to promote
their inclusive economic growth and development. It
calls for an intensification of efforts to prevent debt
crises by enhancing international financial mechanisms
for crisis prevention and resolution, in cooperation
with the private sector, with a view to finding solutions
acceptable to all. It decides to elaborate and adopt
through a process of intergovernmental negotiations,
as a matter of priority during its sixty-ninth session,
a multilateral legal framework for sovereign debt
restructuring processes with a view, inter alia, to
increasing the efficiency, stability and predictability
of the international financial system and achieving
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and
sustainable development, in accordance with national
circumstances and priorities. It also decides to define
the modalities for the intergovernmental negotiations
and the adoption of the text of the multilateral legal
framework at the main part of the sixty-ninth session,
before the end of 2014.
A debate has been going on since 1970 on whether the
international financial system should have a mechanism
for addressing the restructuring of sovereign debt.
Twelve years ago, at the first International Conference
on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, our
leaders expressed their commitment to working to
create an international mechanism for renegotiating
debt. A similar commitment was made at the second
Conference, held in Doha in 2008. Furthermore, at
the conclusion of the 2009 Conference on the World
Financial and Economic Crisis, we reaffirmed the
importance of exploring “enhanced approaches to the
restructuring of sovereign debt” (resolution 63/303,
para. 34). At that time, a committee of experts
appointed by the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session made specific recommendations
for establishing an international bankruptcy court.
The Secretary-General’s reports on external debt,
sustainability and development have also stressed for
many years the importance of addressing this issue and
have made recommendations on establishing a specific
mechanism. The United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development has also been considering the matter
since the end of the 1970s.
In the past decade, the G-77 and China has called
for proposals on establishing a legal framework for
restructuring sovereign debt. In June in Santa Cruz de
la Sierra, Bolivia, the Heads of State and Government
of the G-77 and China agreed on the urgent need for

2/29

09/09/2014

the international community to examine options for
an international mechanism for resolving debt that is
effective, fair, lasting, independent and oriented towards
development, and urged all countries to promote and
contribute to debates in the United Nations and other
relevant forums about this goal.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report (A/69/167)
indicates, the recent debt crises and the protracted
holdout bondholder litigation against Argentina have
led to intensified international debate on the need for
a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism that can
help improve efficiency, fairness and coordination in
restructuring sovereign debt. Today it is Argentina,
but many developing and developed countries have
suffered in the past from the exact same predatory
behaviour, and others will follow if we do not act.
Debt and debt restructuring do not simply pose a
financial, legal or even jurisdictional problem; this is
a problem that concerns the whole world and every
country, developed as well as developing. It is tied to
growth, development and human rights. The lack of a
structured mechanism is a major failure in the current
international financial architecture, which leads to long
delays in debt restructuring, unfair outcomes and loss
of value for both debtors and creditors, among other
problems.
The international community must realize that no
path to growth can be pursued or encouraged when it
has unsustainable debt hanging over it. The core element
of any debt-restructuring exercise should therefore
be determining real repayment capacity. If that is not
properly addressed, the original restructuring may
require more time and further restructuring, which can
further affect growth and good-faith creditors.
The Group of 77 and China is very concerned about
so-called vulture fund litigation. Debt restructuring
processes and debt sustainability itself are at present
facing serious risks, related to the actions of speculators
seeking to profit excessively from countries dealing with
excessive debt obligations and repayment processes,
which put them in vulnerable situations. Sovereign
debt management has in fact been a crucial issue for
developing countries, both as a source of concern in
past decades and as a hot button in recent years, owing
to the activities of vulture funds. Recent developments
in and examples of such activities have exposed these
funds’ speculative and profit-seeking nature, and they
pose a risk to all future debt-restructuring processes for
both developing and developed countries. The Group

14-52899

09/09/2014

of 77 and China believes that vulture funds should not
be allowed to paralyse developing countries’ efforts
in this area, and that their claims should not take
precedence over a State’s right to protect its people
under international law.
Recent events have also shown that marketbased, ad hoc, contractual approaches to working out
sovereign debt are insufficient to deal with such crises,
and can lead to cascades of litigation, with ripple
effects throughout the debt market. As we have said,
the situation we are dealing with today affects every
country, developing or developed, and demonstrates
that the market approach has failures and gaps that
should be urgently addressed.
The G-77 and China would like to reaffirm that the
United Nations plays the central role in and possesses
the necessary legitimacy for dealing with these issues
of development and related matters. We reiterate that
the General Assembly is the appropriate venue for
discussing economic and financial affairs and deciding
on the best follow-up and alternatives for meeting the
needs and challenges of the twenty-first century. The
systemic problems facing the global economy have yet
to be resolved. There are still major unfulfilled goals
to be reached, and we must intensify all our efforts in
this area. We cannot afford to continue to be spectators
until another situation arises and we are once again
reminded of the importance of taking action on this
issue.
In conclusion, I would like to specially thank the
Argentine Republic, since it is owing to the situation
of that country that the international community’s eyes
have been opened to an enormous risk. That is why the
Group of 77 and China is presenting this draft resolution
for adoption by the General Assembly.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1, entitled “Towards
the establishment of a multilateral legal framework
for sovereign debt restructuring processes”, I wish to
put on the record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.

A/68/PV.107

In paragraphs 5 and 6 of draft resolution
A/68/57/Rev.1, the Assembly would decide to elaborate
and adopt, through a process of intergovernmental
negotiations, as a matter of priority during its sixtyninth session, a multilateral legal framework for
sovereign debt restructuring processes, with a view,
inter alia, to increasing the efficiency, stability and
predictability of the international financial system, and
achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic
growth and sustainable development, in accordance
with national circumstances and priorities; and would
decide to define modalities for the intergovernmental
negotiations and adopt the text of a multilateral legal
framework at the main part of its sixty-ninth session
before the end of 2014.
Pursuant to operative paragraphs 5 and 6 of the
draft resolution, the modalities of the negotiation and
adoption of the multilateral legal framework have yet to
be defined. Accordingly, in the absence of the modalities
for the framework, it is not possible at the present time
to estimate the potential financial implications. As
soon as specifications on the dates, format, scope and
modalities are determined by the General Assembly at
the main part of the sixty-ninth session, the SecretaryGeneral would submit the relevant costs of such
requirements in accordance with rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly.
Accordingly, the adoption of the draft resolution
A/68/57/Rev.1 will not give rise to any financial
implications for the programme budget for the biennium
of 2014-2015.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote before the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): Draft resolution
A/68/57/Rev.1 addresses a very real problem. Only this
summer, the Secretary-General concluded in a report
on external debt sustainability and development that
“[t]he international ad hoc arrangements for
debt crisis resolution have created incoherence
and unpredictability. Different courts have very
different interpretations of the same contractual
clause and can impose a wide array of rulings.
Politics and interest groups can impact on the
outcome of the rulings and debt restructuring,

14-528993/29

A/68/PV.107

compromising consistency and fairness.” (A/69/167,
para. 57)
In Iceland’s view, it is highly relevant and timely
to carefully explore sovereign debt restructuring
processes, and we commend those State, Members of
the United Nations that have raised the issue. It is of
great importance that the restructuring of sovereign
debt not be unreasonably impeded by commercial
creditors, particularly by specialized investors such as
hedge funds and the so-called vulture funds.
However, the question remains: What would be the
right and proper international forum for this important
issue? It is clear that a broad consensus is needed in
order to find a sustainable and effective solution. It is
also clear that further work is needed in order to achieve
such a consensus, and therefore we abstain from voting
on the draft resolution at this juncture.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The debt market is a significant component of
contemporary international currency credit relations.
Its sustainability greatly defines the stability of the
whole international financial system. The severe debt
crises of recent years have clearly reflected shortfalls
in our efforts and continued significant gaps in the
existing regulatory system for public debt liability.
The Russian Federation actively supports improving
predictability in the area of public debt liabilities
and stands ready to make its practical contribution to
supporting that issue. In that regard, we believe that
the decision of the Group of 77 to raise in the United
Nations the issue of developing a multilateral legal
framework to regulate sovereign debt restructuring
processes is justified and timely. We therefore support
draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1 and will vote in favour
of its adoption.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic

4/29

09/09/2014

People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Finland,
Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, France, Georgia,
Greece, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/68/L.57/Rev.1 was adopted by
124 votes to 11, with 41 abstentions (resolution
68/304).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
14-52899

09/09/2014

Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The
United States remains committed to the stability of the
international financial system and to the development of
its partners around the world. Financing is a crucial tool
for that growth and development. Access to functioning
debt markets enables developing countries to make
the infrastructure investments essential to diversify
economies and expand productive capacity. In that
context, the United States regrets that it was obliged to
vote against resolution 68/304 on both substantive and
procedural grounds.
The United States cannot support the creation
of a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism, as
envisioned in this resolution. The establishment of a
statutory mechanism for debt restructurings would
create uncertainty in financial markets. If lenders face
higher uncertainty regarding repayment, they may be
less likely to provide financing and will likely charge
higher risk premiums, potentially stifling financing to
developing countries.
Experience from the debate on an sovereign debt
restructuring mechanism in the early 2000s reflected
those concerns and concluded that the creation of such a
mechanism would have highly uncertain results. Issuers
of external debt, working with market participants and
members of the Group of 10, instead elected to pursue
market-oriented approaches, including the increasingly
common use of collective action clauses, paired with
enhancing debt management capacity in borrowing
countries. Work on this technically complex issue is
ongoing in other forums, including the International
Monetary Fund and non-governmental bodies such as
the International Capital Market Association. Those
efforts have already begun to bear fruit and are the
more appropriate venues for this type of discussion and
better ways to address the issue.
The United States is also concerned about
the procedures surrounding the resolution. The
resolution clearly assumes a final outcome, namely
the establishment of a binding convention or legal
framework, precluding substantive debate on its merits.
Effective discussion is further inhibited by the attempt
to force this resolution through in the waning hours of
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly and
mandating an accelerated time frame for developing
any convention or legal framework.
Finally, the resolution should give pause to those
concerned about how United Nations system resources
are deployed. The resolution establishes a mandate

A/68/PV.107

for an expensive United Nations process. However,
its deliberate lack of specificity and the timing of its
introduction, with the Fifth Committee out of session
and no meetings of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions scheduled
this cycle, will mean no effective scrutiny or review of
costs. Members are being asked to write a blank check.
In sum, we have a range of objections to the
resolution and therefore have joined others in voting
against it.
Ms. Miyano (Japan): I, too, would like to explain
the reasoning behind Japan’s vote against resolution
68/304. The issue of sovereign debt is an extremely
important issue. Japan has been taking part in
and contributing to the relevant discussions at the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Paris Club, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
and other forums, and we will continue to do so. Japan
has also been doing its utmost to deal with individual
debt issues in a constructive and productive manner.
However, discussions on what kind of framework
should be employed to deal with the issue of sovereign
debt require technical expertise and knowledge, along
with the participation of all relevant stakeholders. A lack
of proper and effective discussion time and procedure
adds to that problem. So at this juncture, when such
discussions are under way in forums such as the IMF,
Japan cannot support a resolution that has as its sole
expected outcome the establishment of a general legal
framework.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. We shall now open the floor for
statements after adoption.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): On
this day, 9 September, 50 years ago, an Argentinian
diplomat, José María Ruda, made a historic statement
to the Decolonization Committee in which he explained
my country’s opposition to all forms of colonialism.
Once again, just as 50 years ago, the Argentine people
have come to the United Nations to discuss a subject
of great importance for my country and the entire
international community. We are proud that this is
happening as a result of the deep understanding shared
by the developing countries of the world. We have come
to the United Nations because we feel it is the most
representative international forum and the General
Assembly is the democratic forum par excellence, as
all States participate in it on an equal footing.

14-528995/29

A/68/PV.107

I would like to recognize your leadership, Sir, as
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session, and your initiative to convene this plenary
meeting in full accordance with the rules of procedure
and in complete transparency. We also welcome the
adoption of resolution 68/304, submitted by the Group
of 77 and China. This is a forum like no other, which
has been able to highlight the devastating effects of the
unfair distribution of global wealth and which is able to
propose valuable initiatives aimed at building a world
that is more just and free and has more solidarity.
In that respect, I would like to commend the
leadership of the Chairperson of the Group of 77 and
China, the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Sacha Llorentty Solíz, who has fully expressed
the wishes of our Group. We will not accept distorting
pressure, and we will not give in to the scepticism and
indifference of the wealthy.
The important vote that we have just taken
is the clearest possible expression of such global
representativeness. The peoples of the world have
spoken, and we have decided that the time has come
to jointly embark upon an ethical, political and legal
process that can put an end to unbridled speculation. In
so doing, we are choosing a just and lawful path that is
set out by means of a plural and democratic debate, a
debate such as this one, where everyone — and I mean
everyone — has a vote and a voice.
The resolution just adopted is also a faithful
reflection of the relevance and urgency that the clear
majority of the nations of the world assign to a reality
that leaves us without protection from the practices
of and abuses committed by speculators, given the
normative gap in the current international financial
system. We have decided that the time has come to
provide to the financial system a legal framework for
restructuring sovereign debt that respects the majority
of creditors and allows countries to emerge from crises
in a sustainable manner.
Billions of dollars are going into the pockets of the
owners of vulture funds because of that legal vacuum.
The vacuum’s existence is no mere coincidence. Those
who are involved in such trade, which is scandalously
profitable, invest a percentage of their profits in
campaigns and lobbyists to ensure that the situation does
not change. The lack of a legal regulatory framework to
restructure sovereign debt has a direct correlation with
poverty, disease, illiteracy and the insecurity suffered
by countries who have been historically crushed by
6/29

09/09/2014

external debt — countries where none of the owners of
such funds, or their lobbyists or lawyers, live.
For over a decade, developing countries, as well
as many developed countries that do not believe that
the dignity of peoples should be held hostage to the
invisible hand of the market, have been stating that the
world cannot allow the restructuring of sovereign debt
to be subject to the discretion or will of speculators. We
have to put a limit on it, a limit that goes beyond mere
rhetoric and guidelines and principles. For over a decade
in various forums and agencies of this Organization,
both developed and developing countries have been
expressing the need for a legal framework that will
establish effective and transparent rules in order to
bring about sovereign debt restructuring processes that
are ordered and predictable.
Allow me to address my remarks particularly and
with full respect to the countries that did not vote for
the resolution that we just adopted, specifically those
where the majority of international financial activity
is centred. I would like to remind them of the words
of our President — words that she has uttered many
times in this very place. She said we all know that
finance is not possible without production. A bankrupt
country cannot pay back what it owes. Developed
countries benefit from the growth of developing
countries, not just because of the virtuous cycle that is
started by more countries joining in global demand, but
specifically because a more inclusive, just and secure
world presupposes the existence of a global economy
that is more balanced and more efficient. At the same
time, we all know that many countries over the past
200 years have gone into default and, at the end of the
day, have needed to restructure their sovereign debt.
We also know — and this is simply a fact — that there
are many nations that have higher levels of debt than
Argentina’s when we went into default in 2001.
It is therefore clear that there is also a latent need
in the short term for those countries to benefit from a
predictable, fair and sustainable system for sovereign
debt restructuring. I also think it is timely to stress with
regard to financial investment that, in the light of the
case of Argentina, the absence of a legal framework
for sovereign debt restructuring has become a serious
problem for investment funds, since the majority of
them recognize the merit of respecting an agreement
with a majority of creditors. In that regard, I believe
that nothing shows more clearly the need for a legal
regulatory framework than the situation my country is

14-52899

09/09/2014

going through since a judge in this very city allowed
1 per cent of the creditors — international usurers known
as vulture funds — to block the funds that Argentina
paid to 92.4 per cent of the creditors who agreed to the
restructuring that was part of the economic recovery of
my country.
Our concern is nothing new, and it has been
expressed previously in other forums and in every
way possible, as described by the Chair of the Group
of 77 and China when he introduced the resolution
just adopted. Since 2003, we have been working at
the United Nations on the issue of sovereign debt
and the obstacles that it represents for the sustainable
development of peoples and the absence of an adequate
legal framework for sovereign debt restructuring.
The decision we took today democratically is not
only to express what our peoples demand but also to do
what our peoples deserve, namely, to ensure that they
are free and sovereign and that they can live a dignified
life and without fear of becoming victims of speculation
and greed. We have decided to fundamentally change
the future and prevent more people from having to
eternally pay in hunger and misery the exorbitant
privileges of the owners of vulture funds, those sinister
masters of opulence.
If the United Nations has been able to regulate
diplomatic relations covering exploitation of marine
resources, for example, and the need to have a regime
for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to universally condemn the worst crimes, how were
we not going to decide what we have done today, that is,
to draw up a multilateral legal framework for sovereign
debt restructuring?
Honouring those who have preceded us, I am
convinced that with the adoption of today’s resolution
we have undertaken the commitment of the hour,
recognizing the right of everyone, particular our
children and young people, to live a better present and
future, removing one of the causes that contributes to
generating the violence that we are so concerned about
and which destroys the peace that we so urgently need.
Let us work together to continue building a free, fair
and sovereign world.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the European Union.
There should be no doubt that we recognize the
importance of sovereign debt restructuring, which is
not pertinent only to certain countries. We ourselves

A/68/PV.107

have been seriously affected, whether on the creditor
or debtor side. However, we regrettably were not in a
position to support resolution 68/304, entitled “Towards
the establishment of a multilateral legal framework for
sovereign debt restructuring processes”, as we have
serious concerns about its substance and significant
objections about the process of its adoption, especially
with respect to the rush with which that complex
proposal was launched and to the predetermined
outcomes it prescribes.
Together with many other Member States
represented here today, we are actively engaging in
ongoing discussions that address and seek to identify
solutions to the issues of sovereign debt restructuring.
In particular, we are actively participating in the
ongoing work of the International Monetary Fund on
the contractual framework for addressing collective
action problems in sovereign debt restructuring. We
are also actively engaged in the Paris Club and the
discussions on debt restructuring in that forum.
In last year’s resolution on external debt
sustainability and development, we also agreed to
request that the Secretary-General provide
“a comprehensive and substantive analysis of the
external debt situation of developing countries
and options for enhanced approaches to debt
restructuring and resolution mechanisms that
take into account the multiple dimensions of debt
sustainability” (resolution 68/202, para. 38).
We look forward to discussing that report and its
recommendations.
Furthermore, the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts on Sustainable Development Financing, in its
recent report of 8 August 2014, stresses that it is
“important for the international community to
continue ongoing efforts to enhance the existing
architecture for sovereign debt restructuring”.
It also notes that
“[d]iscussions on how to improve the framework for
sovereign debt restructuring for countries in debt
distress taking place in various official forums, in
policy think tanks and in the private sector”.
However, as we very much value multilateral
solutions and strive to reach consensus solutions to
common problems, and as we recognize the seriousness
of the matter at hand, we cannot understand why the

14-528997/29

A/68/PV.107

decision to establish a multilateral framework for
sovereign debt restructuring processes is rushed
through the General Assembly at the very end of the
session, with only a few days available to consider the
proposal. In addition, the lack of information about
the possible elements of the proposed framework, but
with an end result that is determined in advance of the
negotiation, makes it very difficult to respond in the
manner that the proposing countries would like.
The decision on the relative merit of pursuing a
multilateral legal framework requires much deliberation
in our capitals and for us collectively within the
European Union. We have not been afforded such a
possibility, which thus makes it impossible for us to
support the resolution.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation has been an integral participant
in the discussions on the draft resolution introduced
by the Group of 77 and China and adopted today as
resolution 68/304. We would now like to make some
comments in our national capacity.
At the outset, we would like to thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Argentina for his presence and
our dear Ambassador Marita and her entire team,
who have given our countries a new space within the
Organization. We would also like to thank the Chair of
the Group of 77 and China and his team for their efforts
in maintaining the unity and solidarity of the Group in
the light of the importance of this subject for the future
of our peoples.
In paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, it is stated that one of the purposes of the
Organization is to achieve international cooperation
in solving international problems, including those of
an economic nature. The General Assembly is the sole
universal body with equal representation of all Member
States and which has the ability to solve various
problems. Therefore, it is the appropriate forum for
holding these debates and adopting resolutions such
as resolution 68/304, which is intended to fill in the
global legal vacuum with regard to sovereign debt
restructuring.
The resolution just adopted is a reflection not only
of our concerns with regard to the problems being faced
by our dear brother, the Argentine Republic, but of the
concerns and problems that all countries that have
suffered from the impacts of external debt have faced

8/29

09/09/2014

and could face again at any time. It is a safeguard for
the future of our peoples.
Sovereign debt is supposed to be directed
essentially towards funding national policies for social
development. However, in most cases it can throw
millions of people into poverty if it is not managed
properly, in particular if it leads to a debt crisis, as
we have seen in many countries. The debt crisis can,
and indeed does, have far-reaching and profound
implications for global financial stability and economic
growth and for the achievement of the economic,
social and cultural rights of peoples. We reaffirm the
need to ensure national sovereignty in sovereign debt
restructuring processes and, in accordance with the
agreements reached between creditors and debtors,
for payment flows to be distributed to cooperative
creditors, as agreed with them under the established
debt realignment process.
Today’s adoption of the resolution by the vast
majority of the international community encourages us
to continue to work for the necessary legal framework
of our countries, in order for our countries to deal with
the sudden onset, impact and threats of possible future
crises such as that now facing the sisterly Argentine
Republic, to which, as always, we reiterate our support
and unconditional solidarity in the face of such vulture
funds.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement made earlier by
the representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China. We support the adoption at the
current session of resolution 68/304 on sovereign debt,
introduced by the Group of 77 and China.
The debt problem is a major obstacle facing
developing countries in promoting economic growth
and in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
Since the international financial crisis, developing
countries have faced greater difficulties with debt
sustainability. The international community should take
steps to improve international financial governance
and to prevent speculative capital from obstructing
sovereign debt restructuring so that countries can be
more resilient and maintain financial stability. China
shares and supports the concern expressed by the
representative of Argentina on that point. We hope that
the issue can be properly addressed.
China believes that the international financial
system needs further reform and that the international

14-52899

09/09/2014

regulations governing sovereign debt restructuring
should be further improved in order for emerging
markets and developing countries to have greater
input. We hope that the international community will
work together to create conditions conducive to debt
reduction by developing countries and to promote
the early re-establishment of a fair, effective and
development-oriented mechanism for international
debt restructuring and debt resolution.
Mr. Iziraren (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to make some comments in my national
capacity following the introduction of and vote on
resolution 68/304, introduced by the representative of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Developing countries continue to suffer from debt.
In 2013, the debt level rose by 8.7 per cent compared
with that of 2012. Such deterioration in the debt level
of developing countries comes at a time when global
economic growth has slowed. That makes those
countries even more vulnerable to external economic
crises and shocks. It is clear that the debt burden is
preventing developing countries from finding the
resources to promote economic growth, which would
generate jobs and help to combat poverty and inequality.
In general, debt crises gives rise to lower investment
and public spending in sectors that primarily affect
poor people, such as health care and education.
The speculative activities of certain funds, in
particular vulture funds, should be regulated so as
not to hamper State debt restructuring efforts for the
benefit of development. Ensuring the sustainability of
external debt and the capacity of States to meet their
debt commitments are crucial elements for the effective
implementation of the sustainable development goals
and the post-2015 development agenda. In that regard,
we regret the lack of consensus on the resolution, since
we believe that the existence of a multilateral State
sovereign debt restructuring mechanism on the basis of
the internationally agreed principles and processes is an
important step for the fair and transparent management
of the sovereign debt issue.
Furthermore, we think that it is time to establish
an international mechanism that allows for State debt
restructuring on the basis of realistic and lasting
solutions that take into account the capacity of such
States to service their debt and their sustainable
development needs.

A/68/PV.107

Morocco voted in favour of the resolution on
the establishment of a multilateral legal framework
for sovereign debt restructuring processes in the
conviction of the General Assembly’s competence to
address the crucial sustainable development issues
facing States. Sovereign debt restructuring is a major
challenge to development that requires urgent action by
the international community.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
Permanent Representative of Bolivia on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. We also congratulate and thank
Argentina for its initiative.
My delegation supports the commitment and
unshakeable resolve shown in acting positively
with regard to the adoption of resolution 68/304,
which establishes a multilateral legal framework for
sovereign debt restructuring processes. In the past,
developing countries have called for the establishment
of a debt restructuring mechanism. The absence of a
debt crisis resolution mechanism has led to too little
debt restructuring. A mechanism for sovereign debt
restructuring would allow a country to approach
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund
and to request a temporary standstill on the payment
of its debt. During that time, the country would
negotiate a rescheduled time frame or restructuring
with its creditors. It is important to note that previous
efforts at restructuring have had mixed results with
formal statutory initiatives, such as the sovereign debt
restructuring mechanism, not being successful due to a
lack of buy-in by stakeholders.
The resolution before us provides an opportunity to
forge a multilateral commitment to ensure that sovereign
debt crises are dealt with in a structured manner going
forward. My delegation firmly believes that the United
Nations is the relevant forum to discuss that issue of
critical importance. The resolution recognizes the
urgent need to enhance the coherence, governance and
consistency of the international monetary and financial
system.
The United Nations is well positioned to undertake
various reform processes aimed at improving and
strengthening the effective functioning of the
international financial system and architecture. The
appearance of vulture funds has also imposed enormous
harm on global sovereign debt markets and on those
countries whose well-being depends on them. This

14-528999/29

A/68/PV.107

gave added impetus to the call made by developing
countries in previous United Nations resolutions
for enhanced approaches to debt restructuring and
resolution mechanisms.
Once again, South Africa reiterates its support for
the resolution.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me
congratulate Ambassador Sacha Llorentty, Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, for
having so ably guided us, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China (G-77), throughout the negotiations that led
to the adoption of resolution 68/304.
I would also like to thank the delegation of
Argentina, under the leadership of its Foreign Minister,
Ambassador Héctor Timerman, and its Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Marita Perceval, for
drawing the attention of developing and developed
nations alike to the critical issue of sovereign debt
restructuring.
Brazil believes that the resolution should have
been adopted by consensus. We underline the G-77
and China’s initiative to engage in consultations on the
importance of following up on an issue with evident
systemic implications, especially at a time when
Member States are negotiating a development agenda
for the coming decades. We highlight the Group’s
flexibility in postponing the definition on modalities to
the next session, thus setting in motion the negotiating
process without prejudging its final outcome. The
idea of a proposed multilateral legal framework on
debt restructuring was yet another demonstration of
flexibility.
We were surprised by allegations that this topic
was not suitable for treatment at the United Nations.
Development has never been a taboo issue for the
General Assembly, including in its aspects related
to debt sustainability and debt restructuring. The
resolution we have just adopted builds on the treatment
given to this issue in annual resolutions within the
Second Committee and at annual special meetings
of the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton
Woods Institutions and the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), as well as at
biannual special meetings of the Assembly on global
economic governance.

10/29

09/09/2014

As we approach the launch of the world’s first
universal development agenda, the linkage between
debt sustainability and sustainable development
becomes ever clearer. As the international community
organizes itself to subscribe to an ambitious,
transformational, sustainable and universal post-2015
development agenda, it must adopt the corresponding
ambitious and transformational means of implementing
it. Sovereign debt sustainability and restructuring
have been portrayed prominently as a critical means of
implementation in the outcome document of the Open
Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.
The report of the Intergovernmental Committee of
Experts on Sustainable Development Financing also
refers to the issue, stressing the fact that collective
action clauses are seen by many analysts as not sufficient
to deal with all sovereign debt restructuring cases.
The process we have launched today will, hopefully,
address this gap, with the timely support and technical
expertise of all entities of the United Nations system,
especially the International Monetary Fund, UNCTAD
and the Department of Social and Economic Affairs.
We encourage delegations that have found it difficult
to engage on this topic to reconsider their positions
during the next session of the General Assembly in the
context of the upcoming definition of modalities for
the intergovernmental negotiations and the adoption of
a multilateral legal framework on debt restructuring.
Brazil will remain constructively engaged on this issue
and looks forward to moving ahead on this process in
coordination with all Member States and the relevant
organizations.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I shall be brief; at a historic juncture, one can be very
direct.
I should like to thank Foreign Minister Héctor
Timerman for being with us today. I thank the Chairman
of the Group of 77 and China (G-77), Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
for ably guiding the work of the Group.
Argentina is facing the most negative demonstration
of speculative financial power that we have seen.
What we have seen is explicit abuse on the part of
the vulture funds that are threatening the national
economic and financial system of Argentina and many
other countries. It is deplorable that a small percentage
of financial speculators is continuing to endanger an
entire debt-restructuring system, affecting not only

14-52899

09/09/2014

A/68/PV.107

the sovereignty of a nation but also the future of many
children, girls, boys and elderly people, in order to
promote the enrichment of the few.

The cause that brings us together is familiar to
Cuba. The historic leader of the Cuban Revolution,
Fidel Castro Ruz, said in July 1987:

The lack of regulation, transparency and
accountability in the international financial system
has led to the creation of veritable empires that have so
much power that they are able to conduct ever-riskier
financial operations, knowing full well that it is the
people that will have to pay for their bankruptcies, so
that the economic system does not collapse. This we
know as privatizing profit while socializing losses.

“If underdeveloped countries owe more even as
they are paying more, it is because the monetary
manipulations of the major capitalist Powers are
dispossessing them of their own resources, with
transnational banks denying them credit when they
most need it or granting it under conditions not
unlike those set by medieval usurers.

In the light of the founding principles of the United
Nations, it is vital that we continue to pool our efforts
to promote resolutions of this kind. Unfortunately, we
were not able to adopt this resolution by consensus.
Nevertheless, Member States have spoken, and we
have achieved a majority, which demonstrates the
need to reflect and to continue to work constructively
on this matter. That is why I urge all Member States
to participate in the process of the establishment of
a multilateral mechanism for the restructuring of
processes of sovereign debt. This is basically what this
resolution is proposing, and that is why my country,
Ecuador, supported it and voted for it.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank my brother, the Permanent Representative
of Solomon Islands, for his leadership of this meeting.
Let me first welcome Héctor Timerman, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Republic of
Argentina, who honours us with his presence. Once
again we express to him our full solidarity with and
support for the Argentine people in the face of the
aggression they are facing today from the so-called
vulture funds. Given their spurious motives and
conduct, those who run such funds do not even deserve
to be called vultures. Vultures in general terms are
scavengers and make a positive contribution to the
balance of the ecosystem. These funds are dangerous
parasites that threaten the welfare of our peoples.
Today is a historic day for the General Assembly.
For the first time, after decades of discussion in the
context of the United Nations, this body has been able
to adopt a resolution whose aim is to establish, through
a democratic, open and transparent negotiation process,
a multilateral legal framework for restructuring the
external debt of our countries.

“In the context of the framework of international
economic relations, where we see the phenomenon
of debt developing, its internal structure and
dynamic growth require the creation of more debt
in order to pay debt; hence the mathematical and
economic impossibility of ever paying off that
debt”.
For years, our peoples have made enormous
sacrifices to honour our foreign financial obligations,
thus compromising their right to development and their
own minimal living conditions. In contrast, wealthy
usurers and speculators have stepped up their ambitions
to absurd extremes, profiting from hunger, illiteracy
and disease and denying the dream of a better future to
our children, women and men.
Along with many other countries of the global
South, Cuba supported a draft resolution in the Human
Rights Council that established the mandate of the
independent expert on the effects of foreign debt and
other related international financial State obligations
on the full enjoyment of all human rights, in particular
economic, social and cultural rights.
The devastating impact of foreign debt on the
enjoyment of human rights by many peoples of Asia,
Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean — and
more recently even Europe — demonstrates the urgency
and relevance of adopting measures such as resolution
68/304, which we have just adopted.
Foreign debt has become a tool for looting
developing countries. We have paid several times
over the amount of money we received, and we
have not significantly improved the conditions for
future payment. The servicing of foreign debt is
commandeering resources that are crucial to the South’s
development. Its diabolical mechanisms have served in
several cases to plunder our natural resources and have
forced industries that are strategic for the potential

14-5289911/29

A/68/PV.107

development of our economies to denationalize. Even
worse, in extreme cases, payments of those obligations
has served to finance wars of imperialist aggression
and conquest.
How much progress could have been made in
​​
meeting the Millennium Development Goals if
developing countries had not been deprived of millions
of dollars worth of financial resources that had to be
allocated to meet the unfair conditions imposed for
the repayment of foreign debt and its servicing? How
many millions of children could have been saved from
curable diseases? How many millions more would
have attended school and fully realized their right to
education? How many millions more would have slept
happy and kept at bay the insufferable nightmares of a
stomach ravaged by hunger?
The law must presuppose justice, rationality and
guarantees for the greater good. International law must
live up to the requirements of a peaceful world in which
full human rights for all is a reality. Today we have
made a modest contribution to the achievement of those
paradigms.
Cuba is proud to be among the sponsors of today’s
resolution. We commend the Chair of the Group of 77
and China — Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz — and
all the representatives of the brotherly Plurinational
State of Bolivia for their leadership of the negotiations.
Although the resolution is too late to provide the
multilateral framework of justice Argentina deserves,
its adoption confirms the solidarity of the international
community with the determination of its leaders in
defence of the Argentine people and the rights of the
vast majority of creditors who have not colluded to deny
a future of progress to the nation of San Martín, the
same country that gave birth to and nurtured Ernesto
Guevara de la Serna, our beloved Che Guevara.
With the resolution adopted today, we can indeed
prevent the attack against the Argentine people from
being repeated in future against this country or any
other country on Earth. While we cannot ensure that
there will be justice for the peoples of the South, we can
indeed ensure that we will have made a contribution to
establishing a framework to prevent the impunity from
which selfish speculators who are wagering on the ruin
of our peoples benefit today.
Finally, allow us to dedicate this historic
achievement to the Grandmothers and Mothers of the
Plaza de Mayo. In their time, they confronted the tragic
12/29

09/09/2014

silence that surrounded the issue of their disappeared
relatives. But, while knowing that they could not bring
them back, they also believed that justice was important.
Above all, they believed that such an episode should
not be repeated, saying “never again”. So I conclude
my statement by recalling that phrase. Let us hope that
what has already happened will never again happen to
Argentina or any other people on Earth.
Miss Richards (Jamaica): My delegation welcomes
this opportunity to address the important issue of
sovereign debt restructuring and debt sustainability.
We have been carefully observing recent events, which
we believe bring great urgency to the need to address
this issue — one that has remained unresolved for far
too long. Jamaica shares the concerns of many in the
international community, including several eminent
economists, that the lack of a statutory international
sovereign debt restructuring mechanism risks
jeopardizing any prospects for countries in debt distress
to reposition their economies on a growth trajectory.
The increased interdependence of the global
economy magnifies the impact of both localized
and exogenous economic shocks, which can quickly
be transmitted from one part of the economic and
financial system to another. It is imperative, therefore,
that a holistic approach be taken to the restructuring
of sovereign debt in a manner that brings increased
stability and predictability to the operations of the
international monetary and financial system.
Jamaica recognizes the need for a multilateral legal
framework on sovereign debt restructuring to address
the risks posed to both developing and developed
economies. Such a framework should operate in an
equitable, timely, efficient and cost-effective manner.
We view the General Assembly as an appropriate forum
in which to consider this issue, as it has a fundamental
impact on the sustainable development objectives and
aspirations of Member States.
We do not hold the view that the private market
in and of itself is able to fully address the problems of
unsustainable sovereign debt owed to private creditors.
That is particularly so in cases where the speculative
actions of specialized investment funds undertake
purchases of distressed sovereign debt on secondary
markets at deeply discounted rates for the sole purpose
of recouping full value through the pursuit of litigation.
That activity is rendered even more pernicious when
a minute proportion of creditors are allowed to thwart
the desire of the overwhelming majority of investors
14-52899

09/09/2014

to arrive at a structured resolution via an orderly debt
resolution.
We also do not subscribe to the view that collective
action clauses represent a panacea for the problem as
they, though helpful, reflect a piecemeal approach to
resolving an issue that requires a more comprehensive
remedy. It is for those reasons that Jamaica holds the
view that market-based remedies such as collective
action clauses should be complemented by international
statutory provisions that are undergirded by the force of
law.
The link between sovereign debt restructuring and
the ability of countries to meet their commitments to
the Millennium Development Goals, the sustainable
development goals and the post-2015 development
agenda is clear. The inability to undertake orderly
sovereign debt workout arrangements within the
framework of a predictable and legally binding
international sovereign-debt restructuring mechanism
will hinder the ability of countries to undertake
vital public investment in areas such as health care,
education, water and sanitation, and renewable energy.
The value of an approach that provides breathing
room for distressed sovereign debtors is clearly
evidenced by the success that insolvent private firms
have recorded through their recourse to national
bankruptcy laws. We are also mindful of the fact
that, through the Paris Club arrangements, similar
mechanisms are in place to provide relief to debtor
countries via arrangements with creditor countries.
It is indisputable that countries that are afforded
an opportunity to undertake orderly debt workout
arrangements will stand the best chance of stabilizing
their economies and regaining macroeconomic balance,
thereby providing a platform for economic growth.
Jamaica supports the launching of a process to
negotiate a multilateral legal framework for sovereign
debt restructuring and therefore welcomes the adoption
of resolution 68/304, which addresses an issue that goes
to the heart of the work in which the Assembly has been
collectively engaged.
Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank you, Sir, for the manner
in which you have led on this important issue. I would
also like to thank and welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Trade and Worship of the
Argentine Republic, His Excellency Mr. Héctor Marcos
Timerman.

A/68/PV.107

El Salvador aligns itself with the statement that
was so rightly and clearly delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
This afternoon the General Assembly has adopted
a historic resolution (resolution 68/304). The efforts
of developing countries, in particular of the Group of
77 and China, in support of the text were fuelled by
widespread feeling, not only on the part of the financial
world but also by debtor States themselves, along with
Government and private credit institutions, inter alia,
about the lack of international norms and conditions
for framing the restructuring of sovereign debt and by
the urgency to agree on appropriate ways to address
demands for redress when such debts are not repaid.
We believe that the modalities invoked in the
normative design for governing sovereign debt, which
are to be negotiated subsequently, will affect not only
all the countries forced at some point to enter a debt
restructuring process but quite probably also future
sovereign bond issues. Obviously, that matter will also
affect the interests of both public and private creditors
and all other agents involved in the process.
It is important to note that resolution 68/304 and
the implementation of a mechanism along the lines
of the one envisaged is not aimed at creditors as a
whole, whether Governments or private bond holders,
but rather at the disproportionate profits of those
speculating on margin, who have the power to derail
restructuring processes and to disrupt the proper
functioning of debt markets, with the support of the law
in the respective jurisdictions. It is therefore difficult
for us to understand the refusal of a small number of
developed countries to address this scourge, when it
has been speculators themselves who have engaged in
such practices, including vulture funds, that generated
the bubbles that plunged us and other developing
countries into the worst global economic crisis of the
past 80 years. That is why El Salvador is proud today to
have contributed to a measure that will make the world
economy healthier, more fair and more developed.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We commend the General
Assembly for adopting resolution 68/304, which was
introduced by the representative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and which provides for the establishment of
a multilateral legal framework for sovereign debt
restructuring processes. We acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina and

14-5289913/29

A/68/PV.107

commend his delegation’s efforts to steer the resolution
to the floor.
Issues related to sovereign debt have been on the
radar of the international community for several years
now. As early as 2002, the Monterrery Consensus
encouraged the consideration of an international debt
workout mechanism to restructure unsustainable
debt in a timely and efficient manner. The issue has
also been under consideration by the International
Monetary Fund. However, a systemic solution to this
long-standing problem, which continues to bedevil
several developing and developed countries, has so far
eluded us. The timing of the resolution, coming as it
does as we gear up for negotiations on the post-2015
development agenda, as well as for a comprehensive
review of financing for development, is appropriate.
As a firm believer in multilateralism, India believes
that every effort must be made to find cooperative
solutions to the common problems we face. We look
forward to constructive engagement among all Member
States so that we can collectively find a mutually
acceptable solution to this issue.
Mr. Neo (Singapore): As a member of the Group
of 77 and China, we voted in favour of resolution
68/304. However, at the same time, we are concerned
that the United Nations may not be the best forum for
such negotiations. There are established international
financial institutions, such as the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), that we think are better placed
to take these discussions forward. The IMF has the
mandate and necessary expertise. The IMF is already
engaged in serious work on the technical issues needed
to address and strengthen sovereign debt restructuring.
We should allow it to continue those deliberations in
good faith.
We hope that further deliberations will proceed
with all due care and consideration for the complex
and wide-ranging interests involved, including the
need, in any debt restructuring, to take into account the
contractual rights of all creditors. We look forward to
an amicable and durable solution to this issue.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to make the following
statement in connection with the adoption of today’s
important resolution (resolution 68/304), which calls
for the establishment of a multilateral legal framework
for sovereign debt restructuring processes.

14/29

09/09/2014

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
We welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
68/304. Although we regret that it was not adopted by
consensus, we were pleased to be among its sponsors.
Various resolutions and documents adopted by
this international Organization as well as within the
framework of specialized international conferences, in
particular the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, have led to a set of moral
and legal obligations and responsibilities according to
which support should be given to developing countries
in line with their national development priorities, so
as to eliminate all obstacles that hamper their efforts
to achieve sustainable development. We therefore
appreciate the initiative represented by the resolution
just adopted, which complements the long-standing,
ongoing efforts and numerous initiatives of the Group
of 77 and China to find sustainable and just solutions
to the issue of sovereign debt, which has become a
major obstacle that prevents developing countries from
achieving their development goals.
Syria welcomes the focus of resolution 68/304 on
the role of the United Nations and the Bretton Woods
institutions in improving economic and financial
systems and providing a firm and swift response to
assist developing countries in overcoming sovereign
debt impediments and protecting their economies from
the mechanisms that have burdened the economies of
developing countries.
The restructuring of sovereign debt is wellestablished in the international financial system. As
a sovereign right of all Member States, it must be
protected from manipulation by predator entities.
Our role vis-à-vis the wave of crises — especially
those of a global nature — requires serious efforts to
assist affected countries, with full respect for their
sovereignty and priorities. We must not merely look
on as economies collapse, thereby threatening people’s
welfare. We therefore stress the importance of Member
States and international and regional organizations
assuming their international legal obligations with
a view to immediately preventing any politically

14-52899

09/09/2014

motivated manipulation of a crisis in a developing
country.
We must face up to the vulture fund phenomenon,
as described by the Ambassador of Cuba. International
financial institutions, which have not been reformed
since their establishment in the 1950s, still contain
the very same mechanisms. It is therefore imperative
to reform those enormous international institutions,
which are failing to uphold the principle of justice in
the distribution of wealth.
In conclusion, we express our solidarity and support
to the Government and the people of Argentina in their
efforts to relieve themselves of the consequences of
the sovereign debt crisis. We thank the delegation of
Argentina for putting forward this timely initiative in
the proper place and forum: the General Assembly.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I join others in welcoming Argentina’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Héctor Marcos Timerman, and
thank him for his country’s leadership in the adoption
of resolution 68/304 at a difficult time.
Colombia welcomes the adoption of the resolution
as a correct step forward towards that we hope will
become a lasting, predictable and effective solution in
dealing with sovereign debt as part of an international
financial system, which also requires a stable period
based on just rules to promote development. That was
expressed clearly and eloquently by the Chair of the
Group of 77 and China, Ambassador Sacha Llorentty
Solíz, whom we also thank for his leadership. It is within
the framework of the United Nations, more than in any
other forum, that we should be able to find solutions for
the establishment of a multilateral legal framework for
sovereign debt restructuring mechanisms.
It has been nearly 70 years since the establishment
of the Bretton Woods institutions, and more than
10 years since we have been trying here to develop a
new financial architecture. Today we have taken a
definitive step forward with the firm support provided
for the adoption of today’s resolution. The international
community must realize that there can be no path to
inclusive growth and sustainable development without
providing a genuine solution to the sovereign debt
problem.
Alleviating the debt situation is critical to freeing
up resources that could be channelled towards
activities favouring poverty eradication, sustainable

A/68/PV.107

economic growth, reducing inequality and achieving
the internationally agreed Millennium Development
Goals, especially now as we are discussing the post2015 sustainable development goals and agenda. That
is where those resources should be applied.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts
and determination. I am convinced that resolution
68/304, which we have adopted today, will be an
indispensable element to be considered as part of next
year’s third International Conference on Financing for
Development.
Mr. De Lara Rangel (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
In the past, Mexico faced and successfully overcame a
complicated process in order to restructure its foreign
debt. We therefore understand and sympathize with
Argentina, and others, in its current situation.
In a constructive spirit and bearing in mind
our recent experience, my country proposed some
amendments to resolution 68/304. Unfortunately, they
did not receive favourable consideration. That is why
my delegation abstained in the voting on the resolution
and regrets that, despite the efforts made, it was not
possible to reach consensus on an issue that is of interest
to each and every State Member of the Organization.
For many years now, the international community
has sought to ensure that the framework for the
restructuring of sovereign debt would be capable of
overcoming the difficulties that may arise in practice
and providing guarantees to the parties involved. The
past decade has seen significant progress in ensuring
that those processes do not jeopardize the economic
stability of States. The inclusion of collective action
clauses in sovereign debt contracts is an example of
such progress.
Improving and streamlining sovereign debt
restructuring processes is an ongoing activity that is
considered in the relevant international forums, with the
participation of our countries. Recently, in particular,
there has been significant progress and concrete
alternatives proposed to strengthen the contractual
frameworks regarding sovereign debt. We would like
to point out that in those cases where we have identified
areas that could benefit from greater legal certainty
and clarity, we have gone before the relevant judicial
bodies. For example, we recently had the honour to
appear before the United States Supreme Court as a
friend of the court in order to express our concerns
about, and make recommendations for, creating a

14-5289915/29

A/68/PV.107

better environment for restructuring sovereign debt in
general, and in Argentina in particular.
Mexico agrees that we should continue to
strengthen the existing framework and that no debtrestructuring process should impose unsustainable
burdens on a country or endanger its development and
population. In that regard, we reiterate our support to
the Government of Argentina regarding the situation
that the restructuring of its sovereign debt has led to
and our solidarity with countries dealing with similar
processes.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I would like to associate
my delegation with the statement delivered on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China. We would also like to thank
Argentina for taking this commendable initiative.
Sri Lanka would like to express its full support
for the adoption today of resolution 68/304. We agree
with its objective of increasing the efficiency, stability
and predictability of the international financial
system without adversely affecting economic growth.
Maintaining economic growth is one of our prime
goals. We expect this initiative to contribute to the
fulfilment of the unfinished business of the Millennium
Development Goals, sustainable development goals and
the post-2015 development agenda. It is very clear that,
if the current unregulated legal processes continue,
finishing that unfinished business will remain a distant
dream. After all, we have all committed to cooperating
in the pursuit of sustainable development.
We hope that many of our developed-country
partners will in due course support this initiative. Once
we agree on the importance of establishing a legal
framework for sovereign debt-restructuring processes,
the framework’s modalities could be decided through
constructive dialogue. A constructive dialogue aimed
at achieving an equitable goal will help both sides. We
note the extensive arrangements that are in place to deal
with debt in domestic legal systems; there is no reason
not to have one in the international arena. Predictability
and certainty in dealing with overhanging debt can only
benefit the international community and individual
countries, and make them less vulnerable to salivating
vultures, whether developed or developing.
We believe that the United Nations is the most
appropriate and representative forum for discussing
the issue of sovereign debt. There are any number
of reports that have examined this issue in the past.
A regulatory legal framework for sovereign debt-

16/29

09/09/2014

restructuring processes is essential. Addressing the
sovereign debt problems of developing countries is an
important part of international cooperation. We hope
that the Secretary-General, who has made sustainable
development goals a priority, will focus on this critical
aspect, perhaps by getting a group of advisers to look at
it as an urgent matter.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to align my
statement with that delivered on behalf of the Group of
77 (G-77) and China on today’s adoption of resolution
68/304, and I thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz, Chair
of the G-77 and China, for introducing it. I would also
like to take this opportunity to commend the tactful
diplomacy displayed by Argentina in addressing
this issue, as well as its continuing engagement with
the various delegations on this resolution. I applaud
Mr. Timerman for his leadership of a fine group of
diplomats.
We took a position in favour of this resolution
because it addresses an issue of paramount significance
for the global economy and one that affects the
ability of the developing world to achieve sustainable
development. As efforts are under way to design a
blueprint for sustainable development in the coming
year, those issues of sustainability and development
must be addressed in order to ensure the realization of
the post-2015 development agenda. The international
community must examine options for effective,
equitable, durable, independent and developmentoriented debt restructuring, and for a resolution on
international debt restructuring to meet the goals of
eradicating poverty, achieving sustainable development
and reducing inequalities.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Canada recognizes the
challenges faced by countries suffering through fiscal
difficulties, as well as the importance of examining
mechanisms aimed at addressing sovereign debt
restructuring. However, bringing this issue into the
United Nations, particularly in an artificially short
time frame, with procedural irregularities, further
politicizes a technical issue. Canada’s position against
today’s resolution 68/304 reflects our strong view that
the General Assembly is not the appropriate venue for
discussions about sovereign debt restructuring. Canada
believes instead that the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), where most Member States are well
represented, and the Group of 20 are better venues
for such discussions. We are also concerned about the
possibility that finite United Nations resources may be

14-52899

09/09/2014

used for such initiatives, which would be a duplication
of the work of other, better-suited institutions. The
question of how to handle sovereign debt restructuring
is highly technical in nature, and Canada supports
continuing the existing discussions within the IMF and
other bodies that aim to address issues of sovereign
debt.
Mrs. Eckey (Norway): Norway supports parts of
the technical aspects of today’s resolution 68/304 and
recognizes the need for an independent, multilateral
approach to resolving the debt crises of developing
countries. Since 2012 we have supported the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in
developing a step-by-step approach to the process of
creating a mechanism for working out debt. Regrettably,
the process that led up to today’s resolution has not been
fruitful or consensus-driven, which is unfortunate.
The time set aside for the consideration of substance,
discussion and negotiation was inadequate and
unrealistic. The lack of consensus gives the resolution
limited operational value.
We would have preferred to have a discussion
in connection with the regular debt resolution of the
Second Committee. Although there are other key players
in the international arena, notably the International
Monetary Fund and the Paris Club, we do welcome the
engagement of the General Assembly in these matters.
However, a rushed, divisive and premature proposal is
counterproductive. Norway therefore abstained from
taking a position on this resolution.
Mr. Versegi (Australia): I am speaking in
explanation of our position on today’s resolution 68/304
and request that it be recorded as such.
Australia was against the adoption of the resolution,
but not because we think the issues it covers are
unimportant. We agree on the importance of sovereign
debt and on the need for a restructuring framework
that does not undermine the smooth running of the
global system and economic well-being of national
Governments, businesses and individuals in affected
countries.
That is why Australia is an active participant and
contributor to the existing forums, including the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, the Multilateral Debt
Relief initiative, the Paris Club, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF). We recognize
that progress towards consensus on sovereign debt
issues has been slower than we and others would have

A/68/PV.107

liked, and we remain open to discussing ways to make
existing forums work better. However, as others have
said, the IMF’s work on strengthening the contractual
framework for sovereign-debt restructuring is well
advanced, and it would be appropriate to consider
how the international community should respond to
sovereign-debt restructuring issues once that work is
completed.
We should note, however, that we do not believe the
United Nations is an appropriate forum in which to take
this issue forward, or that a United Nations convention,
or new multilateral legal framework, under legal United
Nations auspices will be either appropriate or effective.
We look forward to continuing to work with colleagues
on these very critical issues through existing forums,
with a view to reaching consensus.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to welcome the presence in the Hall today of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Argentine Republic,
Mr. Héctor Timerman. I also wish to commend the
work done by the Group of 77 and China under the
chairmanship of the Plurinational State of Bolivia in the
person of its Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Sacha Llorentty Solíz. And I would like to commend
the work of the Permanent Mission of Argentina under
the leadership of Ambassador María Cristina Perceval,
towards the adoption this afternoon of resolution
68/304, which Uruguay fully supports.
The problems of debt restructuring currently being
faced by Argentina are not exclusive to that country;
they reflect the reality of a great number of countries
that have been affected by similar circumstances, or
could find themselves in that situation in the near future.
Moreover, it affects the international community as a
whole, both developed and developing countries. We
should not lose sight of the fact that external debt is one
of the main obstacles to development, economic growth
and the eradication of poverty. It is also clear that debt
limits the capacity to create the conditions that are
required for the exercise of human rights, in particular
economic, social and cultural rights.
As far as breadth is concerned, we appreciate
the fact that today in the General Assembly we have
considered a resolution of this scope. We feel that this
is the appropriate forum to deal with economic and
financial matters, given the current challenges that
exist. The General Assembly is the most democratic
organ of this institution where the entire membership is
represented on an equal footing.

14-5289917/29

A/68/PV.107

09/09/2014

Uruguay has expressed its repudiation of financial
speculation as represented by vulture funds. We believe
that it is essential that countries be able to count on
a restructuring of sovereign debt under just conditions
without that affecting their development, and at the
end of the day the well-being of its people. These
kinds of unjust situations fly in the face of creating the
conditions for the development that we have referred to,
as well as growth and the eradication of poverty, among
other areas that we deal with in the United Nations. A
human rights perspective is also absent, one that should
be taken into considered when dealing with the wellbeing of peoples. We cannot allow restructuring of debt
to prevent us in any way from achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, or attaining the future sustainable
development goals.

Historically, the international financial institutions
have promoted initiatives to alleviate debt that have
been accompanied by favourable conditions for States
that sign up to them. Although such initiatives may be
able to solve structural economic problems, in the end
they increase the structural social debt, in turn leading
to serious violations of people’s human rights. The
persistent problem of external debt and the servicing
of that debt by low- and middle-income developing
countries over the years has been an important factor
in preventing economic and social growth in a large
number of countries. In addition, today some developed
countries are also suffering from this, particularly the
most vulnerable countries of the European Union who
currently are facing very many social problems because
of external debt.

The international community must look into ways
by which economic interests of this kind could threaten
the well-being of millions of people. My delegation sees
this resolution in that spirit.

A very sensitive and complicated issue for countries
in debt are the so-called vulture funds — named for an
animal whose main trait entails going in for the kill
just as its prey is dying. Such funds, formally referred
to as distressed investment funds, buy up the debt of
countries and companies about to go bankrupt, usually
at 20 to 30 per cent of their value, and then they argue
in courts for 100 per cent reimbursement. According to
inforamtion from the International Monetary Fund, as
many as eight such funds are pursuing heavily indebted
countries, such as the Republic of the Congo, Cameroon,
Uganda and, more recently, Argentina. Clearly, vulture
funds are behaving in line with the selfish logic of
capitalism, which only seeks to easily enrich the few to
the detriment of the most vulnerable.

Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
voted in favour of resolution 68/304 because it refers to a
pending issue in the area of financing for development.
The international community, in the context of the
Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development,
stressed the need to work on and solve the systemic
problems in the international financial architecture.
We feel that the adoption of this resolution is a step in
the right direction — part of the work of the upcoming
third Conference on Financing for Development, to be
held in Addis Ababa in July 2015 — in the framework
of the sustainable development goals and the post2015 development agenda. It is also a demonstration of
solidarity towards developing countries that have faced
a difficult situation in restructuring their sovereign
debt because of the lack of a multilateral framework to
govern such processes.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would
like to take this opportunity to support the statement
made by the representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 68/304, entitled
“Towards the establishment of a multilateral legal
framework for sovereign debt restructuring processes”.
We would also like to cordially welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Argentina, Mr. Héctor Timerman.

18/29

The challenge faced by the international community
is to find effective solutions at the United Nations,
not from the international financial institutions given
the disaster that the latter have brought about at the
international level with regard to resolving the debt
issue. For developing countries it is of vital importance
that we maintain a reference to transparency in the
processes dealing with external debt. That is a criticism
of the non-functioning of the international financing
institutions. As rightly pointed out by the Group of
77 and China in the Declaration of Santa Cruz de la
Sierra, adopted on 15 June, it is alarming to see the
increasing number of developing countries that are
being affected by the global economic crisis and that
are becoming even more vulnerable to problems related
to external debt. Therefore, the external debt problem
of developing countries is an important component of

14-52899

09/09/2014

international cooperation and the global alliance for
development.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been
promoting bilateral financial assistance initiatives by
buying up debt from other countries of the region,
while condemning the speculative practices of socalled vulture funds. Once again, our country is an
example in terms of the new strategies being adopted
by developing countries to promote interregional
financing among ourselves and to reduce our
dependence on and vulnerability vis-à-vis international
capital markets. That also means better usage of the
financing cycles related to the export prices of primary
resources and their rational usage in financing regional
development strategies aimed at facilitating investment
in infrastructure, growth and integration.
In that connection, the Venezuelan position is
guided by its homeland plan for the period 2013-2019,
which is aimed at contributing to the development of
new international geopolitics in which a multicentric,
polycentric world takes shape that will lead to the
achievement of global harmony and guarantee peace in
the world. That is seen in particular in the development
of a new international financial architecture that is
fair and can really solve the external debt problem of
developing countries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been
supporting Argentina’s position in all international
forums with regard to the restructuring of the
country’s sovereign debt in the face of vulture funds.
In that connection, we have stressed the fact that one
cannot require States to pay an immoral debt under
unacceptable conditions. That is why the region must
get behind such initiatives as the Bank of the South in
order to independently counter the attacks of speculative
financial capital.
In conclusion, the debt problem is intimately linked
to the need to create a new international financial
architecture that is fairer and more democratic by
strengthening the United Nations system in that area,
the commitment of developing countries and the new
financial systems that are being created at the regional
level. Bilateral funds such as Venezuela’s with Iran,
China and Russia seek new innovative alternatives to
solve the problem of developing countries’ debt, based
on States’ real needs and without affecting their internal
policies or their economic or political systems.

A/68/PV.107

In that regard, we would stress that the Millennium
Development Goals could be jeopardized given the
reality that the large majority of indebted countries must
divert their scarce resources to paying their debt rather
that investing them for the benefit of their peoples.
As Venezuela’s President Nicolás Maduro Moros
has said, we support any initiative aimed at finding
appropriate, effective, wide-ranging and durable
solutions to the problem of debt on the basis of the
resolution adopted today.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by our colleague
Mr. Sacha Llorentty Solíz, Ambassador of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia and Chair of the Group of
77 and China (G-77).
While Algeria would have preferred to adopt
resolution 68/304 by consensus, we nonetheless
welcome the results of today’s vote. By adopting
the resolution, the General Assembly has sent a
clear message to the banking and financial sectors
that practices and measures that could hinder the
development of any country are of serious concern to
us at the United Nations.
Today’s resolution is timely, judicious and legitimate.
It not only seeks to establish an appropriate framework
whose purpose is to effectively and adequately regulate
the process of sovereign debt restructuring, but it also
places States and peoples at the heart of the system,
thereby preventing financial institutions devoid of
any form of scruples from hijacking the development
process of a nation or its sovereignty. In that vein, I
must recall the words of President Evo Morales Ayma
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, who has spoken
about the inhuman and untamed nature of capitalism.
But we also accept our system of the global economy.
Algeria, which faced a terrible financial crisis
in the 1990s and had to confront the terrible process
of debt restructuring, has consistently advocated a
profound reform of the international financial system
so as to reflect the development aspirations of all
people — which means that it is not just about making
profits. We can accept reasonable profits, of course,
but the goal is also to effectively promote poverty
eradication, job creation, production and strong
inclusive and sustainable economic growth.
At this juncture I wish to congratulate to
congratulate Minister Timerman and our colleague,

14-5289919/29

A/68/PV.107

Mrs. María Perceval. They did a tremendous job. We
extend our congratulations for their initiative and for
the huge international success they have achieved.
We thank them because they sounded a wake-up call
for everyone, including those who did not agree with
the G-77 text. This goes beyond the Argentine debt:
freedom and democracy are at stake. National cohesion
and international relations should be governed in a
transparent, democratic and open way that benefits all.
We cannot contemplate financial institutions
and the latest crisis always being on our minds. We
cannot countenance having invisible groups behind
the scenes deciding on the stability and fate of peoples,
countries and citizens without their knowledge. This is
not a technical issue; it is a hard-wired political one.
Those people, groups and institutions are not — and
they cannot act as if they were — our elected leaders,
working against our basic interests and the stability of
our countries.
For all those reasons, Algeria is a strong supporter
of the G-77 resolution.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 67 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft decision (A/68/L.58)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly decided to consider sub-item (b) of
agenda item 67 directly in plenary meeting and adopted
resolution 68/237 at its 72nd plenary meeting, on
23 December 2013, and adopted decision 68/556 at its
99th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2014.
The General Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/68/L.58, entitled “Programme of activities
for the implementation of the International Decade for
People of African Descent”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/68/L.58?
Draft decision A/68/L.58 was adopted (decision
68/558).
20/29

09/09/2014

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 67 and of agenda item 67
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/68/L.59)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 75 at its 41st and
42nd plenary meetings, on 31 October 2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.59.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 75, draft resolution
A/68/L.59, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”. In addition to the six countries listed
in document A/68/L.59, which contains the text of
the draft resolution, 59 countries have indicated their
wish to be included as sponsors of the draft resolution.
That brings the total number of sponsors to 66. It is
my understanding that the Secretariat will read out the
names of those countries.
On 31 October 2013, the President of the
International Criminal Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song,
presented the ninth annual report (A/68/4) of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the Assembly
(see A/68/PV.41). We had a very constructive and
in-depth debate then, and I would like to highlight a
few elements of it.
First, in order to ensure the Court’s success,
universal adherence to the Rome Statute of the ICC
remains essential. With 122 States having ratified
or acceded to the Rome Statute, almost two thirds of
States Members of the United Nations have shown their
commitment to its universality. It is our sincere hope
that others will join in the near future.
Secondly, I would like to highlight the fact that the
situation with respect to outstanding arrest warrants
remains deeply troubling. The Court remains reliant
on State cooperation in the enforcement of its orders
and decisions. If States do not provide the cooperation
necessary for the Court’s functioning in accordance
with their legal obligations, it will not be able to fulfil
its mandate, and impunity will continue to flourish.

14-52899

09/09/2014

The cooperation of States, international organizations
and civil society is essential to the Court’s functioning.
That cooperation is crucial not only in relation to the
arrest and surrender of accused persons, but also in
relation to the provision of evidence, the protection and
relocation of victims and witnesses and the enforcement
of sentences. We are therefore pleased that the United
Nations has continued over the past year to assist the
Court in its endeavours through the implementation
of the relationship agreement. We also welcome the
assistance provided thus far by States parties and States
not parties and call on all States to continue to support
the Court’s efforts in that respect.
Thirdly, I would like to recall that the hallmark
of the Court is its independent judicial nature. At the
same time, that judicial institution operates within the
political world, and it needs States to not just cooperate
with it but also respect, protect and enhance its judicial
independence.
Fourthly, my Government welcomes the recent
visit of the Security Council to The Hague to meet
with the members of the International Criminal Court,
among others. Practical follow-up to that visit to further
enhance the relationship is called for.
Fifthly and finally, the ICC’s annual report and
the debate in the General Assembly also underlined
the role of the Court in our common efforts to build an
international community characterized not only by the
rule of law and respect for human rights, but also by
peace and security. Sustainable peace cannot be achieved
if the perpetrators of the most serious crimes are not
brought to justice. Peace and justice are complementary
requirements. Peace and justice also serve as essential
conditions that further the development of nations
recovering from conflict. Research has demonstrated
that those nations that have come to terms with the
wrongdoings of the past are better equipped to make
progress and advance than those that remain unable to
deal with crimes from the past.
My country, the Netherlands, takes pride in being
the host State to the International Criminal Court and
many other leading international legal institutions. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its commitment
to be the United Nations partner in the pursuit of peace,
justice and development, which are three fundamental
pillars that, as I mentioned before, are inseparable
and cannot be attained in isolation. We stand ready to
continue to work with the Assembly in achieving our
common objectives in those areas.

A/68/PV.107

Allow me to now turn to the draft resolution itself
(A/68/L.59), which serves three main objectives.
First, it provides political support for the
International Criminal Court as an organization and for
its mandate, its aims and the work it carries out.
Secondly, it underlines the importance of the
relationship between the Court and the United Nations
on the basis of the relationship agreement, as both the
United Nations and the ICC have an equally central
role in enhancing the system of international criminal
justice.
Thirdly and lastly, the draft resolution serves
to remind States and international and regional
organizations of the need to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in carrying out its tasks.
Please allow me to thank all delegations that
participated in the negotiations for their constructive
cooperation and the flexibility shown during the
negotiations on this draft resolution.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands hopes that the
draft resolution will be adopted by consensus and
that it will lead to even greater support for the Court
in the fight against impunity, and its attempts to hold
the perpetrators of serious crimes accountable for their
actions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.59 entitled
“Report of the International Criminal Court”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Mahmassani (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/68/L.59, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,

14-5289921/29

A/68/PV.107

Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.59?
Draft resolution A/68/L.59 was adopted (resolution
68/305).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
the speaker in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Rahamtalla (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Sudan reiterates its clear and firm position on rejecting
the so-called International Criminal Court (ICC),
as it continues to serve as a forum for politicizing
international justice and targeting African leaders.
Since its establishment, the Court has maintained its
antagonistic position vis-à-vis the African States.
The Sudan is not party to the Rome Statute. Hence,
we are not bound by its decisions in accordance with
the Vienna Treaty on the Law of Treaties. We have
a national justice system that is qualified and capable
of administering justice. We can achieve that without
any external support. The strenuous efforts to make
the General Assembly an assembly of States parties
to the International Criminal Court violates the
Charter of the United Nations and runs counter to the
established principles of international law. The Court
is an independent body with no institutional link with
the United Nations. No obligation beyond the context of
States parties should be imposed on non-State parties.
The Sudan therefore did not vote in favour of resolution
68/305. It does not support it. We request that our
position be reflected in the record of the meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position after the adoption of
the resolution.
I now give the floor to those representatives that
have requested the floor to make statements following
the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of Argentina, Austria, Belgium,
Chile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Costa
Rica, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
Iceland, Luxembourg, Mexico, Peru, Romania,
Slovenia, South Africa, Switzerland, Trinidad and
Tobago and my own country, Liechtenstein.
22/29

09/09/2014

We welcome the adoption of resolution 68/305 by
consensus but also regret that, despite the efforts of the
facilitator from the Netherlands and of States parties,
virtually no progress has been achieved compared
to last year’s text (see resolution 67/295) in spite of
important substantive developments in the relationship
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We hope that we will be able to
embark on a better process in the future and to agree on
a text of improved quality and greater relevance.
The International Criminal Court has established
itself as the centrepiece of the international fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes under
international law, in which the United Nations is a
key partner. The annual resolution is the only text that
deals exclusively with the relationship between the
two institutions. It is therefore an important vehicle to
adequately reflect and promote that relationship.
The resolution can and should be an important
tool to assist the Court in fulfilling its mandate to
fight impunity. Unfortunately, we must state that this
year’s text only partly fulfils that expectation. The
States parties to the Rome Statute have made numerous
suggestions on how the resolution could be improved
but very few of those are reflected in the text just
adopted.
We regret in particular that the text does not take
better account of the ongoing ratification process of the
Kampala amendments on war crimes and on the crime
of aggression. The prohibition of the illegal use of force
is at the core of the Charter of the United Nations. The
criminalization of the crime of aggression before the
ICC will bring the two institutions even closer together.
It would therefore be appropriate for the General
Assembly to call on States to ratify those amendments,
since a significant number of States have already done
so and as they entail a notable contribution to the
purposes and objectives of the Organization.
The Security Council is given a special role under
the Rome Statute, as it can refer situations of States
not party to the Statute to the Court in order to hold
perpetrators to account. The Security Council must
utilize its referral power in a consistent manner,
whenever necessary. Having made use of that role twice
in the past, the Council also needs to follow up on its
own referrals in order to allow for judicial proceedings
to take place in The Hague. A better institutional
framework to discuss issues of cooperation between
the Council and the Court is needed, as too many of
14-52899

09/09/2014

the Court’s letters and requests by States have gone
unanswered and too many technical issues have not
been addressed. The recent visit of the Security Council
to the headquarters of the ICC is an important step that
should be followed up by practical measures.
We also wish to again point out that the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court provides for the Court
to be refunded by the United Nations for expenses
incurred in connection with Security Council referrals.
That issue is also not adequately reflected in the text,
even though a significant number of delegations felt that
it should be. The ICC faces serious capacity constraints
and would not be able to discharge crucial tasks, such
as investigations of crimes in other situations following
a Security Council referral, without being given
additional resources. The United Nations membership
cannot continue to turn a blind eye to that fact.
We therefore look forward to discussing with
like-minded delegations how we can bring the text
closer to its important purpose, reflecting the political
challenges that the Court faces in its interaction with
the United Nations and, instead of focusing on technical
matters, addressing pressing political concerns.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank the representative of the
Netherlands as the facilitator of resolution 68/305.
Argentina not only supported the adoption of the
resolution but also co-sponsored it. It did so due to
its firm support for the International Criminal Court
(ICC). My country values the fact that the resolution
was adopted by consensus because the relationship
between the International Criminal Court and the
United Nations is undeniable. The Organization has
supported the objective of fighting impunity for the
most serious crimes of international concern and, in
the light of that and of the Rome Statute, the Security
Council has already made two referrals to the ICC.
However, beyond valuing such consensus, we
believe that consensus is not an end in itself but should
contain the appropriate content that adequately reflects
the development of the Court and of its relationship
with the United Nations, as well as the new challenges.
In that light, I would like to highlight some aspects of
the resolution that have given us cause for concern.
Paragraph 14 limits itself to mentioning the fact
that, to date, the financial cost of referrals made by the
Security Council to the Court has been borne by the

A/68/PV.107

States parties. However, it is also a fact that the Rome
Statute provides that the costs of the referrals must be
borne by the United Nations. That provision is also
reflected in the Relationship Agreement between the
United Nations and the International Criminal Court,
adopted by the General Assembly by consensus (see
resolution 58/318).
That said, what we have before us today is the fact
that the regrettable practice of the Security Council
regarding the financing of referrals is also reflected
in the General Assembly despite a great majority of
States supporting full compliance with article 115,
paragraph (b), of the Rome Statute and with article
13 of the Relationship Agreement and the fact that it
is within the competence of the General Assembly.
It is not acceptable that the General Assembly be put
in the position of not being able to take a decision on
the matter, for which it is fully competent under the
Charter. My country believes that the issue must be
adequately addressed. Not doing so may undermine
the sustainability of the Court’s investigations and the
credibility of the Organization.
Also, with regard to the Security Council, the
Organization must responsibly follow up its referrals to
the Court. The Council has made very little progress to
date. We believe that the General Assembly should be
in a position to urge the Council to have a more organic
institutionalized relationship and to cooperate more
flexibly with the Court. Unfortunately, on this occasion
we have not achieved this either.
Another aspect regarding which no progress is
reflected in the resolution, even though there has
in fact been progress among States parties, is that
of the ratification of the amendments to the Rome
Statute adopted in Kampala in 2010, in particular
the ratification of the amendment on the crime of
aggression. For reasons we fail to understand, the
General Assembly does not seem to be able to reflect
in its pronouncements the progress made towards
the entry into force of the amendment on aggression.
This attitude is deeply regrettable, as that amendment
represents a clear contribution by the Rome Statute to
international peace and security.
The notable contribution made by the ICC to the
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes
of international concern is also a contribution to the
objectives of the Organization. We hope that the
General Assembly, which throughout its history has
also made remarkable contributions to the evolution of

14-5289923/29

A/68/PV.107

the protection of human rights and accountability for
heinous crimes, will in future be able to reflect in an
appropriate manner the current challenges facing the
ICC and its relationship with the United Nations.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wishes to endorse the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein
on behalf of a group of States parties. We should like
to make some additional comments in our national
capacity.
The International Criminal Court is undoubtedly one
of the most important success stories of multilateralism.
It was born of the will of the international community
to put an end to impunity for the most serious crimes
against humanity and to bring justice to victims. Its
essence and its main strength lie in its erga omnes
jurisdiction, a fundamental principle of justice, because
history has shown that there can be no lasting peace
without justice.
As a result of this global aspiration, the world
demands that there can be no State where impunity
prevails. That is why Costa Rica reiterates the need to
continue promoting the ratification of the Rome Statute
until such time as it becomes universal.
In the meantime, the Statute provides that the
United Nations, through the Security Council, should
refer to the International Criminal Court those
cases where heinous crimes have been committed
in States non-parties. That power conferred on
the Security Council should be exercised with the
utmost responsibility and objectivity. Costa Rica
has repeatedly put forward a proposal to establish a
uniform, predictable and transparent protocol for the
referral of cases to the Court. There is no justification
for situations such as that of Syria, where reports of
United Nations experts have repeatedly found evidence
of war crimes, not to have been referred to the Court.
In this respect, Costa Rica welcomes the fact that
France has revised the proposal of the Small Five
Group, of which Costa Rica was a part, which seeks
to encourage members of the Security Council to
subscribe to a code of conduct under which they would
undertake not to resort to the veto in cases where war
crimes, genocide or crimes against humanity have been
committed.
My delegation would also urge that in future
referrals to the Court, the Security Council not include
jurisdictional exceptions that violate the principle of
24/29

09/09/2014

equality before the law and thereby risk its credibility
and that of the Court. Such resolutions must also
establish the obligation for all Member States to
cooperate with the Court. The terms of the resolution
on Syria, submitted by France and, unfortunately,
vetoed, created unacceptable exceptions.
Another crucial issue is the financing of referrals
to the ICC by the United Nations. Given that the
Charter places responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security on the shoulders of
the Security Council, in effecting such referrals the
Court is helping that organ to discharge its mandate.
In cases relating to cooperation, article 13 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court must be applied,
as it provides for the provision of economic support by
the United Nations.
The Agreement makes clear that contributions will
be made by a decision of the General Assembly. For
that reason, my delegation considers it inappropriate
that resolutions of the Security Council incorporate
language that has the aim of excluding such an
economic contribution. That goes beyond the powers
of the Council and contravenes the Agreement of
September 2004.
The issues that I have just mentioned, as well as
other key matters such as advance notification by
United Nations officials who are to have essential
contact with fugitives from the Criminal Court, as
well as the status of the ratifications of the Kampala
amendments on the crime of aggression, among other
things, are issues covered in the report presented by the
President of the Court. As such, and given their current
relevance, mentioning them in the current resolution
was not only appropriate but also particularly relevant.
However, it was not possible to include them fully
in the text because of arguments to the effect that these
matters are not the exclusive remit of the Assembly
of States Parties. My delegation does not agree.
International criminal justice must be in the interest
of all States Members of the United Nations, and the
preamble to the cooperation Agreement between the
Court and the United Nations makes express reference
to the fact that the Rome Statute reaffirms the
purposes and principles of the Charter, mentioning the
important role assigned to the Court in the context of
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole.

14-52899

09/09/2014

The texts quoted show the recognition given by the
Organization to the Court with regard to its key role
in maintaining international peace and security. We
must now implement this cooperation Agreement in
such a manner that the support of the United Nations
is strengthened.
Given its importance, the workload of the Court is
the greatest in its history: eight active investigations,
each with multiple cases, and eight preliminary
investigations. If the United Nations does not provide
financial support for Court referrals, we will have an
institution that will be obliged to decide whether or not
it begins an investigation based on its budget, not on
justice.
It is for these reasons that Costa Rica deeply regrets
that today we are adopting once again a draft resolution
that does not meet the commitments emanating from
the cooperation Agreement between the United Nations
and the Court, and, worse still, does not meet the needs
of international criminal justice.
Finally, I would like to share with the Assembly
a few lines of the joint communiqué issued on 17 July
during the celebration of International Criminal Justice
Day by Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica,
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuela:
“Although we know that international criminal
justice faces new challenges, we are confident that
we will overcome them, and that, with the support
and the commitment of all States Members of
the United Nations, civil society and the relevant
institutions, we will continue to move towards a
world where accountability prevails”.
Mr. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa aligns itself
with the statement read on behalf of the States parties
to the Rome Statute by the Permanent Representative
of Liechtenstein. My delegation would like to join
others in thanking the Netherlands for a job well done
in facilitating negotiations on resolution 68/305. My
delegation is pleased to join in the consensus on the
resolution.
South Africa is a firm supporter of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). As such, South Africa does not
take for granted the ICC’s contribution to international
criminal justice and the fight against impunity.

A/68/PV.107

As a State party to the Rome Statute, we are keenly
aware of the budgetary implications resulting from
ICC investigations and prosecutions. We wish to point
out in this regard that the costs of the investigation
and prosecution of situations referred to the ICC by
the Security Council should be borne by the United
Nations. After all, these situations are referred to the
ICC on behalf of the United Nations as a whole, and it
is inequitable that only States parties should bear the
costs. More to the point, my delegation is concerned that
the practice of the Security Council of excluding the
possibility of United Nations financing for situations
referred to the ICC by the Council amounts to usurping
the functions of the General Assembly under Article 17
of the Charter of the United Nations.
For these reasons, while we joined the consensus
on resolution 68/305, we wish to express our
disappointment that it does not include a paragraph on
financing.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): The delegation of Kenya
acknowledges the adoption by consensus of resolution
68/305, entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”. We express our gratitude to the facilitator, the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, for
ably steering the lengthy negotiations. As a responsible
member of the family of nations, Kenya joins in the
consensus and feels it pertinent to make the following
statement in our national capacity.
At the outset, we note that the resolution can assist
the Court in fulfilling its mandate, which is to fight
impunity. However, informed by current developments
in the Kenyan cases before the Court, and further
informed by the recent filings by the Office of the
Prosecutor, Kenya is constrained to state that we remain
deeply concerned by the current interpretation and
implementation of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
That the Kenyan cases are currently facing serious
challenges is a matter of public knowledge. We are faced
with a situation in which, in one case, the Office of
the Prosecutor has on more than one occasion publicly
stated that the evidence available is insufficient to
prove the defendant’s alleged criminal responsibility
beyond a reasonable doubt. In the other case, a witness
has publicly affirmed that he presented false evidence
and, by his own account, committed perjury with the
knowledge or connivance of named officials of the
Court.

14-5289925/29

A/68/PV.107

This unfortunate state of affairs goes against all
time-tested tenets of legal and judicial norms practiced
in line with known international standards of both civil
law and common law. It would seem that there is an
inability on the part of the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Court to reach the only logical conclusion in light
of the prevailing circumstances. We believe that these
challenges are insurmountable even if the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Court are given an indefinite length
of time. The gaps are simply too wide and too huge
to fill to ensure the credibility of the trials in the two
Kenyan cases.
While the ICC endeavours to carry out its mandate
and continues to receive the earnest cooperation of
State parties, it may appear that in the present state
of interpretation and implementation, the ideals of the
Rome Statute — namely, punishment of serious crimes,
fighting impunity, national healing and reconciliation
and reparations for victims — may be achievable.
However, our delegation believes that the current
implementation and interpretation of the Rome Statute
are counterproductive and antagonistic to these very
ideals.
Our continued silence and acceptance will only
undermine the legitimacy of the Court and its core
mandate, the fight against impunity. They also do
a great disservice to the victims in whose name the
proceedings continue to be perpetuated, not to mention
that they also violate the rights of the accused protected
in the Rome Statute.
We believe that the Rome Statute is undergoing
a test of its veracity, usefulness and impartiality. We
therefore need the international community to take
prompt and decisive action to ensure that the cases do
not drag on ad infinitum. The time has come to make a
decision on the future of the Kenyan cases. From where
we stand, it is time for the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor to do the right thing by dropping the cases
and charges. The present challenge is not only about the
future management of international justice, or of cases
of impunity and violence in the world; it is also about
the way in which nation States relate to one another in
the context of the international justice system. This is
the only step that can keep the integrity of the Court
intact.
The issues of resources and capacity constraints
have been alluded to by many speakers before me. It is
in this context that our delegation asks that both human
capital and financial resources be judiciously utilized
26/29

09/09/2014

and best directed to other more deserving situations
and uses.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my earlier
remark, which was that the resolution adopted today,
dealing with the relationship between the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court, presents
a unique opportunity for State parties and non-parties
alike to support the Court in the fulfilment of its
mandate. Therefore, our plea is that the Rome Statute
be interpreted and implemented in the manner and the
style that the framers of the same Statute intended.
Mr. Kőrösi (Hungary): My country welcomes
the adoption of resolution 68/305, on the report of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). Hungary
co-sponsored the resolution, deeming it important that
the United Nations membership regularly examine
its relationship with the International Criminal Court
in a forward-looking manner. Hungary is one of the
countries that envisage even stronger resolutions that
flesh out the relationship between the Court, the United
Nations and its membership in a more detailed manner.
Hungary therefore aligns itself with the statement
just delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Liechtenstein on behalf of a group of countries
championing more frequent and principled interaction
between the United Nations and the Court.
Let me touch upon only one element, already
mentioned in that statement, namely, the issue of
referrals. Hungary believes that future resolutions should
take a broader perspective on the issue of referrals,
acknowledging the mutually reinforcing relationship
between the tasks of the ICC and the Security Council.
Hungary continues to stress that there can be no lasting
peace without justice. A lack of accountability not only
kills in the present, but becomes a breeding ground
for future atrocities. Moreover, where civilians are
targeted, the Security Council should take all measures
at its disposal to protect the civilian population.
In line with the Council’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2 on the protection of civilians and the
commitments towards strengthening accountability,
the Security Council must utilize its referral power
in a consistent manner wherever and whenever it is
necessary. It is on the basis of these principles that
Hungary joined the initiative of Switzerland and signed
a letter (A/67/694, annex), along with 56 other Member
States, requesting the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the ICC.

14-52899

09/09/2014

The international community must also assist
the Government of Iraq in fighting terrorism and in
investigating the brutal acts being committed in that
country, including those threatening the very existence
of Christian and other religious minorities living in
northern Iraq.
Hungary welcomes the recent resolution adopted by
the Human Rights Council requesting the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) to dispatch a mission to Iraq to investigate
alleged violations and abuses of international human
rights law committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and associated terrorist groups, with
a view to ensuring full accountability. In addition to
supporting the Iraqi Government and the OHCHR
mission, all other options should be explored by the
international community. One such possibility that
has been carefully examined by Hungary is whether to
initiate a request for a referral by the Security Council
of the situation to the International Criminal Court,
following due consultation with the Iraqi Government.
In general, it is our fervent hope that future
resolutions will take an approach whereby the role of
making referrals related to the protection of civilians
and the prevention of conflict is further elaborated and
strengthened.
Mr. Luna (Brazil): Brazil joined in the consensus
adoption of resolution 68/305, on the report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We sponsored
annual resolutions on the ICC report until the sixtysixth session of the General Assembly, demonstrating
our unwavering support for the idea that the Court
has a pivotal role to play in the fight against impunity.
Precisely for that reason, we consider that the best means
to support the ICC is to voice our deep and growing
concern by emphasizing an issue of a structural nature
that goes to the core of the relationship between the
Court and the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly.
Despite the clear guidance provided in article
115 (b) of the Rome Statute and article 13.2 of the
Relationship Agreement between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations, in the
sense that the United Nations must bear the cost of
investigations and prosecutions related to referrals by
the Security Council, the Assembly has limited itself to
acknowledging the fact that those expenses have been
borne exclusively by States parties to the Rome Statute.

A/68/PV.107

Considering that the annual resolution is the only
text dedicated exclusively to the relationship between
the ICC and the United Nations, it is regrettable that it
does not call upon Member States to actually address
that issue. Furthermore, the incipient practice of the
Security Council to try to block the possibility of the
United Nations bearing the costs arising from referrals
to the ICC usurps the General Assembly’s exclusive
responsibility to consider and approve the budget of the
Organization, as set out in Article 17 of the Charter of
the United Nations. At a time when not only does the
Court face an unprecedented workload, but Security
Council members also frequently entertain ideas of
proposing referrals to the ICC, we must objectively
reflect on the sustainability of a system in which the
costs of the implementation of this association are met
solely by States parties to the Rome Statute.
Brazil firmly believes that the relationship of the
United Nations with the ICC, including by means
of referrals made by the Security Council, must be
accompanied by the fulfilment of the responsibility
of the United Nations in providing financial support
for the work of the Court. That issue is one of many
indications that the distance between the problems
faced by the Court and this yearly negotiated text is not
decreasing. We hope to redouble our efforts during the
upcoming session of the General Assembly in order to
approve a text truly deserving of the ICC.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
Having listened to the statements made in this debate, I
am compelled to take the floor.
The representatives of Costa Rica and Hungary
tried to include the situation in my country, Syria, in
the negotiations on today’s item. That imposition is part
of an attempt to reshuffle the roles played by certain
countries. This would seem to be a tradition. We are
familiar with seeing the redistribution of roles when
the item of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
is brought into the discussion. The representatives of
Hungary and Costa Rica forgot or omitted to mention
that their countries and other States Members of the
United Nations that claim to uphold justice recently
turned a blind eye to documented war crimes and
crimes against humanity. They have kept silent before
the crimes that have been witnessed in the Arab region.
That attitude has also been adopted by those who use
hypocrisy to practice diplomacy.

14-5289927/29

A/68/PV.107

We would have loved to see the debate focused where
it should have been focused — on countries that sponsor
terrorism, supply material and financial support, and
instil barbaric ideas in the minds of terrorists. We
would have loved for those two representatives to have
called for those responsible for those brutal actions to
be referred to the International Criminal Court. The
politicization and double standards practiced by certain
delegations have bled the lofty principle of justice of its
meaning and undermined their credibility.
I wish to reaffirm that the Syrian Government is
making every effort to shoulder its responsibility for
upholding justice. The Syrian people and authorities
are the only parties with the right to choose the judicial
arrangements they deem necessary to punish those
involved in the events in my country. We reaffirm that
no State can impose its opinions on the Syrian people.
Those who wish to help the Syrian people should assist
the Syrian-led process on the basis of the principle of
national ownership and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The Costa Rican representative referred to the
challenges faced by the ICC. It is true that the ICC is
facing challenges, foremost among which are the double
standards, politicization and hypocrisy that compose
the approach of certain countries in dealing with
international events. The representative of Hungary
addressed terrorist crime in Iraq as if the killing of
Syrians by terrorists were legal. He concentrated on
the protection of certain religious minorities and the
protection of minorities in general, omitting to state
the need to protect all Syrians, all Iraqis and all human
beings from indiscriminate terrorist actions sponsored
by certain countries, such as his own, with its double
standards.
We do not identify human beings according to their
religions or affiliation with minority groups. Every
citizen in Syria is a Syrian citizen. Every Iraqi in Iraq
is an Iraqi citizen. Every human being is a human
being before any other consideration. We call upon the
two delegations to respect the Syrian people and take
positions that reflect such respect.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of agenda item 75.

28/29

09/09/2014

Agenda items 125 (continued) and 124
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/68/L.42/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 125, jointly with
agenda items 14 and 118, at its 54th plenary meeting, on
20 November 2013, and adopted resolution 68/268 at its
81st plenary meeting, on 9 April 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1.
Ms. Rios Requena (Plurinational State of Bolivia):
I have the honour to introduce, on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1,
entitled “Enhancement of the administration and
financial functioning of the United Nations”.
In recent years, many Permanent Missions of
Member and Observer States to the United Nations
and their staff have been seriously affected and even
humiliated by the arbitrary decisions of several banking
institutions in the City of New York to abruptly close
their bank accounts and subsequently refuse to continue
to provide services to them. As a result, the dignity
and normal functioning of the Permanent Missions
concerned and the United Nations as a whole have
been negatively affected. That unusual situation is far
from being in line with the facilities that have to be
ensured to Permanent Missions to the United Nations
under the host country agreement and the 1961 Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
Considering the severity of the situation and the
number of Missions affected, the Group of 77 and China
deems it necessary to present a draft resolution with
the objective of achieving a long-term solution to the
problem. In April, a process of informal consultations
with the whole United Nations membership was
undertaken. It is important to underscore that all
concerned parties participated and contributed to the
draft resolution in a constructive and cooperative spirit.
We recognize the engagement of the host country of the
United Nations, which has the regulatory power over
the banking system, and trust that that engagement will
continue.

14-52899

09/09/2014

The Group of 77 and China would like to take this
opportunity to deeply thank Belarus for co-sponsoring
the draft resolution under consideration.
After four months of consultations, a revised
version of draft resolution A/68/L.42 was agreed
informally, and it is now before the General Assembly
for consideration. Allow me to highlight that the draft
recognizes the problem and notes with concern the
difficulties experienced by the affected Permanent
Missions and their staff, and therefore requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
on the issue and its impact on the adequate functioning
of those Permanent Missions.
The draft resolution also requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly on the
financial relations of the Secretariat with the banking
institutions in the City of New York, and to provide
Member and Observer States with information on
alternative options regarding banking services in the
City of New York. Furthermore, the draft resolution
requests that the host country take as soon as possible
additional measures to assist the Permanent Missions
accredited to the United Nations and their staff to
obtain appropriate banking services, and also stresses
the importance of ensuring confidentiality of personal
data and information on persons affected by the closure
of accounts, inviting the host country to submit relevant

A/68/PV.107

information on the norms and regulations applicable to
the banking system.
In conclusion, the draft resolution under
consideration by the General Assembly will allow the
Organization to gain knowledge of the magnitude of
the problem and its consequences and will certainly
contribute to taking the necessary measures. The
Group of 77 and China looks forward to adopting
draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1 by consensus and
to following up on the matter during the sixtyninth session, as a first step towards a much-needed
permanent solution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1,
entitled “Enhancement of the administration and
financial functioning of the United Nations”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/68/L.42/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 68/306).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 124 and 125.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

14-5289929/29
