S/PV.9025

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9025th meeting

Friday, 29 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-33394 (E)
*2233394*

S/PV.9025

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/356, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2629 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2629 (2022) to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL). We thank the United Kingdom, as the
penholder, for its efforts in facilitating the negotiations
that led to the adoption of the resolution, which
reaffirms the Security Council’s support for a Libyanled and Libyan-owned comprehensive political process.
We look forward to the Mission continuing to
implement its mandate effectively in the light of the
Council’s endorsement of the recommendations of the
strategic review, including returning the Mission to its
previous configuration. We also encourage UNSMIL to
intensify its efforts to advance the political process as
well as the security and economic tracks.
We hope that the Council will be able to adopt an
integrated and substantive draft resolution that responds
2/7

29/04/2022

to the future course of events in Libya. We underscore
the importance of the Council continuing to speak with
one voice to support Libya in achieving the aspirations
of its people.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): First, I would like
to express our appreciation to the United Kingdom
for its determined efforts as penholder on this
mandate renewal.
Ireland voted in favour of resolution 2629 (2022)
today because we believe that an effective United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) is vital to support
the Libyan people and their legitimate expectations of
a democratic and peaceful future. With the adoption of
this resolution, the Security Council has finally come to
agreement on the long-overdue implementation of the
recommendations of the Mission’s strategic review. We
believe that will equip UNSMIL to achieve optimum
impact on the ground, including through the reform of
the Mission’s leadership structure. We look forward to
the swift appointment of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
The sustained support from the United Nations and
the Security Council is also essential to overcome the
current political impasse and to help Libyan stakeholders
forge agreement on the way forward and on the holding
of elections as soon as possible. The importance of
free, fair and inclusive elections is emphasised in this
text, as is the need for adherence to the October 2020
ceasefire agreement.
Despite our positive vote today, we sincerely
regret that, owing to the objection and intransigence
of one Council member, we were not to secure
consensus on a substantive one-year mandate renewal,
as originally proposed by the penholder. Instead,
we have unfortunately defaulted to another short,
three-month renewal.
This is the fourth time we have resorted to a brief
and essentially technical rollover on UNSMIL since
we joined the Council. We firmly believe that a longer
renewal would provide much-needed stability and
predictability to the Mission at a critical and sensitive
juncture in Libya’s transition.
Furthermore, there are many crucial elements now
absent from this text, including on human rights, the
role of women and the humanitarian situation, to name
but a few. We wish to reiterate that the most recent
substantive resolution renewing UNSMIL’s mandate,
22-33394

29/04/2022

The situation in Libya

resolution 2542 (2020), of September 2020, remains the
guiding framework when it comes to the Mission’s role
on the ground.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania welcomes the
mandate renewal of United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), which we supported. I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and the United
Kingdom team, the penholder, for its relentless work
and commend it for the outcome.
Albania further welcomes the focus of resolution
2629 (2022) on the implementation of the independent
strategic review and strongly encourages its
implementation. We commend the mediation efforts
of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Stephanie Williams, in paving the way towards
national elections through a sustainable, Libyan-led
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations. We hope that the May talks in Cairo will
have positive results in advancing the aspiration of
the Libyan people towards national elections, held on
a constitutional basis, and we expect the parties to
engage in negotiations in good faith.
Albania and others in the Council have loudly
voiced their support for a substantive mandate renewal
of UNSMIL. Regrettably, that did not happen. We
are disappointed that one Council member imposed
a technical rollover despite the sincere engagement
and efforts of other Council members. We very much
hope that all members of the Council will engage
constructively in guaranteeing the Mission predictable
funding and resources, as well as a robust mandate to
operate on the ground in future.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
members of the Security Council for the flexibility
shown throughout the negotiations to ensure that the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
has a robust mandate equipped to meet the challenges
of the peace process and the expectations placed in the
Council by the Libyan people.
The implementation of the recommendations of the
independent strategic review is long overdue. UNSMIL
needs an adequate structure, with its leadership based
in Tripoli and in close contact with relevant Libyan
political actors, in order to carry out its functions. By
incorporating the recommendations into the mandate,
the Council provides a strong response to the political
crisis in Libya, which once again faces the dangers
of destabilization.

S/PV.9025

We hope that resolution 2629 (2022) will pave the
way for the appointment of a new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General without further delay. The
appointment of new UNSMIL leadership will confirm
to the Libyan political forces that the Council is
serious about its commitment to support the national
reconciliation process.
We regret that, once again, there was no consensus
among members to approve a longer term for UNSMIL’s
mandate. Brazil understands that the Mission would
benefit from a period of one year, which would ensure
greater predictability and facilitate the selection of the
Special Representative.
We hope that, in July, when the Council revisits
the matter, we will finally be able to overcome our
differences and do what is expected of us in the name
of peace, stability and prosperity for all Libyans.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico voted in favour of resolution 2629
(2022) because of the importance of the continuity of
the work of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) in the face of the precarious situation
of the Libyan political process.
While the recommendations of the independent
strategic review have been incorporated into the new
mandate, particularly with regard to the reconfiguration
of the Mission’s leadership, we believe that a three-month
extension, in practice and in all lights, is insufficient to
advance towards its full implementation.
The text could have included very important
elements in order to promote Libya’s stabilization,
specifically with regard to combating the illegal flow of
arms, coordinating with the countries of the region and
making reference to the national reconciliation process,
to name but a few.
We also take this opportunity to recall the
importance of appointing, as soon as possible, a Special
Representative to assume the leadership of UNSMIL
and create the conditions for a substantial renewal of
the Mission’s mandate.
Finally, we call on all members of the Council and
the international community, in general, to promote an
agreement between the Libyan political actors that will
lead to free, just and inclusive elections, with the full
participation of women and youth.

22-333943/7

S/PV.9025

The situation in Libya

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway would like to
thank the penholder for its efforts to get agreement on
a substantial renewal of the mandate of United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We appreciate that
resolution 2629 (2022)requests UNSMIL to implement
the recommendations from the strategic review and
reaffirms the Council’s support for elections.
However, we regret that the Council was not able to
agree on a full, substantial resolution with a one-year
renewal. Despite the good faith efforts of 14 Council
members, one member chose to block such an outcome.
This is the third time the Council has negotiated a
text that ultimately was not put forward. We supported
the earlier draft texts, which reflected relevant
developments in Libya and contained important
language on issues like regional cooperation, national
reconciliation and women’s participation in the
political process. The Council’s failure to agree on a
full, substantial mandate not only sends an unfortunate
signal to the Libyan people, but also to the whole region.
UNSMIL plays a pivotal role in supporting Libya’s
political process and contributes to stability in Libya,
including in cooperation with the African Union and
regional security cooperation mechanisms. Such
stability is essential for the Libyan people, neighbouring
countries and the whole African continent.
Nevertheless, our foremost priority is to secure a
continuation of UNSMIL’s mandate. And we hope that
all 15 Council members will contribute constructively
when the mandate comes up for renewal again in July.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon voted
in favour of the technical rollover of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We did not want to break with consensus. Nevertheless,
we note that the Council members once again were
unable to overcome their differences in the interests of
the Libyan people.
We therefore must emphasize and deplore that
this is the third technical rollover. At a key moment
in Libya’s history, this lack of consensus is regrettable
and impedes a more consistent and predictable
UNSMIL mandate.
It is evident that, on the political front, the country is
once again at risk of implosion, with two Governments.
The prospect of organizing elections as soon as possible,
as we would like to see, will not address the root causes
of that division. The Libyan people must engage in
4/7

29/04/2022

dialogue, and a national reconciliation process is
critical. Restoring an environment of trust among
all stakeholders, in our view, is also essential for the
country’s stability. The international community must
support that process by enhancing UNSMIL’s mandate.
We call for greater involvement by Africans in
the resolution of African crises. Above all, it is Africa
that is affected by the crises on its continent. We call
for the appointment as soon as possible of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, whom we hope will
be an African. That is vital.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2629 (2022), prepared by the United Kingdom, on
extending the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
Nonetheless, we have many questions about the
Mission’s work, which we raised very actively during
negotiations on the draft. We are convinced that keeping
the current configuration of the United Nations mediation
efforts in Libya at this very important — literally
critical — juncture is unacceptable.
In that regard, we stressed the need to ensure that
the text sends a very clear and unequivocal signal
about the need to without delay make a decision about
selecting a new leader for the United Nations team
in Libya. We expect that the Secretary-General will
discharge the duties entrusted to him to appoint a
Special Representative.
In order to speed that process along, we have been
consistently speaking out to extend the Mission for three
months only, given that for six months now UNSMIL,
because of the absence of the Special Representative,
has not been able to fully participate in accompanying
the political process in Libya. A normal organization
of United Nations work on the issue of Libya there is
important not just for Russia but, first and foremost,
for Libya itself. It is important not to forget that we
need to uphold the high standards of the United
Nations, primarily impartiality, which, unfortunately,
is not something that a number of our colleagues are
interested in.
If in the near future we anyone deliberately
hindering, owing to opportunistic interests, the
appointment of a Special Representative, we will draw
very serious conclusions about the future of UNSMIL.
22-33394

29/04/2022

The situation in Libya

We also deplore the fact that some members
of the Security Council are not prepared to accept a
scenario wherein UNSMIL will be headed by someone
from the African continent. We think that that is
not a constructive approach. It is also a display of
neocolonialism. It is important to also remember that
in 2011 the African Union spoke out in favour of a
peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis, but the Western
countries sidelined the Africans and began destroying
Libyan statehood, the consequences of which actions
we continue to experience to this day.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): We wish to thank the United
Kingdom for its hard work during the negotiations on
resolution 2629 (2022). Ghana voted in favour of the
resolution in order to move the process in Libya forward
and for consensus-building. It is, however, regrettable
that the resolution did not reflect issues related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
well as reconciliation and a substantive renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.
During the negotiations, the three African
countries members of the Security Council called
for a substantive renewal of the mandate to allow for
predictability and proper planning to meet the myriad
of challenges confronting the Libyan people. We wish
to state that reconciliation would provide the people of
Libya the opportunity to heal their wounds and forge
ahead in unison towards the peaceful development
of Libya.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya considers it crucially
important that the United Nations provide full
support to Libya’s peace process in a dedicated and
on-the-ground manner. That is why we voted to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) this morning.
We have seen remarkable positive developments in
the peace process over the past two years, an indication
of the commitment and desire of the people of Libya
to transition their country to a new era of peace and
stability. That commitment requires a robust and
substantive United Nations Mission mandate that is
able to play an effective, supportive role in that regard.
But it is deeply regrettable that after three
consecutive technical rollovers of the mandate of
UNSMIL, the Council has once again failed to agree
on a sufficiently substantive mandate, ending up with
what is, for all intents and purposes, a fourth technical

S/PV.9025

rollover. We must be reminded that the mandate of
UNSMIL serves the interests of the people of Libya.
It is unfortunate that the Council is unable to structure
United Nations support to meet those responsibilities
in accordance with the purpose and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Successful conflict resolution requires the
prioritization and sequencing of activities within a
broader comprehensive peace framework to achieve
sustainable outcomes. We are persuaded of the need
to mainstream a Libyan-led and -owned dialogue and
reconciliation on all tracks and at all stages of the
Libyan peace process, and the prevailing political
impasse makes it more critical than ever before.
On several occasions, the need for a national
dialogue and reconciliation has been underscored in
this Chamber by the representative of Libya and other
briefers. The least that the Council should do is to listen
and respond positively to the needs of the Member
States affected.
We are therefore disappointed that our expectation
that the new UNSMIL mandate would provide for
support for an inclusive and comprehensive national
dialogue and reconciliation process did not materialize.
We will continue to amplify the voice of the Libyan
people by championing that need, among other
important issues that most of us agree should be
incorporated into the next resolution.
Finally, we reaffirm our commitment to the peace
process in Libya and continue to push for decisions that
effectively respond to a truly Libyan-led and -owned
peace process.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
present, the ceasefire in Libya is generally holding,
with a notable increase in the uncertainty of the
political process and related risks and challenges. It
is imperative for the parties in Libya to strengthen
dialogue and consultation and quickly reach consensus
on the relevant arrangements for the political transition
so as to put the political transition back on track. We
hope that the Libyan parties will achieve substantive
progress at the next round of meetings, to be held in
Cairo in May.
Under current circumstances, the mediation role of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
is even more important. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2629 (2022) renewing its mandate.

22-333945/7

S/PV.9025

The situation in Libya

We hope that UNSMIL will continue to uphold the
principle of Libyan ownership and leadership, redouble
its efforts with the relevant States and regional
organizations, and strengthen its mediation efforts so
as to play a greater positive and constructive role in the
realization of peace and stability in Libya.
In addition to renewing UNSMIL’s mandate, the
resolution cuts the reporting cycle of the SecretaryGeneral to once a month. That can help the Council
to better follow developments in Libya and respond to
them. The resolution calls on the Secretary-General
to quickly appoint a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Libyan issue. China hopes
that the Secretary-General will soon nominate a
candidate for the post, in particular a candidate from
Africa, so as to fully leverage the political mediation
role of UNSMIL.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank you, Madam President, for the efforts
that you and your team deployed in these negotiations,
which made it possible for us to adopt resolution 2629
(2022) unanimously.
By voting in favour of this text, France is reaffirming
its full support to the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) and its restructuring, in accordance
with the recommendations of the United Nations
strategic review, which the Security Council has now
endorsed. That is an essential first step to give UNSMIL
all the necessary tools to fully play its mediation role.
The Secretary-General must now appoint a Special
Representative without delay, as called for in the
resolution we just adopted.
An effective political mission, with a clear line
of authority that reports to the Security Council, is
necessary to enable Libya to overcome the many
challenges it faces today. After the postponement of the
presidential and parliamentary elections in December,
it is urgent that Libya get back on track for the holding
of elections in order to move forward on the path to
peace, dialogue and reconciliation. The United Nations
mediation must support that process, which also means
that in the future the Security Council must renew a
predictable, robust one-year mandate. It is also the
Council’s responsibility to encourage Libyans to settle
their differences so that elections can be held as quickly
as possible.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States is disappointed that negotiations again
6/7

29/04/2022

failed to achieve the adoption of a substantive, year-long
mandate that authorizes the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to continue its work in
Libya with the foundation it needs to be successful.
UNSMIL is an essential partner in Libya, particularly
at this critical moment when United Nations-facilitated
dialogue has begun to bring the political process back
on track. A stripped-down resolution that does not
provide guidance on several essential issues sends the
wrong message to the Libyan people and risks allowing
spoilers to cling to the status quo, or worse.
We are particularly disappointed that the Russian
delegation demanded the removal of several elements
from resolution 2629 (2022) that would have provided
UNSMIL the guidance and resources it needs on
critical issues like reconciliation and security sector
reform. Russia’s insistence on a mandate that lasts only
three months, purportedly to facilitate the appointment
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
will have the opposite effect. A short mandate duration
severely complicates the United Nations ability to
recruit a head of mission. It also creates uncertainty for
the Libyan people and their leaders over the Security
Council’s commitment to Libya. Finally, revisiting the
mandate every few months stalls progress on UNSMIL’s
long-term plans to develop sustainable solutions to the
challenges in Libya.
Let there be no mistake: the Security Council as
a whole did not fail the Libyan people today. Fourteen
Council members were supportive of a one-year,
substantive mandate that strengthens UNSMIL’s ability
to move Libya towards stability and an inclusive peace.
I want to thank the United Kingdom for its role as
the penholder and all Council members who negotiated
in good faith, especially our three African members of
the Security Council colleagues who pushed for critical
language on reconciliation and security sector reform,
to no avail. It is incumbent upon the Security Council
to ensure that we incorporate the views of all Council
members moving forward and not allow one member to
hold the mandate hostage.
The United States will continue its full support of
United Nations efforts to establish a Libyan-led path
to free and fair elections as soon as possible. That
includes providing our full support for the initiative
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Libya, Stephanie Williams, to broker an agreement on
the constitutional framework for elections. We call on
22-33394

29/04/2022

The situation in Libya

the delegations from the House of Representatives and
the High State Council to work constructively towards
that goal.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I welcome the adoption of resolution 2629 (2022),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). I particularly welcome
the decision to implement the independent strategic
review and look forward to the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
The resolution also reaffirms the Council’s
strong commitment for the United Nations efforts
to help create a path towards free, fair and inclusive
presidential and parliamentary elections. I reiterate the
United Kingdom’s call on all stakeholders to engage
constructively in the ongoing intra-Libyan consultations
to reach an agreement on the constitutional and legal
basis for elections.

S/PV.9025

I would also like to thank the vast majority of
Council members for their constructive engagement and
flexibility throughout the negotiations. As penholder,
we made significant efforts to achieve consensus on
a resolution that would have provided UNSMIL with
greater stability to implement its mandate over a longer
period. Regrettably that was not possible. Russia has
once again isolated itself. By not joining the consensus
with the 14 other members of the Council, it has blocked
a longer mandate for UNSMIL, as both the Libyans and
the United Nations had requested. In the future, we call
on Russia to meet its responsibilities as a member of the
Security Council and join the consensus with the rest of
the Council on a substantive UNSMIL mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

22-333947/7
