UNITED NATIONS

_.Y

SECURITY COU
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2221st

MEETING:

8 MAY 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/222 1) .i......*............................

Tribute to the memory of Josip Broz Tito, President of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............................
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . ..*.....................................
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 6 May 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13926) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

ZqPV.2221

. ..
,.l

,

__.

. I-

:

.
,.

.,

.NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council; numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

222ist MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 8 May 1980, at 4.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Id& OUMAROU

(Niger).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United ‘Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2221)

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 6 May 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13926)
was called to order at 5.10 p.m.

Tribute to the memory of Josip Broz Tito, President
of the SotiiaIist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
1. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

from

French):

This meeting of the Security Council is taking place
at a time of great sorrow, when the world is mourning
the death of Josip Broz Tito, President of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. His commitment to
the work of the United Nations was a source of
inspiration to the entire world community. President
Tito was one of the founders of the non-aligned
movement, to which he brought great vision. His
passing on 4 May 1980 leaves the world bereft of one
of its foremost personalities. He was a champion of
the cause of peace and of humanity as a whole, and his
great qualities will ensure that he will be remembered
by future generations. On behalf of the Council,
I intend to send a telegram today to the Government
of Yugoslavia conveying the Council’s sincere condolences to that Government and to the people of
Yugoslavia and our heartfelt sympathy to the bereaved
family.
On the proposal of the President, the members of
the Council observed a minute of silence in tribute to
the memory of President Tito.
Expression of tbanks to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 6 May 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13926)

1. Adoption of the agenda

The meeting

I should like at the outset to Dav a tribute, on behalf
of the members of the Council; td Ambassador Porfirio
Muiioz Ledo of Mexico, for the masterly way in which
he conducted the proceedings of the Council in April.

President

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Since this is the first meeting of the Council in May,

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Israel and Jordan, in which they ask to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 8 May from the representative of Tunisia [S/13932], which reads as
follows:
“I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the
occupied Arab territories’, in accordance with the
Council’s usual practice. **
5. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) the same rights of participation as those conferred on a Member State when invited to participate
under rule 37.

Il. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I now call on those representatives who have asked to
speak after the vote.

6. Does any member of the Security Council wish
to speak on this proposal?
7. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America):
The delegation of the United States has repeatedly
made clear its view .that it is inappropriate for the
Council to couch an invitation to the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the debate in terms
that some seek to interpret as conferring rights of
participation as if it were a Member State. For this
reason, the United States will once again vote against
the manner in which this invitation has been phrased.

12. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America): Mr. President, the month of May has brought
the distinction of your presence as the leader of our
deliberations. During the membership of the Niger on
the Council you have been a most eloquent spokesman for justice and your advice and guidance have
always been wise. Already you have shown the firmness and the judgement that promise a most successful
tenure. The United States welcomes your presidency.

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak at
this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready to
vote on the proposal of Tunisia.

13. May I also use this occasion to salute our brother
the representative of Mexico, whose energy and
instinct for leadership and substantive acumen made
his incumbency a model. These months have been
endlessly difficult, complex and frequently exhausting.
But, reflecting the qualities of his great country,
Ambassador Munoz Ledo led us through the turmoil
of April with a sure hand and boundless skill, courtesy
and wisdom. We are grateful for that.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against:

United States of America

14. I regret that it has not been possible for the United
States to join in a unanimous decision of the Council
on the question before it today. As has been made clear
by a spokesman for my Government, the United States
holds that the deportations of Mayors Milhem and
Qawasma and Sharia Judge Attamimi are contrary to
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
that the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,’ apply to the conduct of
Israeli military authorities in the West Bank and Gaza.

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

by 10 votes to I, with

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the
Council table.

9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The Security Council is meeting today following a
request submitted by the representative of Tunisia
contained in a letter dated 6 May, which was circulated
as document S/13926.

15. However, my Government could not support this
draft resolution. We are dealing here, as we have been
for a number of years, with a tragic cycle of violence
in which one violent act begets another. It has been
and remains the position of the United States that we
cannot focus on a single act in this cycle. We deeply
regret that the resolution does not refer to the killing
in Hebron of six Israelis and the wounding of 16others
-an act which preceded the deportations of the Palestinian officials and which constitutes an obvious
factor in the present situation. We condemn this
wanton act of violence at Hebron and the Palestine
Liberation Organization’s responsibility for it.

10. Members of the Council have before them document S/13930, which contains the text of a draft resolution that was drafted in the course of consultations.
I understand that the Council is ready to vote on the
draft resolution before it. If I hear no objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

16. It is sadly apparent that in recent weeks the
Council has been unable to condemn the murder of
Israeli citizens, whether at Misgav Am or at Hebron.
In these circumstances, we are forced to conclude
that the Council’s deliberations on these matters,
despite the good faith and sincere effort to find
common ground which have generally characterized
them, cannot achieve a constructive and balanced
result. In reaching this conclusion, we have also been
mindful of the extraordinarily difficult and complex
negotiations in which my Government is participating
and which have the objective of reaching agreement

Bangladesh, China, France, German
Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
In favour:

Against:
Abstaining:

None
United States of America

The draft resolution
none, with I abstention

.

was adopted by 14 votes to
(resolution 468 (1980)).

2
/

on full autonomy for the Palestiniansin -the West Bank
and Gaza while preserving security for the people of
Israel.

manner in which he conducted the Council’s proceedings last month.
“
24. On behalf of the people. of Israel, I should also
like to take this opportunity to extend our deepest
condolences to the people of Yugoslavia on the sad
passing of their great leader, President Josip Broz
Tito. Together, we the Jewish people and the people
of Yugoslavia were targets of nazism and fascism
during the Second World War; together we fought the
Nazi-Fascist scourge. Both our peoples suffered
terribly at the hands of the Nazi oppressors. Many
of my people who also fought in the ranks of the
heroic anti-Fascist resistance led by President Tito
gave their lives for the struggle against tyranny and
oppression and for the liberation of Yugoslavia. We
shall always remember President Tito as a great fighter
for the freedom of his country and for his unmatched
part in consolidating the independence of Yugoslavia.
We shall also remember his help to the survivors of
the Holocaust and to the Jews of Yugoslavia to allow
them to reach the shores of Israel.

17. My delegation has therefore abstained in the vote
on this draft resolution.
18. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpreetation from Russian): First of all,
I should like warmly to congratulate you, the representative of the Republic of the Niger, as President of
the Security Council and to express my conviction
that your diplomatic talents will help us solve the
problems which remain for the Security Council to
discuss during this month of May. I take this opportunity to express the hope that the relations of cooperation between our countries-and they include
relations within the United Nations-will be positively
advanced.
19. I should like also to express my sincere gratitude
to the representative of Mexico, under whose skilful
leadership during the month of April the Council discussed a number of important matters relating to the
situation in the Middle East. His great diplomatic
qualities did much to help those discussions. Although,
for reasons beyond his control, the goals pursued were
not fully achieved, those discussions will nevertheless
promote progress towards the establishment of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

25.. Last Friday, six Jews were callously murdered
in Hebron. Sixteen others were wounded, two of them
critically. While Israel is still mourning its dead, this
Council is already engaged in yet another one-sided
exercise against Israel.
26. Let me acquaint the Council with the facts.

20. The delegation of the Soviet Union voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted for the Council’s consideration in document S/13930. At the same
time, our delegation would like to point out that,
unfortunately, the text does not contain a decisive
condemnation of Israel as the occupying Power, for
those illegal actions which it has committed with regard
to Palestinian leaders and which should be immediately
repealed. Nor can we over!ook any attempts to place
on the same footing the actions of the Israeli occupiers
who have committed atrocities in the Arab lands that
they have seized in violation of the norms of intemational law and the heroic struggle of the Palestinian
patriots who are tighting to drive out the occupiers
and to restore their inalienable rights which have been
recognized by the overwhelming majority of the international community. Such attempts can be viewed
only as direct support of the Israeli aggressors in their
attempts to annex Arab lands.

27. Last Friday night, a group of Jewish worshippers,
mostly students at religious seminaries, were returning
from their Sabbath eve devotions at the Tomb of the
Hebrew Patriarchs-the
Cave of Machpela-in
Hebron, on foot, in accordance with Jewish religious
law regarding the Sabbath. While they were walking
down a narrow alley, PLO terrorists attacked them
from the roofs of two buildings, first by hailing them
with bullets from the rear and then by hurling handgrenades and explosives at them from several directions. As I have just said, six persons were killed in
that brutal and cowardly attack and 16 others were
wounded, among them women and children; two of the
wounded remain in critical condition.
28. Within hours, the gang of terrorists called AlFatah, which is headed by Yasser Arafat and is the
largest constituent group within the criminal PLO,
took responsibility for this outrage in a statement
broadcast on the terrorists’ radio in Lebanon. On
3 May, Arafat himself applauded that atrocity on
arrival in Kuwait for a visit, and he again justified
it in unqualified terms in Beirut yesterday, as reported
today in The New York Times.

21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset let me pay my
respects to you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month.

29. It will be recalled that in 1929the existence of the
millenia-old Jewish community of Hebron was
virtually brought to a close as a result of a brutal
pogrom staged by the forerunners of the terrorist PLO.
At that time the community consisted mainly of pious
scholars and students. More than 60 of them were

23. May I also pay a tribute to the representative of
Mexico, Ambassador Muiioz iedo, for the exemplary
3

brutally murdered and scores of others were wounded
and tortured, their homes pillaged and their places
of worship desecrated. That pogrom was instigated by
the notorious Mufti of Jerusalem, Haj Amin AlHusseini, who during the Second World War collaborated with the Nazis in the extermination of the
Jews of Europe and was wanted thereafter as a war
criminal to answer at Nuremberg for his crimes. By
perpetrating this latest outrage in.Hebron, the terrorist
PLO has proved once again that its criminals are the
faithful disciples of their infamous mentor.

back from Lebanon, and no one is being killed in and
around Beirut. Refugees are not fleeing Cuba in their
thousands. All is quiet in Africa, particularly in the
Sahara, the Maghreb and the Horn of Africa. Sweetness and light radiate from South-East Asia. Intemational terrorism has been brought under control worldwide. In brief, the international scene is a happy one.,
Were it not for Israel, there would be no threats to
international peace-or at least the Security Council
does not know of them.
36. The resolution which has just been adopted is
highly reminiscent of resolution 467 (1980) adopted
two weeks ago.

30. Once again the aim was mass murder for its own
sake. The target was a peaceful group of worshippers
returning from prayer, and the timing was the Sabbath
eve.

37. As will be recalled, that resolution was the
product of a debate which came in the wake of a
despicable outrage perpetrated by PLO terrorists who
took hostage babes in arms at Kibbutz Misgav Am.
That criminal act resulted in the deaths of an infant and
a civilian, as well as the wounding of four toddlers,
not to mention the death of an Israel Defence Forces
soldier and the injury of 11 other soldiers in the action
to free the little hostages. None the less, the Council’s
resolution in question made no reference to that
atrocity and confined itself mainly to placing bIame on
Israel, regardless of the wider context and of the
implications for Israel’s security.

31. Beyond indiscriminate murder, the object of this
unconscionable atrocity was to inflame religious
sentiments among local Arabs, and to foment incitement in an attempt to interfere with the ongoing peace
process in the Middle East and in particular with the
negotiations on full autonomy for the Palestinian
Arabs in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district.
32. The fact is that the outrage which took place in
Hebron last Friday night is known to the whole world.
People everywhere were shocked when they heard
about it on their radios and saw the gruesome aftermath on their television screens. But for some reason,
that atrocity has escaped the attention of the Council.
I say “escaped the attention” advisedly, because that
is the most charitable construction that can be put on
the Council’s meeting this afternoon and on the resolution which has just been adopted. But such an assumption is hardly credible, since I brought the facts to
the Council’s attention in my letter of 4 May to the
Secretary-General, which was also circulated under the
symbol S/13923.

38. An act of hypocrisy and of selective conscience
of precisely the same kind is being played out in the
Council today. The resolution which has just been
adopted makes no reference to the background to the
events mentioned in it. The Council’s vision is eclectic,
to put it mildly: it sees what it wants to see. It ignores
what it is told to ignore.
39. The Government of Israel. like any Government,
has a primary duty and responsibility for the preservai
tion of law and ord.er and the maintenance of security.
It has taken a number of steps in order to prevent the
recurrence of outrages of the kind which occurred in
Hebron last Friday night. These steps included the
deportation of the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul
and the Qadi of Hebron.

33. We are thus left with an even more uncomfortable alternative-namely, that while the Council, like
the rest of the world, is aware of the wanton murder
perpetrated in Hebron last Friday, it has purposely
chosen to ignore it.
34. Such “oversights” have long characterized the
Council’s debates on matters regarding the ArabIsrael conflict. This familiar pattern has been highlighted in the last three months when the opponents of
peace in the Middle East, both in the region and
beyond, have kept the ,Council in almost constant
session on selected aspects of the conflict, invariably
abstracted from their proper and full context.

40, Over the last few months, these three individuals,
on instructions from the PLO and the Arab rejectionist
States, have been actively and systematically engaged
in inciting the local Arab population to acts of violence
and subversion against Israel and Israelis alike. In so
doing, they have-abused their public offices, and even
channelled PLO funds for these purposes. I could
cite at length inflammatory statements made at open
meetings by the two Mayors and from the pulpit by
the Qadi of Hebron, despite repeated warnings that
they were far exceeding the norms of freedom of
expression guaranteed and protected by the authorities. However, since the Council is not a court of
law--even though it frequently chooses to act as
though it were one-1 shall perhaps limit myself to a
few instances of what Israel has had to deal with and

35. Indeed, anyone reviewing the agendaof the Council in recent months would be obliged to conclude
that there are no international crises in the world,
.other than the Arab-Israel conflict. The Soviet Union
has withdrawn from Afghanistan; its troops have
stopped slaughtering hundreds of ordinary Afghan
citizens. The Syrian army of occupation has pulled
4

had chosen not to act upon until the murders in
Hebron last Friday night.
41. At the beginning of February of this year, the
Mayor of Halhoul spoke at a meeting at the Municipal
Building and declared that there had been enough
of words. He said that “the time has come to act,
and one must not recoil from the use of any means”.
He concluded by expressing the hope that the Jihad
-the Holy War-would go on forever.
42. On 23 March, the Qadi of Hebron raised a call
for violence until the Palestinian flag flew not only
in Hebron, but also in Jaffa, Haifa and Acre-in other
words, in Israel.
43. The Mayor of Hebron has a long record of subversive activities. The disturbances in the Tomb of
the Patriarchs-the Cave of Machpela-in October
1976 were fanned by an inflammatory broadsheet
which Mr. Qawasma issued himself and in which he
incited the Moslem community to despoil the things
held holy by the Jews in the Cave of Machpela.
Instead of trying to ensure public order in Hebron,
Mr. Qawasma worked openly in the opposite direction. In the last few days he has again given unrestrained expression to his views. According to the
PLO radio in Lebanon, Mr. Qawasma called yesterday on Palestinian refugees in Sidon to return to Jaffa
and Haifa over the- blood of innocent Israelis.
44. The deportation of these three individuals was
based on the Defence (Emergency) Regulations of
1945, issued by the British Mandatory authorities,
regulation 112 of which authorizes deportation on
grounds of certain activities against security. These
regulations were in force and were acted upon on
several occasions in Judea and Samaria under the
Jordanian occupation prior to 4 June 1967. I do not
recall any Council meeting being called to discuss
those deportations. These regulations have remained
in force since that date, 4 June 1967, in accordance
with the principles of article 43 of the regulations
annexed to The Hague Convention of 19072and the
first paragraph of article 64. of the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949,’ and that without prejudice to
Israel’s well-known position of principle with regard
to the non-applicability of the Geneva Convention in
the present context.
45. One of the tragedies of the Palestinian Arabs has
been that for almost 60 years they have been dominated
by an extremist and fanatical leadership. Starting with
the notorious Mufti of Jerusalem, Amin Al-Husseini,
that leadership has had no compunction about
terrorizing and assassinating its political rivals. It
was totally lacking in political realism and.obstinately
opposed to compromise. It led the Palestinian Arabs,
whom it claimed to represent, from one disaster to
another.
46. The direct heir to that political legacy is the
terrorist PLO. That organization has also waged a
steady campaign of intimidation and assassination
against Palestinian Arabs in Judea, Samaria and the

Gaza district who were willing to co-exist peacefully
with Israel. Moreover, that organization has used
Judea and Samaria as a launching pad for acts of
hostility and terror against Israel. In recent months it
has stepped up its campaign against the peace process
and the current talks aimed at achieving full autonomy
for the Palestinian Arabs in Judea, Samaria and the
Gaza district. And prominent among those involved in
this campaign were the Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul
and the Qadi of Hebron, whom Israel decided to deport
only after their words and activities had led to bloodshed. The deportations had as one of their major
purposes the prevention of further outrages of the kind
perpetrated in Hebron last Friday night and the unnecessary and unforgivable shedding of more blood.
47. Those both inside and beyond the Council who
have rushed to the defence of the three individuals in
question are in fact those.who have taken the lead in
trying to frustrate the inexorable process leading to
peace in the Middle East.
48. I have on numerous occasions indicated in the
Council and in other organs of the United Nations who
those Arab enemies of peace are and also who their
supporters in other parts of the globe are. The most
extreme of them within the Arab world are those who
call themselves the Steadfastness Front and who met in
Tripoli in the middle of last month with the participation of Yasser Arafat. The declaration which that
Front issued at the conclusion of their meeting and
recently had distributed as an official document both
of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
as document S/13912, was one expression of their
implacable opposition to peace and their active
campaign against Israel, no matter how brutal and
inhuman the means. The murders in Hebron last
Friday night were another expression of the same
phenomenon. Their repeated resort to the United
Nations, and particularly to the Security Council,
which they are confident they can always manipulate
for their bellicose purposes, adds a third dimension
to their tactics.
49. Israel. for its part, will not take risks with its
security. Similarly it will not be deterred from continuing its efforts to achieve peace within the framework of the Camp David accords, which offer the only
practical approach for the achievement of a stable,
just and comprehensive peace in the region. Israel
will not be deflected by acts of terror in the region or
by transparent exercises in hypocrisy and selective
conscience in the Council.
50. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. I call upon him.
51. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to welcome
you and to express our great satisfaction and pleasure
at seeing you conducting the deliberations of the Council during the current month.

52. The action taken by the Council last month under
the able leadership of Ambassador Muiioz Ledo gave
us much more reassurance and reason to trust in the
productiveness and fruitfulness of bringing our case
before the international Organization.

heightened and heightening tension in the West Bank,
which led to the serious incident. We are sure that the
Secretary-General really is concerned about what is
happening.
58. The tight now going on is a fight for survival.
The Palestinians have been denied the right to
existence; they have been denied the right to return
to their homes; they have been denied the right to selfdetermination. And now they are being denied the right
to life. So what they are involved in is a fight for
survival. I should like here to make it clear that there
will never be another Deir Yassin. The Palestinians
are determined that Deir Yassin will not be repeated.
We shall prevent that. We know we can do so, and we
know that the international community will support
us in preventing another Deir Yassin.

53. Mr. President, we wish through you to express
our condolences to the peoples of Yugoslavia, the
Government of Yugoslavia and our colleagues in the
Yugoslav Mission. The role of Tito in his unswerving
determination to eliminate all forms of racism, whether
the Fascist occupation of Yugoslavia or the Zionist
occupation of Palestine, showed that such determination was a constant in the policy adopted by the great
hero Tito.
54. We are not really surprised at the attitude taken
by the United States on the resolution that has just
been adopted. That country has regretted that it was
not possible for it to recall the Geneva Convention of
1949. Apparently, it really feels allergic to the Geneva
Convention, which, I understand, is the fourth Geneva
Convention of 12 August 1949, which is applicable to
the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem. It was not possible for the United
States to vote in favour of such a statement. It is not
at all concerned at the expulsion by the Israeli military
occupation authorities of the Mayors of Hebron and
Halhoul and the Sharia Judge of Hebron-at least, it
could not vote in favour of an expression of such
concern. It does not intend to join in the call upon the
Government of Israel as occupying Power to rescind
its illegal measures and to facilitate the immediate
return of the expelled Palestinian leaders so that they
can resume the functions for which they were elected
and appointed. Naturally, it would simply like to
encourage the Secretary-General to report upon the
implementation of the resolution.

59. On 1 March the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 465 (1980), in which it strongly deplored
“the continuation and persistence of Israel in pursuing
those policies and practices” and called upon the
Government and people of Israel to rescind those
measures, to dismantle the settlements and to cease
the establishment, construction and planning of settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem. Now what was the response?
The response was rejection of that. The response was
additional aid-8200 million-from
the Government
of the United States to Israel. The response was the
disavowal by the President of the United States of the
position taken by his representative.
60. That is what happened here. But what happened
in the region itself? Immediately after that decision
was taken by the Council, the Israeli Cabinet decided
to expropriate 1,000 acres of land in Jerusalem. That
response shows how much the Israelis respect Article 25 of the Charter. On 11 March, the Jerusalem
Domestic Service in Hebrew announced that:

55. Well, I am not surprised. I am not running for
President of the United States. Are the high values and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations just
another card in the game? Besides, after the experience
of 1 March, I am really not that certain that the attitude
of the representative of the United States will not be
disavowed within the next 48 hours. I do not know;
we have had that experience.

“It now emerges that in the area between Neve
Yaacov and French Hill in Jerusalem some
4,000 dunums of land have been expropriated. In
this area only 500 dunums are owned by Jews.”
According to that broadcast, it was not yet clear how
the landowners would be compensated.

56. Somebody has mentioned a cycle of violence in
my country. There is no cycle of violence there. There
is a military occupation; there is violence; there is an
attempt at genocide; and there is legitimate resistance,
including resistance through resort to armed struggle.
That is not what I would call a cycle of violence.
I would say that there is provocation, there is a plan
to eliminate the Palestinians from their country and to
commit genocide. And then, of course, there is the
exercise of legitimate resistance, including armed
struggle.

61. The Minister of Justice of Israel responded to
the resolution adopted by the Council. According to a
broadcast of the Jerusalem Domestic Service in
Hebrew, of 11 March, 1400 GMT, he said that if the
Government faced a legal situation in which the courts
instructed it to dismantle Jewish settlements in Judaea
and Samaria-he was, of course, referring to the
West Bank-the Ministry would legislate a retroactive
law that would prevent such a situation.
62. I would merely like to draw the attention of a
member of the Council to the way in which the Cabinet
of a State with which it has very good diplomatic

57. We are grateful that the Secretary-General has
expressed his great anxiety and concern at the
6

relations and which it supplies with millions and
millions of dollars responds to a decision adopted
unanimously by the Council.

of the Zionists will wish to refute what is published
there.
On 4 March, The Jerusalem Post reported that
residents of the Jalazoun refugee camp near Ramallah
-refugees who have been denied the right to live in
their homes-had complained during the past few
days that troops had kept them waiting in the cold and
wet for hours, while questioning them, These are the
new SS troops. All this is so reminiscent of the Nazis.
Residents of the camp, near the military Government
headquarters on the Ramallah-Nablus road, said that
soldiers had forced them to wait outside while
questioning them about stone-throwing attacks on
Israeli cars. That is a very humane way of treating
people, is it not? They bring them out at night; they
make them sit in the rain-and all this to find out who
threw a stone.
72.

63. On 17 March, The New York Times reported that
the Israeli authorities had fenced off 375 acres of Arab
land near Bethlehem: another violation.
64. To turn to Hebron, on 23 March, the Cabinet
voted 8 to 6 to set up what the Israelis call religious
institutions in two houses in Hebron.
65. I am referring to these matters merely to call the
Council’s attention to the response given to the resolution it adopted.
66. We are told that the Gush Emunim or squatters
are involved. But let us see what the Tel Aviv newspaper Hatzofe reported on 24 March: “The Government is due to invest more than 100 million Israeli
pounds in the establishment of yeshivas and field
schools in Hebron”. It was not the Gush Emunim, it
was not a faction, it was the Cabinet that decided to
do this.

73. One would have thought that a lesson had been
learned in Viet Nam, but the same kinds of things are
being done in my country. Again, according to The
Jerusalem Post, an army patrol called the “Green
Patrol” had mistakenly sprayed more than 400 dunums
of cultivated land in the area south of Hebron with
an agricultural poison several weeks before the date on
which this report appeared, 16 April. A “Green
Patrol” spraying an agricultural poison on more than
400 dunums of agricultural land can only be a manifestation of inherent hatred by the Zionists for the
Arabs merely because they are Arabs. That is racism
in its ugliest form.

67. According to The Jerusalem Post, work began on
3 April on one of a cluster of settlements planned for
the Jericho area. That means that the people of the
area will be thrown out in order that this cluster of
settlements can be constructed.
68. I turn now to the area around Nablus. According
to The Jerusalem Post of 4 April, the military Govemment decided to close off 1,000 dunums of privately
owned land near the village of Talluza, north of
Nablus.

74. Let us now turn again to Hebron and see what has
been reported. According to a broadcast of the
Jerusalem Domestic Service in English of 26 March:

The Jerusalem Post also reported on 13 April
that 800 dunums of land in the Ramallah district
had been seized by the military Government and that
officials of that Government were unable to comment
on the subject. The newspaper stated that, according
to some sources, the mukhtars of the villages of Kafr
Malik and Mughair, in the Ramallah district, had been
summoned to the military Government headquarters
on the preceding Wednesday evening and had been
informed that land around their villages had already
been seized. So, they just summon the mukhtar at
night and say, “Listen, old man, 800 dunums of your
land has been seized and you can go to hell”. The
newspaper stated also that it was not clear whether
the land was intended for military purposes or for a
settlement. But that is irrelevant, because the land has
been expropriated.

“Sources in the West Bank military Government
say that for now Governor Binyamin Ben-Eliassar
will not go beyond the stem warning he delivered
to Mayor Fahd Qawasma yesterday. Ben-Eliassar
made it clear that Israel would not tolerate statements similar to the ones he made comparing
Zionism and nazism. Ben-Eliassar told Qawasma
that his remarks at the mass protest meeting on
Monday were incitement.”

69.

75. If the United Nations considers Zionism to be a
form of racism, if the United Nations and indeed the
entire world fought nazism, if more than 40 million
lives were lost in that fight against nazism, a form of
racism, I do not see why the Mayor of Hebron should
be warned that he will not be allowed to compare
Zionism with nazism. It is the opinion-indeed the
determination- of the international community that
Zionism is a form of nazism.

70. With regard to the vandalizing of Arab towns,
we sent a letter to the President of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General.

76. I continue quoting from the report by the
Jerusalem Domestic Service of 26 March:

71. How are the people treated? In this respect,
I should like again to quote from The Jerusalem Post.
I do that because I do not think the representative

“What, then, are the options open to the military
Government? The most serious are deportation”
7

-which has happened--“trial and imprisonment”
-something they would not dare do-‘&or removing
Qawasma from his post. But a number of key
personalities on the West Bank who would not be
quoted by name said they did not really take the
warning to Qawasma seriously, because the military
Government had earlier issued an even sterner
warning to the Nablus Mayor, ordering him not to
engage in political activity, and that warning had
gone unheeded.”

Torah or the Holy Book. According to The New York
Times, he died carrying his rifle on his shoulder. He
did not really die while praying. That Hazeev was a
graduate of the imperialist, racist war in Viet Nam.
He believed in the motto: “The only good Arab is a
dead one”. That was the prototype of those settlers
who came to evict the Palestinian from his home in
Hebron and to take his place. They, too, believed in
that saying.

77. The Council, of course, knows that at that time
the General Assembly condemned Israel and asked it
to rescind that order so that the Mayor, who had
been elected by his own people, would be able to return
to his post. And he did return. That is why we find that
there is in the United Nations a very constructive
approach conducive to peace.

82. How did certain members of the Knesset
react? I shall quote only one, according to The New
York Times of 6 May. Haim Bar-Lev, a former chief
of staff, said “that the killings would not have occurred
if no Jews had been living in Hebron”. Now if the
Israelis were just to live there, as they had for more
than a hundred years before 1929, if they were willing
to live and let the Palestinians live in their own
homes in Haifa, in Nazareth and in Jaffa, I think we
could reach some sort of peaceful coexistence.

78. Again, on 25 March, the Jerusalem Domestic
Television Service quoted General Binyamin BenEliassar as saying:

83.’ But here, because the Mayor spoke out there was
an order-I do not even know if it was an order, given
the way these people were expelled. They were called
in the middle of the night, taken to the police station
with black hoods on their heads--apparently, the chief
of that operation was an ex-chief of the Ku Klux *
Klan-put in a helicopter, told they were wanted to
meet with the Minister of War and they ended up in
southern Lebanon with no papers, no passports,
nothing. Eventually, they found acab to bring them to
Beirut.

“It seems to me that in the talk I held today with
Mayor Qawasma I explicitly made clear to him the
seriousness of the remarks uttered. I also told him
in a clear-cut manner that there is an accepted framework which we will be ready to tolerate and that he
had to obey it. Any deviation from this framework
will be seriously regarded by us.”
So we have this very benign sort of alien domination:
“You do .what we tell you; otherwise we kick you
in the pants and throw you out or put you in prison. You
have no right to express an opinion. You have no right
to freedom of thought or freedom of speech”. Those of
us who have read the history of Nazi behaviour in
occupied Europe are familiar with all these things.

84. Why was that done? Nobody seems to know.
According to Major-General Danny Matt, who is the
military co-ordinator for the occupied areas, there was
no evidence of their direct involvement in the Hebron
attack. Frankly, ifthe military governor seemsto have
no evidence that those people were involved, we
naturally do not know why they were expelled. If they
were expelled simply for having said that the Zionist
empire would fall, just as the British empire and the
Nazi empire fell in the past, that is no crime to my
mind. It is a very historical prediction. All those racist
empires, based on exploitation, fall not of themselves,
but because peoples rise against them. That is what
the Palestinians are doing.

79. Let us now see what the settlers who came to
live in Hebron as students have to say.
80. The head of one of those settlements, a certain
Noam Amon, is reported in The Jerusalem Post of
26 March to have said:
“The stronger the Jewish presence in the town,
the less the danger. The Arabs will not fight the
master. They only act when they feel there is no
master.”

85. How will the Israelis carry on with this occupation of our country and our lands? Foreign Minister
Shamir, who was connected with the murder of
Bemadotte, said that the only way to deal with such
a situation would be to maintain a huge Jewish presence
in the occupied areas.

Is this not a master and slave notion? Is it not a racist
ideology? But then, this Noam Amon continued,
saying that, in the long run, the Arabs would have to
choose between allegiance to Israel or getting out of
Palestine. That we will not do. We will stay there. We
will fight for our survival. We will fight for a permanent
status in our own country.

86. The situation is really very serious. It is the duty
of the Council to find a solution-and the solution is
there, before our eyes. Let the Palestinians return to
their homes. Let them live in dignity in their own
homes. Let them exercise their right to self-determination. Let Israel and those who voted in favour of
the resolutions of the Council implement those resolu-

81. It was really touching emotionally to have shown
on television here the funeral of a certain Mr. Hazeev.
That Mr. Hazeev, who died, did not die carrying the
8

tions. Let Israel withdraw from the territories
it
‘occupied in 1967. Let the Palestinians establish their
own State. That would be a concrete and constructive
step, conducive to peace. If that is not done, if we are
denied the right to live in peace in our own homes,
we cannot conceive of peace for anyone. That is our
inalienable right. It is in accordance with the Charter
and with United N&ions
resolutions.
How much
longer do we have to suffer? Do we really have to wait
for genocide?

to expel us, to take our country. Those pamphlets
distributed only a few days ago by the group of the
United States citizen, Kahane, tell us that there is no
room for us in the country, to get out. Well, we are
not getting out; we are staying in. And we shall fight
for our survival and permanent status in our country.
90. Finally, I think that I should thank-and
it gives
me pleasure to do so-those who voted in favour of
the resolution, which simply reasserts or restates the
affirmation
that those expelled leaders should be
permitted immediately
to return to the posts to which
they were elected. Otherwise, there will be a violation
of the resolution, a violation of the Charter, and a
continued violation of our inalienable
rights. Article 25 of the Charter speaks very clearly to this point:

87. For those who sometimes watch television at
noon, that Mr. Hazeev, who died with his rifle on his
shoulder, was on television two or three days ago on
Channel 9. He was being interviewed and there were
some boys in the street in Hebron. Apparently,
the
reporter asked him a question, whereupon he turned
to the Arab boys in the vicinity and said, “Oh, these
damn bastards”. Excuse me, but thy’ was the language
he used. That is the spirit of colt I ialism. One does
not refer to people as “those dam]. bastards”.

“The Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter.”
91. I takk it that, should those two Mayors and the
Qadi decide to return within the next 24 hours or so,
they will have the way open for them. They might
go to the bridge over the River Jordan, take a cab
on the other side of the bridge and return to resume
their functions. If they still think that Zionism and
nazism are equal, they have that right. They will not
hold an opinion different from that of the rest of
the world. Should Israel deny them entry, I should
think that the Council would then have to meet again
and consider what further steps it will take, again in
the spirit of the Charter.

88. Reference was made once again to the incident
of 1929 in Hebron. It was reported in the Peel Report
of 1937, ‘as follows:
“The Arab reaction to the sudden and striking
development
was quite natural. All that the Arab
leaders had felt in 1929 they now felt more bitterly . . . the greater the Jewish inflow, the greater
obstacle to their attainment
of national independence.“3
In 1929, Sir Walter
special Commission,

Shaw, who was at the head of a
wrote:

92. 1. shall not talk about other matters because we
should confine our discussion today to the exercise of
an inalienable right of a person to be in his home and
to carry out the functions for which he has been
elected.

“In less than ten years, three serious attacks have
been made by Arabs on Jews. For eighty years
before the first of these attacks, there is no recorded
instance of any similar incidents. It is obvious, then,
that the relations between the two races during the
past decade must have differed in some material
respect from those which previously obtained. Of
this we found ample evidence. The reports of the
Military Court and of the local Commission which,
in 1920 and in 1921, respectively, enquired into the
disturbances of those years, drew attention to the
change in the attitude of the Arab population towards
the Jews in Palestine. This was bone out by the
evidence tendered during our enquiry, when representatives of all parties told us that before the War
the Jews and Arabs lived side by side, if not in
amity, at least with tolerance, a quality which,
to-day”-that
is, 1929-“is
almost unknown in
Palestine.“4

93. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative
of
Yugoslavia, in which he requests to be invited in order
to make a statement. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite that representative,
in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
94. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation
from French):
I invite the representative
of Yugoslavia to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
95. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): We are deeply
touched by the expressions of condolence and sympathy that you, Mr. President, have conveyed, on the
demise of the President of my country, to the Government and people of Yugoslavia and to the members of
President Tito’s family. I am very grateful for this
opportunity most warmly to thank the President and all
the other members of the Council.

89. I should just appeal to the Council to consider
for a moment. Why was it that for decades Arabs
and Jews lived together in amity and tolerance and
then, after 1929, there was a change in attitude? It was,
as we realized then, because the Zionist movement had
brought a new dimension to the cduntry. They wanted
9

96. In our deep sorrow and great sense of loss which
are felt in the hearts of all Yugoslavs, these marks of
sympathy give us further encouragement resolutely to
pursue the efforts of our late President in promoting
the realization of the lofty ideals that are enshrined in
the Charter of
.^5 the United Nations.
97. :I should iike also to thank the representative of
Israel. for the: expression of his condolences. I am
thankful
to the representative
of the Palestine
Liberation Organization for the sympathy that he has
expressed t6 my country and to my people.’
98. President Tito consistently stressed the crucial
role of the Security Council in promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes and in safeguarding intemational peace and security on the basis of the principles
of the Charter.
99. To the last moments of his life, to his last breath,
from his sickbed President Tito participated actively
in all world developments just as, throughout his life,
he was not only a witness to, but also a participant
in, all historical and revolutionary
transformations.
Shortly before his death, he mustered sufficient
strength to address to world statesmen messages
echoing the voice of reason and calling upon them to
settle disputes by peaceful means, to refrain from the
use of force and to continue to promote dttente.
‘

100. He urged that the deterioration
of the intemational situation must be checked, emphasizing that
solutions to conflicts and crises cannot be found in
bloc rivalry, the arms race, the policy of force and the
deepening of international tensions. He pointed out that
the only way leading to these solutions is through full
respect for the principies of peaceful co-existence in
relations among all nations, in negotiations and in the
strengthening of equitable co-operation among equal
and independent countries.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

101. We have lost a man who guided us during the
long and trying years of our recent history along the
path of freedom, independence
and progress. Our
grief is as profound as the love we felt for our late
President, who was a symbol of the new Yugoslavia.
He was a legend during his lifetime and he has become
a legend of history.
102. The death of President Tito has created a void
that we in Yugoslavia can only fill by daily commitment to carrying on his life work. His accomplishments
inspired us during the liberation war; they imbued us
with faith in peacetime; they became an integral part
of the life of new Yugoslavia, and with his accomplishments are irrevocably linked the present and the future
of all the Yugoslav peoples.
103. I shall convey, Mr. President, your condolences
and expressions of sympathy to the Government and
the people of Yugoslavia and to the members of the
family of our late President, who will find in them a
source of encouragement, consolation and inspiration.
104. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
There are no further speakers for this meeting. The
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting

rose at 6.30 p.m.

NOTES

’ United Nations, TreatySeries,vol. 75, p. 287.
2 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, TheHagueConventions
and Declarations
of 1899 and 1907, New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915.
3 Palestine
Royal
Commission,
Report,
Cmd. 5479, London,
H. M. Stationery Office, 1937, part I, chap. III, para. 76.
4 Report

of the

Commission

on the Palestine

Disturbances

of

August 1929,Cmd. 3530, London, H. M. Stationery Office, 1930,
p. 150.

00300

83-61462~Septembzr

1986-2,050
