TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING:

NEW

30 DECEMBER

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
46 1) , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Trygve Lie, first Secretary-General
of the United
Nations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

.. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. . : . . . . . . . . . .

2

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946)
. .. . , . .. . .. . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . .

2

Provisional

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l

of the agenda

S/PV. 146 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in ‘yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
,Security council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-FIRST

Held in New York on Monday,

30 December 1968, at 9 pm.

Presidenf: Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia).

6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, I just
want to report to the Council that as soon as I learned of
the passing of Trygve Lie, the fust Secretary-General of the
United Nations, I sent a message of condolence to the
Prime Minister of Norway. The text of the message is as
follows:

&?se,gt: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,+
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“I expressto you and to the Government and people .of
Norway my profound sorrow and condolences on the
death of Trygve Lie. As its first Secretary.General! Trygve
Lie holds a unique place in the history of the United
Nations. After a distinguished career as a wartime leader
qf his embattled country he was given the herculean task
of putting into operation the new world organization, ot’
recruiting its Secretariat, of finding its permanent home
after several y&us in temporary quarters, of building the
New York Headquarters and of installing the Organization in it, The execution of these highly complex
administrative tasks ran parallel with the infinitely difficult duty of seeing the United Nations through its first,
and halting, steps towards making a reality of the
purposes and principles bf the Charter. Trygve Lie’s
tenure of office, from February 1946 to April $1953,was
beset by many crises and was afflicted by the increasing
rigours of the cold war. Despite the unceasing problems
of those years-Palestine, Berlin, Kashmir and Korea, to
name only four-Trygve Lie continued as he had started
out, a fighter for peace, a defender of the Charter and a
tireless builder of the new world Organization. Like
anyone who occupies an exposed position of world
importance, he was frequently criticized from many
sources, as often for doing too much as for doing too
little, No one was more aware than he of the contrast
between his great responsibilities for peace and the
stringent limitations on his authority and on his possibilities for effective action. It was he more than anyone else
who was responsible for building from nothing ‘the
physical structure and administration of the United
Nations. Thus the Headquarters in New York is in a sense
his most enduring monument.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l461 1

1. Ad’option of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1368 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946).
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Trygve Lie,
first Secretary-General of the United Nations

1. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council must have
learned of the passing today, in Norway, of Mr. Trygve Lie,
the first Secretary-General of the United Nations. During
the seven years of his occupancy of the post of SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lie served with great distinction and dedication the ideals and aspiration8 of this Organization as laid
down in the Charter. Under his leadership, the international
Secretariat was recruited and organized, the Headquarters
of the United Nations was constructed, and the Organization itself faced up to and survived numerous perilous
crises.
2. His courage, wisdom and statesmanship were a high
example and a great source of strength to those who
followed him in the service of our common cause.
3. This afternoon 1 sent condolences, in my capacity &
President of the Security Council, to the Government of
NorwaLy and to Mr. Lie’s family for the sad loss they have
sustained in the death of this great son of Norway and
outstanding citizen of the world.

“My sympathy goes to his family and to the people of
Norway in their great loss, which is shared by all the
Members of the United Nations.”
7. I also sent another message of condolence to Mrs. Guri
Lie Zeckendorff, a daughter of Trygve Lie. The message
runs asfollows:

4. I !shouId now like to ask the members of the Council
and all others in this chamber to rise and observe a minute
of silence in tribute to the memory of Trygve Lie.

“The sudden death of your father has come as a shock
to all of us here in the United Nations who kne-w him and
who are daily aware of his great contribution to the
Organization. He was a champion of peace and atireless

The membersof the Councilobserveda minute of silence.

5. The PRESIDENT:

MEETING

I now call on the Secretary-General.
1

i

!
’
/
I
I
I

worker for a more just and better world. As the first
Secretary-General of the United Nations he was the
master biilder of the Organization, as well as its chief
executive in the extraordinary series of crises of its early
years. He brought to what he once called ‘the most
impossible job in the world’ the courage and conviction
which had sustained him and his fellow countrymen
through the darkest days of the war. Even if the job was
impossible he .managed to do it. I send to you, your
sisters and all the family my deep sympathy in your great
loss.”

Armistice ~greellNXltS which it has concluded and me.
cease-fire decisions which have been taken by the Council
in regard to the Middle Eastern region have always been
SCrUpUhISly
respected by my country. That .wasno doubt
the reason why the world was justly disturbed by the
aggression recently perpetrated against Lebanon. by Israel,
13. In face of that peaceful attitude of Lebanon, Israel has
continuously by every means at its dispos& including
fOrCe, violence and military power, provoked my country,
challenged it and threatened its vital interests, by the
statements of its responsible officials snd the acts of its
regular armed forces, Every pretext, every argument, no
matter how fallacious, has been used. On the most recent
OCCaSiOn, that is to say, forty-eight hours ago, it did not
scrape together such poor twigs, but set off a blaze which
puts the region’s peace and security in obvious peril.

Those are the texts of the two messages.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was a&pted.

14. I needoonly ote in passing how tardy and contrived is
the complaint, pr counter-complaint, which Israel has
lodged in reply, to the Lebanese complaint which seeks to
blame Lebanon for the incident committed at Athens
airport by two Palestinian refugees of their own accord;
whereas Israel refrained after that incident from making the
slightest protest or from submitting a complaint to your
Council against Lebanon. I think, moreover, that that trick
will not deceive the Council, and that examination of that
complaint at this session is merely formal:

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) letter dated 29 December’1968 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8945);
(61 Letter dated 29 December 1966 from the Acting
Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (s/6946)

15. But what is the substance of the matter? A clear-cut,
flagrant and premeditated aggressionwascommitted against
Lebanon, against civilian objectives, threatening not only
the lives and property of individuals but also the security of
an international business centre, jeopardizing the cease-fire
decisions and helping to set the region ablaze. Israel seeksin
vain by far-fetched arguments to justify this aggression, this
threat to peace, this disregard of the Armistice Agreements
and the cease-fire decisions. Such arguments,‘however, will
clearly not withstand examination, since they hold
Lebanon responsible for actions committed outside its
territory, of course without its knowledge and stilI less with
its connivance, by Palestinian refugeeswho werechased out
of their country solel,y by the Israeli imperialists and made
refugees in Lebanon or other Arab countries. The Israel
pseudo-dialectics cannot prove the Lebanon Government
guilty of connivance, actual or even possible, with the
agents of the Athens operation, or prove it in any way
responsible for that operation. I shall confine myself to a
few arguments which in my opinion, completely invalidate
the Israel pseudo-dialectics. The first argument-to which I
have already referred-asks why, if Israel really considered
Lebanon responsible for the Athens incident, did it not
immediately submit a complaint against Lebanon to the
Security Council. Its attitude today is not only fantastic
but most clearly fraudulent. In short, Israel makes the
Athens incident, with which the Lebanese Government had
nothing to do, both a justification for appealing to the
Security Council and a pretext for completely unwarranted
reprisals, I leave the Council to pass judgement on that
claim. Moreover, the allegations that the agents of the
Athens incident have found refuge in Lebanon or have
some connexion with it are completely ,urmnmded. The
Creek judicial authorities are still investigating the incident,
and I do not believe that Israel can have suchabsolute and
precise foreknowledge of their findings.

8. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council last evening, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Lebanon and Israel to take seats a,t the Council table in
order to participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr, F, Boutros
(Lebanon) and Mr. Y. ‘Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

9. The PRESIDENT:
The Secuiity Council will now
continue its consideration of the question inscribed on its
agenda, The first speaker on my list is Mr. Boutros,
representative of Lebanon. I give him the floor.
10. Mr. BOUTROS (Lebanon) (translated from French):
M$President, I thank you for calling on me to speak; I also
wish to thank those representatives who have been kind
enough to give way to me.
11. At yesterday’s meeting the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations presented the Lebanese
complaint, I do not intend to repeat his arguments or to
stray into a discussion of unnecessary detail. I believe it to
be my duty, however, for the take of truth itself and so
that no element of this deplorable business shall remain
hidden, to discuss some of its aspects in order to enlighten
the members of the Security Council.
12. I do not consider that I need to defend my country
here and its conduct as a member of the international
community and of the United Nations. Lebanon can be
justly proud both of its record asaaveryactive Member and
of its extreme respect for the principles of the Charter. So
far it has never been the subject of the slightest complaint
or even of the slightest protest to the Security Council. The
2

Y
I
E

23. I shall conclude my statement by reading out the brief
diplomatic note which the .President of the Lebanese
Republic sent yesterday to the representatives of certain
Powers :

16. Furthermore, the Palestinian National Liberation
Front, the organization to which, according to Israel, the
agents of the Athens incident belong, stated on 29
Dece:mber 1968 and the two commandos-the two fedayeen-were trained outside Lebanese territory and came to
Lebanon only two days before the Athens operation.

“This is the first time in history that a State has used its
regular military forces to attack a civilian objective or a
private company of another State’in alleged reprisal for
an action by commandos who are not nationals of that
other State and have acted outside its territory,

17. At this point one question occurs to me and I shall
mention it to members. If the two fedayeen, instead of
passing through Lebanon, had stopped at another airportat Rome, Paris, Milan, London or elsewhere-would Israel
have held the authorities of the particular country responsible for the Athens incident, and have considered reprisals
against the airport at which they had stopped? Furthermore, in international law the theory that a State can be
held responsible for acts done by its inhabitants abroad of
their own choice, no longer has to be shown: the answer is
clearly negative. As proof I need only mention the attitude
adopted by Israel itself when Argentina complained against
it to the Security Council in the Eichmsnn affair. The then
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel developed quite a
theory, which members can find in the archjyes, that Israel
considered that it could not be held responsible for actions
of its nationals outside its territory-and the present acts
were committed by persons who are not even nationals of
Lebanon.

“This is the first time in history that a State has
fabricated a reason for attacking another State so remote
from this State’s responsibility that it could not give valid
ground, and in fact has not given ground, for any
complaint ,against this State before any international
control or decision-making body.
“This is the first time. that a State has been held
responsible for the acts of persons whom it has in no way
assisted to do those acts, and who are refugees happening
to be on its territory because they cannot return to their
Palestinian homeland and, because of their situation in
international law, cannot be domiciled elsewhere. The
most recent Israeli aggression against Lebanon has violated not only the Armistice Agreement and the cease-fire
decision but also very basic principles, so that it hazards
not only the security of Lebanon which today appeals to
the Security Council, but also every reason why the
United Nations and the Security Council should exist.

18. I do not wish to waste your time by reading all the
statejments and lengthy arguments of the then Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Israel. I am sure you remember them
much better than I do and that it is completely unnecessary
for me to refer to them.

% sum, Israel attacks Lebanon and blames it for the
behaviour outside Lebanese territory of Palestinian refugees who are in Lebanon becauseIsrael itself has violently
expelled them from their home country and who cannot
return thither because of Israel itself.”

19. What is the purpose, therefore, of this case against
Lebanon? Lebanon is not even charged with intent. Its
actual intentions are not at issue. Is official Lebanon to be
made accountable for the desires, feelings, longings and
passions of the refugees, or held responsible for their faith
in their cause and their destiny? Is that really the purpose
of the lofty principles which are enshrined in the Charter
and of which the United Nations is so proud?

24. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Algeria, who wishes to speak on a point of order.
25. Mr. BEN RAC1 (Algeria) (translated from lknch):
While the Security Council is examining the Lebanese
complaint, United Nations Headquarters is besieged by a
crowd and by pressure groups of supporters of international
Zionism chanting anti-Arab slogans the content of which I
shall spare the Council.

20. The country on whose behalf I have the honour to
speak is proud to present to the world a rare if not unique
example of constructive and harmonious coexistence
between its communities, which are so many spiritual
families for whom respect for freedom of thought and of
expression not transgressing law or morals is a fundamental
article of faith. The human values which it glorifies are
based on respect for the individual and his dignity and on
the support of just causes against unjust causesin all their
forms.

26. We have no objection to groups expressing their
opinion in one way or another, but we oppose these
anti-Arab demonstrations outside the very doors of United
Nations Headquarters. They should be held.on the other
side of the street. The host country should therefore take
the necessary measures ta -ensurethat the Headquarters of
the Organization is respected and that the Secutity Council
can continue its proceedings in peace.

21. Was it by pure chance that the most recent Israel
aggression was committed against my wise and tolerant
country between Christmas and. the New Year? Was it a
simple coincidence that the target country is a centre of
culture, trade and international transport, which may
offend Israel not only by its material and commercial
develiopment but espesially because of the aberrant philosophy on which Israel claims to be seeking to build a
nation?

27. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Algeria for drawing the attention of the Council,to the fact
that these incidents are taking place’ outside the Headquarters buihling. I am sure that the representative of the,
host country will take note of what has been brought to the
attention of the Council and will do his best to co-operate
with the Secretariat in znsuring that the work of the United
’
Nations is conducted in calm and tranquillity,

22. I shall not answer those two questions, since I am sure
that you have already done so.
3

I
l

28. Mr. WIGGINS
(United States of America): My
Government is always pIeased to respond immediately to
any request by the Secretary-General to assist in any way in
the maintenance of order whenever he seeks our assistance.

the true interests of all peoples and of all nations in the
Middle East.
33. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Mr. President, before
commenting on the question before us on the agenda, I alsO
should like to refer briefly to the sad news to which you
and the Secretary-General referred, the death of Trygve Lie,
whom I had the privilege of knowing and working with in
earlier times. I should like to quote the words of another
Canadian who knew Mr. Lie even better, our former Prime
Minister, the Right Honourable L. B. Pearson, one of the
pioneers of this Organization, who said today:

29. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Denmark, a sister cohntry of
Norway, mourns the death of Trygve Lie. This morning the
Prime Minister of Denmark made the following statement,
which, with permission, I will quote:
“At the passing away of Trygve Lie, not only Norway
but the whole world has lost a great personality, a
statesman and a great administrator. Over many years
Trygve Lie held important posts in the Government of his
country, among those the post of Foreign Minister in the
Government-in-exile in London during the difficult years
of the war. Outside the Nordic countries he will be
particularly remembered for the great and unselfish work
which he carried out with skill and determination as the
Secretary-General of the United Nations from 1946 to
1953. It was to be of great importance to the United
Nations and thus to the whole world, and not least to the
Nordic countries, that the post of Secretary-General was
held by a personality so outstanding and forceful in the
first years of the United Nations, when the Organization
was to find its shape and the way in which to function.
The contribution of Trygve Lie to the United Nations and
to the cause of peace shall not be forgotten.”

“He was a man of integrity and great courage and
completely devoted to the ideals of the United Nations.
His contribution to the growth of the world Organization
as its first Secretary-General was an essential one. He will
be greatly missed, for his work for international peace
and progress will not be forgotten.”
34. The Canadian delegation cannot in any way condone
actions of violence which breach the spirit &d intent of the
cease-fire established by the Security Council, especially
when this Council is engaged in trying to bring about
conciliation in the Middle East. Time and again experience
has shown that retaliation and acts of reprisal lead only to a
further escalation of violence in a situation already fraught
with, danger for peace in the area.
35. With the information at our disposal, it is clear that
the Council has no alternative but to state its strong
opposition to the action taken by Israeli commandos at
Beirut Airport on 28 December. This deplorable action,
while represented as a form of response td other regrettable
actions such as the terrorist attack on an Israeli civil aircraft
at Athens Airport last week, is unacceptable; and it cannot
but be the subject of severe censure by the Security
Council.

30. Turning now to the complaints before the Council, it
is with regret that we have to note that the Security
Council has met once again because of violent incidents
arising out of the conflict in the Middle East. We have done
so repeatedly-regrettably
to little avail. We deplore these
incidents-all of them-not only becausi: df the senseless
human suffering and material losses they inflict but also
because such acts of violence do harm to the prospects for
peace in the Middle East and the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to that end.

36. The Israeli attack on the civil airport at Beirut is
unprecedented and out of proportion to any provocation
offered. The Lebanese Government has, since the war of
June last year, conspicuously endeavoured tb maintain an
atmosphere of calm at a time when tempers are high and
the danger of incidents is very great. Furthermore, the
Israeli attack has the disturbing effect, as did the incident in
Athens, of widening even further the area of conflict.

31. The Danish Government condemns the Israeli attack
on 3eirut international airport on 28 December. That
action endangered the lives of many innocent people and it
is of a particuIarIy deplorable character because it extended
the area of conflict to Lebanon, a country which has stood
for moderation. Israel would have acted wisely and
properly by promptly bringing to the United Nations the
case of the criminal act of terror committed against the
Israeli civil aircraft in Athens on 26 Dectimber, instead of
committing this grave act upon an international airport, an
act that stands out by its scale and magnitude.

37. It is obvious that the Israeli attack seriously risks
bringing about a rise in tension and further violent incidents
in the Middle East. This kind of reprisal must also be
regarded v+th deep concern by all countries upholding the
rights of persons to use civil air carriers to move safely by
air from one place to another.

32. My country is about to leave the Security Council;
therefore I shall avail myself of this occasion to express our
hope that the vicious circle of violence may at long last be
broken and that the paramount importance of restoring
peace and security to the Middle East may soon be
recognized by all those concerned. By its resolution
242 (1967) of 22 Novembei 1967 the Security Council has
shown the way. It is our sincere hope that the coming year
will witness a mutual realization by the parties that active
and fruitful co-operation with Mr. Jarring in the exercise of
the mandate entrusted to him by this Council holds the
best promise for peace in the area and will thus best serve

38. The Canadian delegation has remarked ‘on more than
one occasion that the road to peace in the Middle East
cannot be built with the weapons of war. All the violence in
the area only serves to confirm this. The violence now
under consideration by the Council is alI too ClearlY a
reflection of the frustration, the resentment, and indeed the
anguish on both sides over an inherently unstable s?uation,
full of danger.
39. This may be the last opportunity for my delegation to
speak on the Middle East situation before 1968 is out and
4

$

f

Canada, like Denmark, leaves the Council. I therefore take
this opportunity to appeal most earnestly to the parties
concerned to make a renewed and determined effort to
break out of the vicious cycle of violence-which is in
danger of escalating again-and work for a settlement on
the basis of the provisions and principles of resolution
242 (1967), supporting what Ambassador Jarring is doing
towards that goal. I would also recall that the responsibility
for achieving a settlement must depend primarily on the
efforts of the parties themselves.

condone that, we should give an advance license t0 any
wodd-be aggressor. The Security Council could never do
that.
46. We know that Israel has a right to exist: it has a right
t0 do so within secureand agreedfrontiers. Any suggestion
that Israel must be subject to continuous violence, intimidation and harassment is equally and wholly unacceptable to
us. The Security Council could never accept or condone the
use of subversive violence, which is no less aggressionthan
open attack,

40. The present course-terror, violence, destruction-as
the evelnts now before the Council clearly demonstrate,
cannot ls0lve any of the‘problems; such a course can only
make those problems worse and put reasonable solutions
further beyond our reach. This is not the time to open fresh
wounds,, but to help heal those which already exist.
Diplomacy, n0t belligerence, is the best reiipe in the long
term for the &hievem&t of a state of peace in the Middle
East.

1

47. We in this Council have consequently declared the
twin principles of withdrawal and security. I am sure that
we stand by them. We can accept nothing less and nothing
else.
48. We have declared other purposes, among which I
would always put first a just settlement of the refugee
problem. That is a humanitarian necessity. We must no
longer shirk that obligation or allow it to be cslldusly
shelved or cruelly shuffled aside. Still less must we allow
the refugees to be used as pawnsin a political game, It is
time enough to act.

41, Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish on behalf
of my lGovernment to join with other members of this
Council in paying respect to the memory of Secretary
General Trygve Lie. Even those of us who did not know
him personally realize well the high motives and devotion
he brought to his task. We all know that no one in public
life carries a burden as heavy as that of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations; no man carries so great a
responsibility with so little power. All the more we admire
Mr. Lie’,s contribution as a leader in the field of international endeavour. To his family and to his Government
and his people I tender the condolences and respectful
tribute of my Government.

49. The other purposes are already unanimously declared
and accepted, including the freedom of passagethrough
international waterways to all shipping without exception.
50. These principles and purposes have been approved and
repeatedly endorsed by the Soviet Union, by the United
States, by France and by the United Kingdom-indeed by
representatives of every continent and every race in the
world. Why cannot the approved principles be put into
effect? Why cannot the agreed purposes of settlement be
achieved? Why must we watch such wastedbloodshed and
such futile destruction? What stands in the way of peace?
Too well we ,.kriow ‘the answer: it is that ‘there is such
mistrust, suspicion, bitterness, hate and fear bet.ween the
two sides that they will not move to carry out the
settlement, the settlement which both desperately need and
which I believe both genuinely desire.

42. I am sorry that I was not, in my place last night, but I
wish to take this opportunity of repeating and emphasizing
what was said on behalf of my delegation. Certainly my
Government strongly condemns the attack on Beirut
Airport. Certainly we shall continue to emphasize that we
deplore all violations of existing cease-fire agreements, and
other acts of violence. We regard the attack in Beirut as
particul;arly reprehensible.

1

51. How is the mistrust, suspicion, bitterness, hate and
fear to be removed so that the way to peace can be
cleared? What I say may be ill received by one side or the
other-possibly by both. No matter. We all have a right and
a duty to say what we believe needs saying.

43. Moreover, I make no excuse at all, whenever we meet
in this Council on the dangers of the Middle East, for
turning our attention to the ‘need for a settlement. The
scale and frequency of the violence in the Middle East make
it essential that’ we should turn from the violence to
consider again how we can achieve the political settlement
ever more desperately needed.

52. I would say that the way to remove mistrust and
suspicion is not by violence, and I would say that the way
to remove bitterness and hate is not by,,sabptage. 1 would
say that the way to remove fear is not by killing. Anyone
who believes that peace can be secured by intimidation, or.
that security can be won by sabotage is surely making the
most terrible mistake. To build a wall of hate will not bring
peace: it will attract mounting violence.

4.4; I heave often said in this Council that there is one
factor which distinguishes this dispute from nearly every
other dispute in the world-that is, that to this problem we
already know the answer, to this puzzle we already know
the solution, to this dispute, we already know the settlement. Tlhe outstanding question is not whether there will be
a settlernent: the question is whether that settlement will
be achieved in common sense and peace or after appalling
suffering and bloodshed.

53. But we hear the anguished cry: “What else can we do?
What other course is open to us? ” I go back to what I have
repeatedly said h this Council. Here is no blind alley. It is
not true that there is no other course but violence. What is
the other course-the. course of hope and peace? First, it
would be the acceptance, without further prevaricsti0n or

45. We know that we cannot accept or condone acquisition of territory by conquest. If we were to accept or
5

reservation, of a genuine readiness to implement the
resolution of November 1967. Secondly, it would be to let
the new refugees go home at once, and to start immediate
negotiations through Ambassador Jarring to end the longterm tragedy of the old refugees.

clashes have become an almost daily routine, If this trend
of events is not averted in time, there is no telling what
tragedy may yet befall the Middle East area.
61. The Council is now dealing with a casein which Israeli
troops landed by helicopter at Beirut International Airport
and destroyed or damaged a dozen or so civilian aircraft,
Extensive damage has been done to aviation facilities and
installations. The representative of Lebanon yesterday gave
us a full account of this unfortunate affair.

54. “Magnanimity in politics is not seldom the truest
wisdom.” Is magnanimity a utopian aim? All I would say is
that it is much less unrealistic than the delusion that peace
is to be won by a spiral of violence and retaliation.

62. The Council has been told that the military action
taken by Israel was in the nature of a retaliation, provoked
by an attack on an Israeli aircraft in Athens on 26
December and the previous hijacking of another Israeli
jetliner by Arab commandos. It seems to my delegation
that this massive destructive foray into a centre of
international transportion cannot be justified under the
circumstances. There is no evidence that the Government of
Lebanon was responsible for what had taken place LI
Athens or for hijacking the Israeli jetliner. To deal an
unwarranted blow to a country which had hitherto shown
itself to be moderate and restrained in its attitude towards
Israel cannot fail to cause universal concern.

55. Let the conditions for a permanent peace be publicly
stated. It will be found that the conditions have been on
the record for more than a year. They are the principles and
purposes unanimously approved by this Council. Let it be
publicly stated and reaffirmed by both sides that if those
conditions are met, a permanent peace will be honoured.

iI
I,
i

56. What then is the role of the Council, and particularly
the role of the permanent members? We have long been
agreed on the principles and purposes. We have separately
and repeatedly urged on the parties acceptance and
implementation of those principles and purposes. But we
begin to fear that if left to themselves alone the Israelis and
the Arabs will never voluntarily come together; even with
the help and encouragement of Ambassador Jarring, they
may continue to stand apart and hopelessly resort to
escalating violence.

63. On a number of occasions my delegation has in this
Council voiced its strong disapproval of the doctrine of
retaliation and reprisal. We believe that no Government,
even under extreme provocation, should take the Iaw into
its own hands. Such unilateral exercise of force must be
regarded as contrary to the spirit of the Charter and must
be condemned by the Council,

57. Particularly those of us who have special interests and
responsibilities in the matter can surely no longer be
content to allow the declared purposes of the international
community to be flouted and frustrated. We must surely
refuse to allow the vicious circle of violence to lead to
greater disaster. We must surely insist that the parties pay
more than lip service to our resolutions. We must surely
require that the violence shall cease in order to make
permanent peace a possibility and a reality. We must surely
find every means to achieve these purposes; we must surely
do so without further delay.

64. It must be realized that no country can always reIy on
its superior military strength to force the pace of settlement
on its own terms. Indeed, the long-term prospects for peace
depend not on force but on a lasting conciliation between
the parties. If there is anything to be learned from the
history of the Middle East in the last twenty years, it is that
war and violence are no solution to the problems that have
beset the area. Here victory in war brings not security but
only an increase in insecurity to the victor, and defeat
engenders in the breast of the defeated an increased feeling
of injustice and gives an added reason for defiance.

58. Mr. CHANG (China): Mr. President, this being the first
time that 1 have occasion to speak this month, let me first
of all extend to you the belated congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council, Your devotion to the principles and purposes of
the Charter and to the traditions of this Council, as well as
your unfailing courtesy and sense of fairness, have earned
for you the respect and admiration of all your colleagues. I
wish also to associate my delegation with the well-deserved
tribute paid to your predecessor in the Chair, Ambassador
Borch of Denmark.

65. In the present case, the responsibility of the Security
Council is clear enough. My delegation is prepared to
support prompt, effective and just action by the Council
for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the Middie
East.
66. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the representative
of China for the kind and generous referenceshe has made
to me and to my predecessor in the office of the President
of the Security Council,

59. The year 1968, which is now drawing to a close, might
have been used in the Middle East to reduce the scope and
intensity of Israeli-Arab differences, to narrow the psychological gulf separating the two peoples, and above all to
create a climate conducive to the establishment of a just
and enduring peace in that area.

67. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The death of the first Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Trygve Lie, fills my
delegation with deep sorrow. He served the world Organization in the formative years of its life with conspicuous
devotion and sincerity. On behalf of my Government, 1
should like to offer our respectful tribute to his memory.

60. Unfortunately, that has not been the case. To an
increasing degree, there has been a tendency for the parties
concerned to rely on force to achieve what they conceive to
be their ultimate objectives. In recent months, armed

68. This being the first time, Mr. President, that I have
made a statement in the Security Council under Your
6

f

presidency, may I offer to YOU the sincere felicitations of
my delegation. It is appropriate that at this time the
Council should have the benefit of the guidance and
leadership of so outstanding and able a representative of
Ethiopia as yourself-Ethiopia, a country which has experienced aggression, witnessed its eventual defeat, warned the
world at a historic moment of the folly of condoning it,
and seen the final vindication of justice. Your own qualities
of fairness, impartiality
and dedication to the United
Nations, and your unfailing courtesy and vast experience
are only too well known and hardly need any fresh eulogy
from me.,

significance. They nail to the counter the fiction of Israel as
a small State defending its very existence against fearful
odds. The actual situation is quite the contrary.
76. This situation must be squarely faced, without any
preconceptions, and the Council must issue a solemn
warning to Israel to ceaseand desist from its predatory acts
against its neighbours. For if the Council is to reassertits
authority in the face of this situation-as it mustresponsibility needs to be placed on Israel to make
reparation for the damages which it has causedto Lebanon.
Further, the Council must ensure full compliance with its
demands by Israel.

69. I must also take this opportunity to convey my
delegatia’n’s deep appreciation of the skill and wisdom with
which Ambassador Borch of Denmark presided over our
deliberations last month.

77. Considering the statements already made by my
colleagues in this debate, I do not think that these points
need any further elaboration. As the representative of the
United States said in his statement last night:

70. In .this year of 1968 the Security Council has met
many times to consider the situation repeatedly caused by
the acts of massive and indiscriminate violence and destruction wrought by Israel. The latest of such acts, committed
by Israel on 28 December at the civil international airport
of Beirut, is but the culmination of a series of occurrences
which have rent the fabric of peace in that unhappy part of
the world.

“It must now be plain to the Government of Israel itself
that the attack on the international airport at Beirut has
introduced new dangers into the already alarming situation in the Middle East. This destructive operation has
enlarged the ring of reprisal and widened the circle of
terror to touch areas and peoples hitherto struggling to
keep aloof from these measures. Surely the Government
of Israel must be having sober second thoughts about this
act of arrogance.” [146Oth meeting, para. 75.1

71. We know that sometimes the Security Council has
condemned Israel’s acts as flagrant violations of the United
Nations Charter and of the cease-fire agreement. We also
know that at other times the Security Council has,
unfortunately, remained inactive. Whether issuing a condemnation or choosing to remain silent, the Council has so
far found Israel acting as a law unto itself.

78. It is the hope of my delegation that, with all these
considerations in mind, the Security Council will evolve an
agreed resolution that will be an adequate response to the
requirements of the present situation. But as we concentrate on the measures that are necessary in the present
specific case, it is impossible to turn our minds awayfrom
the entire situation in the Middle East. The Security
Council laid down the framework of a political solution in
its resolution 242 (1967) and assigned to Ambassador
Jarring the task of establishing and maintaining contacts
with the States concerned in order to promote agreement
and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and just settlement.
While Ambassador Jarring has made laudable efforts, with
remarkable perseverance, Israel has acted consistently as if
his mission did not even exist and as if no restraint was
demanded of Israel if that mission wereto bear fruit. Time.
and again Israel has shown that it enjoys complete
immunity from .whatever depredations it might choose to
visit on its neighbours. The bombardment of towns in
Jordan, the massive raids on areasvital to the sustenanceof
that kingdom; the defiance of the injunction of the
Security Council against the holding of a military parade in
Jerusalem, the calculated attempt at the annexation of the
Holy ‘City, the attack on civilian installations deep within
the territory of the United Arab Republic, and finally, the
act of piracy on Beirut Airport-what do all these acts
indicate except a systematic policy based on reliance on the
use . of force without a sense of discrimination or
proportion? ’

72. In the present situation there seems to exist no doubt
among the members of the Council that the Council’s
authority should be reasserted and that it should act
promptly and speedily, My colleagues who have preceded
me in this debate have already established several points.
These are :
73. First, Israel’s attack on Beirut airport, which was a
most serious blow to the sovereignty of Lebanon and to
international civil aviation, calls for condemnation by the
Council in the most unmistakable terms. If that condemnation is to have any meaning and effect, it must
necessari:ly be stronger than those contained or implied in
previous Security Council resolutions.
74. Secondly, the occurrence of a certain act at Athens
Airport on 26 December which has been cited by Israel as a
justification for its latest act of aggression is not only
irrelevant to this debate but is also outside the purview of
the Security Council, as has been very ably pointed out by
the representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Yakov
Malik.
75. Thirdly, the Security Council is now confronted with
a worsening of the crisis in the Middle East. The repetition
and enlargement of the acts of belligerence committed by
Israel and the inclusion in the area of conflict of the
defenceless State of Lebanon, known for its concentration
on the pursuits of peace, are matters of the gravest

79. The indignation felt by the Arab Governments and
peoples at the continued occupation of their territories has
been continuously aggravated by every act and every
declaration of policy by Israel. Can anyone suppose that
7

the chances of a peaceful settlement will be promoted if
this indignation is not assuaged and the explosive element
naturally resulting from it removed? For Ambassador
Jarring to have any hope of success in his mission, for the
Security Council to arrest the trend towards another war, it
is essential, first and foremost, that a balance be introduced
into the situation by the imposition or the injection of
some clement of restraint on Israel’s reckless course.

86. The unprecedented attack carried out by units of the
Israel Air Force against Beirut international Airport on the
night of 28 December 1968 falls within this category of
actions,
87. If the principle that a State can arrogate to itself the
right to carry out reprisals is to be rejected, then in the
particular case before us the fact of carrying out such an
action against Lebanon-a country which in United Nations
terminology is described as “moderate’‘-and
the damage
caused to the airport makes the military action even more
reprehensible.

80. My delegation is convinced that such a balance can be
introduced only if the permanent members of the Security
Council concert their efforts for peace in the Middle East.
We were greatly impressed by the statement of the
representative of the United States last night, and I
apologize to him for quoting from that statement for the
second time: “The Security Council-indeed every Member
of the United Nations-has
a responsibility to help break
the pattern of violence in the Middle East.” [Ibid.,
para. 76.1

88. The general situation in the Near East is serious and
tense. Our individual and collective efforts therefore should
be made to establish a just and lasting peace in the entire
area. I am referring, of course, to the unanimous Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) and to the peace mission
entrusted to Ambassador Jarring, whose talent, ability and
patience are well known. Incidents as serious as that of 28
December make this picture a very gloomy one indeed.
b,

81. It is evident that this responsibility devolves especially
on four permanent members of the, Security Council. It is
their concerted action alone which can bring about the
conditions necessary for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Without their initiative the
prospects for the implementation of that resolution will
only worsen. Beyond that, what is required, in our
judgement-and I have said this before-is a re-examination
of the policies pursued so far. Such a re-examination would
be constructive to the degree that it shows at least an
awareness of the sense of outrage suffered by the Arab
peoples over the historic injustice inflicted upon them.

89. In these circumstances my delegation is prepared to
associate itself with other members .of the Council in
searching for means of securing a unanimous resolution that
will reflect the deep concern and anxiety which we are sure
not only all members of the Council but all Members of the
United Nations feel, to prevent a repetition of events such
as those we are now discussing.
90. Those are the preliminary and general comments that
my delegation wishes to make. We reserve the right to speak
again on this subject whenever we deem it appropriate.
91. Before concluding this brief statement I should like to
refer to the death of Mr. Trygve Lie, Secretary-General of
the United Nations from 1946 to 19.53. In your statement
at the beginning of this meeting, Mr. President, we find a
reflection of the feelings of my delegation. Permit me
merely to add that to the memory of Trygve Lie the
members of my delegation bow with reverence and respect
in silent tribute.

82. The PRESIDENT:
I should like fully to reciprocate
the very friendly sentiments that my distinguished colleague and friend Ambassador Shahi has addressed to me
and to my predecessor in the office of President of the
Security Council,
83. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated fram
Spanish): Before I take up the item on our agenda, I should
like to extend to you, Sir, the congratulations of my
delegation on the honour and responsibility which you have
assumed as President of the Security Council, Knowing.you
as we do and appreciating as we do your outstanding
personal qualities, neither we nor you need any praise from
me here and now.

92. The PRESIDENT: Speaking again for myself, as we11
as for my predecessor, I should like to express sincere
gratitude to our friend and colleague Ambassador Solano
Lopez for the message of goodwill that he has been good
enough to address to both of us.
93. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel. I now give him the floor.

84. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Borch, the President for November, who also
possesses outstanding qualities.

94. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I should like to
join you, the Secretary-General and members of the
Security Council in the expression of regret and grief at the
passing of the great and unforgettable first Secretary
General of the United Nations, Mr, Trygve Lie. On behalf
of the Government of Israel, I extend profound condolences to his family and to the Government and people of
Norway. Trygve Lie will always be remembered for his
great loyalty to the fundamental principles of the Charter
and his indefatigable efforts to see them carried out in
practice.

85. During the year that my delegation has been in the
Security Council, in the many meetings that have been held
to consider the situation in the Middle East, it has had
repeated opportunities of expressing its views on each and
every violation of the cease-fire ordered by the Security
Council in 1967; we have, invariably condemned these
whatever their origin or characteristics have been. With
equal persistence and firmness we have never hesitated most
resolutely to condemn premeditated and planned military
actions carried out on the territory of another sovereign
State, although efforts have been made to justify them as
reprisals.

95, On 26 December, at 1034 hours, a passenger airhner
of the Israeli company El Al was preparing to take off from
8

Athens airport on a regular flight from Tel Aviv to New
York. All the passengers were already seated in the plane.
The exit doors were shut. The engines were on. It was at
that mo’ment that an armed attack of unprecedented
character was carried out against the aircraft, its passengers
and crew.
96. Using. a sub-machine-gun, grenades and flame bombs
two Ara.b assailants opened fire on the cockpit of the
airplane and its passenger section. The purpose of the
attack was obvious-to blow up the aircraft and kill all on
board. There were fifty passengers and crew members on
the plane. By the time the attackers were seized one
passenge.r was killed, a stewardess wounded and the
airplane’,s motors destroyed. When Greek firemen tried to
‘approach, the attackers opened fire on them as well.
97. The: Israeli passenger killed was an engineer en route to
Argentina on behalf of the United Nations. He was killed
b7 bullet:s in the head and chest.
98. The: commander of ihe airport police, Colonel Patroklus Nik’os, stated: “There is no doubt that the intention of
the attackers was to kill. They fired first on the motors and
then on lthe windows of the plane.“’
99. “The entire airport of Athens could have gone up in
flames,” declared one of the Greek officials to the press.
“Next to the El Al plane”, he continued, “there was a
Comet of Olympic Airlines which was refuelling. In the
Israeli aircraft alone there were thirty tons of fuel. Several
metres away there stood a Boeing of Ethiopian Airlines and
a Trident of British European Airways. I tell you that on
that spot there were about 300 tons of easily inflammable
fuel which was enough to blow us all up.”
100. Inhuman in its lust for blood, indifferent to the
catastrophic dangers involved, oblivious of international
interests and rights, the attack was the most despicable of
acts of violence committed in the course of Arab warfare
that continues against Israel in violation of the cease-fire.
101. “A cowardly act of barbaric insanity” the Ceylon
Daily News of 28 December labelled it. “A condemnable
act” said Dugens Nyheter of Stockholm on 28 December.
The Ath.ens daily I+udyni stated on 27 December: “The
criminal act . . . the murder of one of the passengers . . .
and the attempt, fortunately unsuccessful, to blow up the
aircraft, all these constitute manifestations of a fanaticism
inadmiss:ible and condemnable by every free man.” The
Cyprus daily Ekftheriu
wrote on 27 December: “The
attack . . . should be condemned unreservedly.”
102. “This act, like the incident which occurred with the
same Israeli company on 23 July last in Algiers, will be
condemned by the entire world as banditry. This was a
criminal act”, stated R~ternitk of Abidjan on 28 December.
103. On 29 December the important newspaper Ddy
/*‘!
Graphic of Accra, in Ghana, wrote:
“The attack on these defenseless civilian passengers, no
matter what their nationality, should be condemned both

for its savagery and for the fact that it took place in a
foreign country which is in no way involved in the Middle
East crisis. By the attack the Arab guerrillas have
indicated that they are determined to carry the war to
any country which has dealings which Israel. We feel that
any piracy, whether on the sea or in the air, should be
treated with the greatest contempt and indignation, no
matter what the motivation.”
104. The Turkish newspaper Tasvir of 29 December,
published in Ankara, also warns of the far-reaching consequences of Arab terrorist warfare, as follows:
“This negative action of the Arab territorists against
Israel is not the first one nor the last one. To throw
bombs in a crowd in Jetusalem when innocent civilians
are going about their business, to kill children on the
doorsteps of their homes, or moviegoers, all this is not
commando operations, it is cowardly terrorism. The
Nasser-inspired terrorists are violating international law,
are recklessly and brutally jeopardizing the freedom and
safety of aviation. The Nasser-inspired commandos ought
to be brought before the United Nations, which should
categorically stop the interference with security and with
the free communications between the peoples of the
world. The problem is not only an Arab-Israel problem
but the problem of welfare of the enlightened world.”
105. From all continents, ‘from all parts of the world,
came expressions of shock and anger. Here was an attack
directed against Israel and its citizens but endangering
international aviation in general and innocent travellers
irrespective of their nationality. It was not the first such
act. Last June an El Al aircraft was seized in mid-air by an
Arab commando and forced to land in Algiers. The lives of
helpless passengers and crew members were put in jeopardy
in an act of wanton piracy. Nor was the viciousness and
cruelty of the armed attack at Athens Airport entirely
unprecedented.
106. The attempt to blow up an airplane with all its
passengers and crew and endanger the lives of many others
at a neutral airport was of the same character as throwing
grenades into a crowded bus station, exploding dynamite
charges in a market place, placing button-shaped mines in
school yards, planting mines under tourist buses.
107. Defeated in their aggression of May-June 1967 the
Arab States are now trying to prove their mettle by war
against women and children. Thwarted in their openly
proclaimed plan to destroy Israel and annihiliate its people
in 1967, the Arab Governments have turned in 1968 to
bleeding Israel by murder of the innocent and defenceless,
by terror and sabotage. At Athens Airport the warfare by
stealth, merciless and indiscriminate, reached new depths of
baselessness. It was clear that it must not be left without
reaction. It was clear that attacks against international civil
aviation were becoming a pattern. It was clear that action
had to be taken against this menace threatening to bring
chaos and catastrophe to international life.
108. Where was the action to come from? The world,
shocked as it was, remained paralysed and Governments
strangely silent. .The people of Israel were once again on

their own. They ren~enWxx.i how over the years the Lhlited
Nations proved powerless to ensure their rights arId protect
their lives, They remembered how the Security council WS
unable even to condemn attacks on Israel territory and the
murder of Israel citizens. They remembered how in 1948
they had to repel by themselves the aggression of seven
Arab States defying the United
Nations; how the world
stood by in silence when Arab armies rained death and
destruction on Jewish villages and towns. They rcmcmbercd
how the world remained passive whrn Israeli shipping WIS
barrod from file Sue7. Canal for twenty years; IIW niltic%
were l2ilU~ilt
helplcrs when Ksracl’s lifeline through the
Straits of Tiran W;IS cut. Israel ICIWW that it WIS again up to
itself to uphold its rights, to protect its citizens, tcr prevent
a stranglehold on its air lifeline. Israel knew that as in SC)
many cases in the past it had to act ta defend itself and its
people.

114. 111 the last months the concentration of raidefi
increased especially in the vicinity of the Lebanon-Israel
CeaX-fire h. The number of sabotage raids in this area
brtwcerl
hl@st
and December 1968 was twentPtwo, I
havC brought this t.o the knowledge of the president ofthe
%@lIrity council
III P number of letters. According to
information which 113~ reached Israel, there is a concentra.
tian of hundreds of raiders in the area of the Lebanese
cease-fire line. The Lebanese authorities are obviously
aware of this f;lct and have appointed liaison officers to the
cornm3ndo units.

109. The decision WBS taken. Israel acted. Yet how
different its action wasfrom that of the Arab aggressors.

116. ‘I’hc leader of the Front, George Habash, is well
known in the Middle East for his sinister past as m
~~pcrative of the fascist-inspired Arab Nationalist Party, He
anti his deputy and dlief of operations, Ahmed Al-An-&,
enjoy special protection and immunity granted to them by
the I.x~~~csc police. The political spokesman of the Front,
hfaarouf Saad, is a member of the Lebanese Parliament for
the city of Sidun. The widely-publicized activities of the
Fronl have been the object of special debates in the
Lebanese parliament. On 26 June 1968, a well-known
political personality, Mr. Raymond Edde, had to admit that
Lebanon had granted free movement to the terrorists
through its territory. 0n 11 November 1968, another
central political figure, Kamal Joumbalatt, called the
Lcbanesc public to assist the terror movement with all the
moans at its disposal and advocated a “positive collaboration” between the terrorist armed groups and the Lebanese
authorities.

110. The attackers of the El Al aircraft in Athens tcshficd
that they were Lcbancse who came from Lebanon. One of
them was Lebanese burn, the other a resident and national
of Lebtlnon. Both lived in the city of Tripoli. Both were
members of the Pnlestine Liberation Front, the sume terror
organizntion that claimed credit for the act of piracy
committed against the El Al plane last June. Its head*
quarters are situated in Beirut, in the very mtrc of the
city, in the building crFthe weekly fMirtrip.
11 is to be
noted that the office of the El-Fatah terror orgdnization is
located in Tarik Abiri ~!l lucre to Beirut airport. The
training base of El-Fatah is lacated cast of the airport, while
its recruiting office is located in Ein&dcda, in Brirut itself.
111. The I’nlcstine Liberation Front hcudquartcrs, operating in Beirut with the sanction of the LCbiUWX!
authorilies,
was the’ tirst to announce the execution of the Athens
attack. Its cornmuniclu~ was broadcast over Lcban~‘s
governmental radio to be picked up and repeated in sickly
exhilaration by information media in other Arab capitals.
The activities of these terror organisations are conducted in
the open. They issue statements, publish anllllllnCelltellts.
organise public recruitment to their ranks. They nraintuin
camps at Tripoli, Won and Tyre, where hundreds of men
receive military training.

118. The at tention of the Lebanese Government has been
drawn on numerous occasions to the activities of the terror
organisations within its burdcrs. The Lebanese Government, howcvcr, has not only continued to condone these
activities, but has publicly identified itself with them. Prime
Minister al-Yafi has announced several times that his
Government supports terror operations against Israel. Only
this morning he declared again: “The feduym operations
are legal and sacred”. It is inconceivable how, in the k&t of
these facts, the Lebanese representatives can come before
the Security &uncil and claim ignorance and innocence.It
1s well known that the terror organisations which the
hbanc.~.(hvcrnment
assists have all proclaimed that their
aim is Israel’s destruction as a State and the annihilation of
its ~CUPIC. EVCII here in the Security Council we have not
heard a single word disswiating the Lebanese Government
from terror warfare pursued against Israel in violation Of
the cease-fire.

113. The raider Khalil Moharnad Musa Sad ad-din, captured by Israel defence forces, testified that he was
recruited in Beirut by a person named Taha IIarned and was
registered in the Palestine Liberation Qrganization office
near the UNESCO building in Beirut. The head of the office
is the notorious Shaflq al-Hut, He added that in the orrice
there were thirty other recruits from Lebanon, Twenty-six
of them were sent to receive their training at the Iraqi
Expeditionary Force stitioned in Jordan and the other four
were sent to an officers school in Iraq. The four are: the
witness himself; Suhcil Hamam; Fuad Abu Drram from
Beirut; Abd el-Aini from Ein Hilwa.

119, TIC representative of the United Kingdom indicated
in KS Stmlnctlt today that it is the United Nations itse1f
that has cstablishcd the responsibility of Governments for
assisting or tolerating within its territory terror activities
10

4

1ls. The financial branch of the Palestine Liberation
Front is openly conducting a fund-raising campaign h
h2bY~KJn and th6 receipts issued bear its imprint. They
cirC\dittt! thrOllghOllt
Lebanon with the full knowledge of
the Lcbancse authorities,

117, The encouragement and the complicity of the
Lebanese Government are no doubt accountable for the
rapid expansion of the Front activities.

112. TWO sabotage bases are located in the refugee camps
in Ein Hilwa near Sidon. The residence 01 the Mukhtar
Yosef El-Abdallah is being used as the centre of the bases.

’

*

directed aga
Charterand
this applies
hhed by t
mjlitUy acti
120. ur&
Lebanesete!
fifty persol
iaternationa
measuresto
airport.
Unli
fivesbut to
waslustful
wasutmost
While at At1
carrywarfar
to involve i
action Was
there is a
aggressionf
attempt, afl
sion does n(
the other b
war.
121, An 01
action was
precededit.
tionate to
Athenssucc
fifty persol
explosion 0
installations
proportiona
succeededil
havewaited
territory res
we engaged
in murder (
between or
impressivenl
act’s dange
motiviation’
122. Itis c
in the Midd
tion for the
whowill pa
the Israeli
Nations mi
upholstery
Or are the
privileged tl
the hundre
existing ce
damage to
incessantly
Wcentrati~
Jewishrefu
Arab war ai
123. Durh
Werebeing

directed against another State, activities which, under the
Charter and international law, constitute aggression. Surely
this applies to Lebanon which, under the cease-fire established ‘by the Security Council, is obligated to prevent
rnihtary activities of any kind whatever against Israel.

the Germans: the lives of severalthousand Jews in return
for the same number of trucks supplied from the allied
Powers. The latter, however, deemed the trucks more
valuable than living Jews. The trucks were refused. The
Jews were put to death. Here, in the Security Council of
the United Nations, a quarter of a century after the defeat
of nazi barbarism are we to hear that the scrap iron of
airplanes is worth more than Jewish blood? There is
apparently nothing so low that Arab aggressorsand their
supporters would not stoop to it. Theirs is a malevolence
which the Jewish people will not easily forget.

120. IJnlike the attempt, organized and launched from
Lebanese territory, to destroy an Israel airplane and kill the
fifty persons aboard, Israel chose not to act at the
international airport of a neutral country, but to direct its
measures to the source of the Arab attack-Beirut and its
airport. Unlike the Lebanese attack, Israel chose not to take
lives but to strike against inanimate objectives. Where there
was lustful bloodthirstiness in the Lebanese attack, there
was utmost care to avoid loss of life in the Israeli measure.
While at Athens Airport there was a premeditated effort to
carry warfare to new areas, to extend it to new dimensions,
to involve in it the international community, the Israeli
action was restricted in its scope and objective. Indeed,
there is a difference between the two acts. One was
aggression for the sake of murder; the other a desperate
attempt:, after continued restraint, to impress that aggression doles not pay. One was marked by brutal inhumanity;
the other by an attempt to revindicate humanity even in
war.

124. It is perhaps not by accident, and it may even be
symbolic, that the most penetrating assessment of. the
situation was pronounced under the name of Winston
Churchill, the younger Winston Churchill, writing in the
London Evening News of 30 December.
“On the one hand”, he wrote, “a deliberate . . , attempt
was made to destroy an Israeli civil airliner as it was
taxiing out for take-off with fifty-one people aboard. On
the other a raid that resulted in the destruction of
thirteen empty aircraft that was meticulously planned
and executed to avoid any loss of life or injury to
civilians. It is indeed strange that the Israeli action which
was deliberately designed to avoid loss of life (and it
appears, succeeded in this respect) should come in for so
much more condemnation from the British, French and
American Governments than the deliberate attempts to
destroy an airliner with all its passengersaboard. Surely,
even in our materialistic present-day society, human
life-even one individual-is worth more than a handful of
aircraft. As far as the Israelis are concerned, their raid on
Beirut airport was not so much a question of tit for tat
retaliation as for keeping their air lanes open.”

121. An opinion was expressed in this Council that Israel’s
action was disproportionate to the terror attacks that
preceded it. When would Israel’s action have been proportionate to them? Had the assailants of the aircraft at
Athens succeeded in blowing up the airplane and killing the
fifty plsrsons aboard, or had they brought about the
explosion of other airplanes on the field and of the airport
installations, would that have made the Israeli action
proportionate? Should we have waited until Arab warfare
succeeded in bringing about such a catastrophe? Should we
have waited until terror attacks from Lebanon against Israel
territory resulted in more casualties and more damage? Are
we engalgedhere in keeping the score of successand failure
in murder or in an effort to thwart it? Is proportionality
between one act and another to be established by the
impressiveness of the damage caused or by the extent of the
act’s danger, by its purpose, by its background and
motiviation?

Finally Mr. Churchill has this to say:
“The Israelis do not glory in this retribution. They say
they would willingly turn the other cheek if that were the
means of securing a soundly basedpeace. They clearly do
not believe that it is.”
125. Those who shrink from truth, those who are afraid of
truth, try to keep it out. Such an attempt was made
yesterday when certain delegations tried to prevent the
inclusion on the agenda of the Israel complaint against
Lebanese, violations of the cease-fire.Such an attempt will
undoubtedly be made again when the Security Council
comes to formulate the conclusions of its present deliberations. The truth, however, cannot be shut out-whether by
speeches or by resolutions. It is there for all to see,and it is
grim.

122. It. is odd to hear several supporters of Arab aggression
in the hlliddle East suggest that Israel should pay compensation for the aircraft destroyed at the Beirut airfield. And
who will pay for the loss of Israeli lives? Is the single life of
the Israeli engineer killed in Athens while on a United
Nations mission worth less than all the metal, wire and
upholstery destroyed in Beirut? Who will determine that?
Or are the shares of the owners of the Arab airlines more
privileged than human life? Who will compensate Israel for
the hundreds of its citizens killed in the course of the
existing cease-fire? Who will make reparation for the
damage to the border villages that are being shelled
incessantly or the Jews lingering since June 1967 in Arab
concentration camps, for the property of nearly a million
Jewish refugees from Arab lands, or for the twenty years of
Arab war against Israeli territory and people?

126. After nineteen years of unabated warfare against
Israel, the Arab States in June 1967 mounted a campaign of
aggression to wipe the State of Israel and its people off the
map. Having failed in their design, they have undertaken to
pursue the war, in defiance of the cease-fire,by terror and
sabotage. It is not a new method. It is in no way an
outgrowth of the June 1967 hostilities. It has been
employed by the Arab States for years, in the fifties and
sixties. Indeed, it is the Arab method of war against Israel
when Arab armies prefer to avoid direct confrontation with

123. During the Second World War, while iix million Jews
were being annihilated by the nazis, an offer was made by
11

the Israel army. This is the situation that has faced Israel
since 1948. For twenty years there has been Arab warfare
by terror. For twenty years there have been Israeli
self-defence counter-measures. There is only one way to
avert this chain reaction: terminate Arab warfare. There
would have been no Israeli action at the Beirut airport if
not for the savage attack in Athens perpetrated by
Lebanese from Lebanon. There would have been no attack
in Athens if not for the policy of war which the Arab
Governments are continuing in word as well as in deed. The
Government of Lebanon is fully aware of Israel’s attitude
towards it. It is one of “live and let live” When there are no
attacks from Lebanon against Israel, there are no Israel
counter-measures. When Lebanese territory is used as a base
for acts of aggression against Israel, when the Lebanese
authorities harbour terror organizations and allow them to
operate freely against Israel territory and Israel citizens,
Israel has no choice but to act in self-defence.

130. There is no doubt that it is such a state of affairs that
has contributed through the years to Arab intransigence
and fanaticism. There is no doubt that it has encouraged
the continuation of Arab aggression. There is no doubt that
in the Security Council it has given succour to Arab terror
warfare. This must no longer be, if the causeof peace is to
be strengthened and advanced,
13 1. The time has come for the parties to the Mid& East
conflict to conclude agreement on a just and lasting peace,
as called for in the 22 November 1967 resolution. It is nqt
enough to juggle with words in defining respective attitudes
towards that resolution. Peace can be achieved only by
agreement between Israel and the Arab States. Peace, ‘.
however, cannot be attained if warfare continues while the
Arab States disclaim responsibility for it. It, must end. The
Arab States can and should end it. The Security Council
must call upon them to do so. To omit such a call again can
only encourage further breaches of the cease-fire, And if
peace is to come, the cease-fire must be maintained. There
is no reason why it should not be. Israel hopes that all
Governments in the area will now realize that it is in the
interest of all of us to respect the cease-fireand to prevent
all violations of it by whatever means committed, so that
we may devote our efforts fully towards the establishment
of a just and lasting peace.

_ 127. Israel desires tranquillity on the cease-fire line with
Lebanon, as on other cease-fire lines. There will be
tranquillity if Lebanon abides by the cease-fire and puts an
end to acts of violence by terror organizations operating
from its territory, contrary to the cease-fire. In the past
twenty years such acts of aggression have only brought
disaster and suffering to all the peoples of the area. There is
no reason why Lebanon should tread this path instead of
striving, together with Israel, towards the attainment of
peace.

132. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian):Yesterday the Soviet delegation

reserved its right to speak at today’s meeting after a
thorough study of all the documents and of the facts
adduced in the statement of the Lebanese representative.

128. I returned from Israel only three hours ago. I found
the people and its Government determined to follow a
course of peace, resolved to end the war that has plagued
the Middle East since 1948. But I found a people which, if
war continues to be waged against it, will defend itself with
all its soul and all its heart! and all its might. To that people
it is immaterial how this warfare is waged or how it is
defined. Whether attacked by the shell of a regular army’s
artillery or by the bazooka bomb of an irregular military
force, the people of Israel will defend itself. Whether death
is forced upon it by an Arab arn$‘or by a terror warfare
organization supported by Arab Governments and committed to Israel’s destruction, the people of Israel will not yield
to it. They will repel it as best they can, by whatever means
they possess;for in the struggle for life it is the right to live
that precedes all. I found a people that has suffered too
much for too long, to be deterred from achieving its
objective to live at peace, real peace, like all other nations. I
found a people that will not agree that laws valid for all
should not be applicable to itself. If Governments which
permit terrorist attacks to be launched froru their territory
against another State are considered by the United Nations
as being responsible for aggression, Israel will not be ready
to consider the Arab States otherwise. If Members of the
United Nations, and in particular members of the Security
Council, regard themselves as entitled to take military
action against the bases of terrorist aggression and sabotage,
wherever they may be, Israel cannot be expected to act
differently.

136. The consideration of this question at yesterday’s and
today’s meetings has shown that all the members of the
Security Council recognize that Israel’s aggression must be
strongly condemned and that the Council must take a
decision designed to prevent future acts of aggressive
banditry by Israel.

129. There cannot be one law for Israel and another for
the Arab States, There cannot be inalienable rights for
Members of the United Nations and a questioning of the
same rights in respect of Israel.

137. The armed provocations which have been committed
in recent months by Israel troops-first against the United
Arab Republic, then against Jordan, and now against
Lebanon-are not isolated incidents. They represent a new

133. The documents, the statement made yesterday by
the Lebanese representative and today’s statement by the
head of the Lebanese delegation show beyond any doubt
that a new act of aggression has been committed by Israel.
134. The repetition by the representative of Israel at
today’? meeting of all that was said yesterday by the
representative of Israel, even in an artificially-dramatized
form, introduced nothing new.
135. The new act of aggression ‘perpetrated by Israel
against an Arab State has been -strongly condemned
throughout the world. I am deeply convinced that if the
Lebanese representative had begun his statement at this
meeting of the Council by quoting the world press-as the
Israel representative frequently does-then a single meeting
of the Security Council would not have been long enough
for him to read out all its indignant comments on this
monstrous act of Israel aggression against Lebanon.

12

stage in Israel’s aggressive policy against the neighbouring
Arab St,ates; they reflect the course set by the Israel
Government towards an expansion of the sphere of
aggressive acts by Israel in the Near East. That has been
recognizled in substance by representatives of Member
States who spoke in the Security Council yesterday and
today, including even those who have previously tried in
one forum or another to justify Israel’s actions, placing
Israel, theeaggressor, on the same footing as the Arab States,
victims of the aggression.

in Israel have various political approaches to the problem of
a settlement in the Near East and that the Israel Govemment has its “hawks” and (‘doves”, are nothing but political
camouflage and a smokescreen
deliberately spread to
conceal from world public opinion the real unity of the
leaders of Israel based on an aggressive policy.
143. The statement of the Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr. Eshkol, officially confirming that the armed attack
against Lebanon was carried out with the sanction of the
Israel Government leaves no doubt that the course towards
further aggression, towards an extension of the scale of
military provocation against Arab States, towards an
undermining of the chances of a peaceful settlement, is
indeed the off&l
policy of the Israel Government.
Therefore, let us not hear any more fables about alleged
“hawks” and “doves” in Israel. The entire world regards
Israel’s present official policy as one of reckless aggression,
threatening not only the peoples of the Near East but also
the maintenance of international peace.

138. The Israel Government’s official announcement that
‘- it had carried out a raid against the Beirut airport-allegedIy
as a retaliatory measure-merely proves that the policy of
illegal reprisals, armed provocation, and international gangsterism has now been raised to the level of the official
policy o’f the Israel Government, and that violation of the
Security Council’s decisions and of the Charter of the
United Nations has become a method of implementing that
policy.
v

144. There can be no doubt that in pursuing this policy
the Israel aggressor is once again counting for support and
defence on its protectors. The question naturally arises
whether it will continue to receive such assistance and
protection in the future.

139. It is common knowledge that modern international
law-the Charter of the United Nations-forbids
States to
resort to military reprisals. Even in earlier times, before the
adoption of the United Nations Charter, international law
recogninsd the absolute inadmissibility of carrying out
reprisals in response to actions of individuals, since such
actions cannot be regarded as violations of international
law. Israel’s aggressive acts carried out against Arab States
under the pretext of so-called retaliatory measures are
therefore in flagrant contradiction to Israel’s obligations as
a State Member of the United Nations under its Charter.
They constitute a defiance of many decisions of the
Security Council, which has frequently stressed in its
resolutions that the practice of so-called reprisal measures
of a military nature is incompatible with the purposes and
principlles of the United Nations Charter. It is common
knowledge that the Security Council, in its resolutions
adopted. in January 1956, April 1962, April 1964 and
November 1966, condemned Israel for its so-called reprisal
measures against Arab States. The Security Council reaffirmed those decisions in even stronger language by its
resolutiion of 24 March 1968 in connexion with Israel’s
attack on the town of Karameh in Jordan,

145. The Security Council listened carefully to the statement made yesterday by the representative of the United
States of America f146Oth meeting]. The Soviet delegation
noted that for the first time in recent years a United States
representative clearly condemned an aggressive act committed by Israel against an Arab State. There was also an
expression of willingness
to support immediately the
Security Council decision designed to prevent a repetition
of such acts.
146. If these words of the United States representative are
really followed by deeds of the United States Government,
if the United States of America joins the majority of the
members of the Security Council in supporting the adoption of an effective decision that would restrain the
aggressor, then the Security Council will be able rapidly and
effectively to put the arrogant aggressor in its place and to
compel it to respect the legitimate rights of other peoples,
international law, the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the decisions of the Security Council.

140. On that occasion the Security Council warned Israel
in very clear terms that, if its “actions of military reprisal”
were not stopped, then “the Security Council would have
to consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in
the Charter to ensure against repetition of such acts”

147. Gentlemen, let us be frank. We all understand that
putting a stop to Israel aggression will depend to a great
extent on the position adopted by the United States of
America. The entire world is now wondering whether the
United States is really prepared to use all its opportunities,
jointly with the Security Council and with other States, to
bring to bear on Israel the pressure necessary to help to
achieve a political settlement in the Near East, or whether
the result will merely be another verbal condemnation of
the aggressor while the Israel extremists are in fact further
encouraged to continue their aggressive policy against the
Arab States and inspired to launch new adventures by
receiving military and financial assistance and political
support.

[resolution 248 (1968/j.
141. However, the facts of recent months show that Israel
pays no attention to that strict warning by the Security
Council, and stubbornly persists in its aggressive policy
directed against the Arab States, undermining the chances
for reaching a peaceful political settlement in the Near East,
obstructing the noble mission of Ambassador Jarring, and
thus creating a threat to international peace.
142. Recent events in the Near East and the incident at
the Benut airport on 2$ December 1968 have yet another
major isignificance. They show that all the various allegations and fabrications to the effect that the leading circles
- - .-

I

148. We have also listened with close attention to the
statement made today by the United Kingdom representa-

i
i

13
,*/’

tive, who strongly condemned the aggressive actions of
Israel, We are entitled to express the hope that the United
Kingdom Government may willingly contribute towards the
normalization of the situation in the Near East and take
measures which will exert a definite influence on the
Government of Israel. The United Kingdom is far from
powerless in this regard; we are convinced of this, and the
only question is whether there really exists a desire and a
will to warn Israel of the grave consequencesto which its
present course may lead.

157. The artificial pathos of the representative of Israel
cannot conceal the leanness and inanity of his arguments.
Instead of replying to one argument by another, Israel seeks
to broaden the debate tendentiously, so-that it has gone far
beyond the question submitted to the Security Council and
led the Council irremediably astray.
158. In short, ,becauseIsrael suffered twenty years ago and
because its inhabitants today fear for their future, it
arrogates to itself the right to cause the Arabs suffwing,
make them martyrs, OCCUPY
their lands, usurp their
property, attack Lebanon, and seriously threaten peace. I
too have come straight from my country, and I can assure
you that my fellow citizens are far from calm, happy and
satisfied. The permanent threat that Israel hangs over
them-for Israel is not at all the lamb it pretends to
be-makes their situation far from enviable.

149. These comments are my reply to the remarks made
by the representative of Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi,
concerning the action that can be taken by the permanent
members of the Security Council.
150. Yesterday the Soviet delegation put forward its views
concerning the content of the decision to be taken by the
Security Council on this matter. We should like now to
reaffirm those considerations. Their foundation is that new
acts of aggression committed by Israel shall require the
Security Council to take the “further and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter” mentioned in the earlier
Security Council resolution.

159. The picture of destruction and damage causedby the
commandos, so cleverly painted by the Israel representative
in vivid, even glaring, colours cannot in any way conceal the
naturally and really pathetic situation of the Palestinian
refugees. More than two million uprooted people are living
in a permanent hell, suffering misery, disease, unemployment and death. Their plight deserves full sympathy from
public opinion and must not be forgotten. If some of them
react, they do so because Israel has lamentably left them no
choice.

151.. That warning was given by the Security Council some
months ago in caseIsrael did not ceaseits criminal policy of
attacking Arab States. In the light of those considerations
the Soviet delegation will approach any draft resolution
that may be submitted to the Council.

160. But what has Lebanon to do with all this? What is
the connexion between the Athens incident and the
Government of Lebanon? One of the commandos at the
Athens airport was allegedly born in Lebanon. But he is’far
from being Lebanese, since he was born in Lebanon of
refugee parents.

152. In this connexion we are bound to point out to
Council members that-this is becoming well knownduring the consultations conducted today among several
delegations concerning the text of a draft resolution certain
forces tried various backstage manoeuvres clearly aimed at
emasculating and watering down the proposed draft resole
tion, to prevent the Security Council from adopting any
decision which would really end the aggressiveactsperpetrated by Israel against neighbouring Arab States.
153. In strongly condemning such manoeuvres and
attempts, the Soviet delegation of course reservesits right
to speak on the substance of the draft resolution when this
is submitted to the Security Council.

161. Lebanon shelters no commando organization. But we
must understand one another clearly. For Israel every
refugee camp is a potential commando camp. If a refugee is
recruited at Beirut by some representative passingthrough,
what responsibility can the Lebanese Government assume?
To accuse Lebanon of encouragement and complicity is an
absurd slander, belied by Lebanon’s whole political history
over the past twenty years and by its extreme loyalty to
United Nations decisions.

154. The PRESIDENT: I have received a communication
from the representative of Saudi Arabia [S/8955/, requesting that he be allowed to participate in the deliberations of
the Council. If there is no objection to this, with the
consent of the Council I intend to invite the representative
of Saudi Arabia to take a seat at the Council table.

162. In sum, this entire show is designed to serveonly one
purpose, which we perceived at the end of the statement.
That is to blame the Arab countries for failing to abide by
the Security Council decision of 22 November 1967. The
accused seeks to become the accuser. I believe that you will
treat this claim as it deserves.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table.

163. In concluding these remarks on the particular ques.
tion of Lebanon, I would say this: Israel is a lamb, Lebanon
is a wolf. Gentlemen, does any one of you believe this for a
single moment?

155. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia was the next speaker on my list, but he has agreed
to cede his place to the representative of Lebanon. I now
therefore call on the representative of Lebanon.

164. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia. I now give him the floor.

156. Mr, BOUTROS (Lebanon) (translated from French):
I merely wish to rriake a few remarks about some
statements which we have heard here.

165. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, it is a
privilege for me to take the floor under your presidency. I
say this judiciously, for, indeed, whenever you take the
14

floor in the Council your words are weighted with wisdom
and YOU are never rash in coming to a conclusion. I must
say that you seem to be free from the straight jacket of
instructions that often characterizes Members of the United
Nations.

invent the alphabet, which figures on the sarcophagus of
Hiram of Byblos. The word Byblos, thirteen centuries
before Christ, gave its name to the Book, to the Bible. That
was three hundred years before King Solomon came on the
scene in Palestine. The oriental Jews, as well as Europeans,
Jewish scholars and gentile scholars, know that the
Lebanese engaged in shipbuilding, in trade. They never
went to war except in self-defence.They never went to war
against anybody.

166. I take this opportunity also to offer my condolences
to our Norwegian colleagues, whether present or absent, on
the death they have sustained through the passing of
Mr. Trygve Lie, whom I had known since the inception of
the IJnited Nations. I can hardly add to the laudatory
words that were expressed by our Secretary-General at the
beginning of this meeting.

172. And here, after 3,300 years, come those usurpers
from eastern Europe who were converted to Judaism
between the seventh and eighth centuries after Christ,
according to the Jewish Encyclopaedia, and who happen to
have Judaism as their religion but who are eastern European
in origin. They come as colonials and they are supported by
some great Powers. They have been supported by the
British Government since the days of Balfour, and later
they were supported by none other than a President of the
United States, Mr. Truman; they created Israel.

167. I had decided not to take the floor; but after having
heard the arrogant allegations of none other than
Mr. Tekoah, I feel constrained to take the floor, for indeed
if his words are left unanswered they may be taken for
granted by many people, Jews and non-Jews, not only in
New York City but the wo#ld over. The reason is simple.
The Zionists control or influence the mass media of
information in many countries and it has become habitual
for Mr. Tekoah to quote chapter and verse from articles
that may have been inspired if not p&d for by Israel or its
representatives abroad.

173. The United Nations at Lake Successvoted for the
partition of Palestine by the slim margin of two or three
votes, if my memory is correct. And by whosepressurewas
it? By the pressure of the Western countries; but unfortunately, Mr. Gromyko also voted for the partition. Then,
what happened? Palestine waspartitioned.

168. But I asked for the floor to address myself to the
item that this august body is discussing. I read the verbatim
record, because I was not here last night to attend the first
meeting of the Council on this item. There is a change in
the attitude of the United States. They seem to be waking
up to the fact that Israel is drunk with power and has taken
precipitate action that may lead one day to a world
conflict. I say this because, after having read the words of
Mr. Wiggins, I find that there is a concern expressed by the
United States; but at the same time it is a cautious restraint.
For indeed, if the United States means action it would
forthwith have stated categorically that it would reconsider
the sale of fifty Phantom jets to Israel.

174. I jotted down a few of the phrases used by the
representative of Israel. He stated that the armed attack on
the airport of Athens was of an unprecedented character.
Does he for a moment think that no invasion of Palestine
by Europeans had ever occurred before the Zionists’
invasion? Has he forgotten the days of the Crusaders,who
used religion as a motivation for a political and economic
end?
175. Mr. Tekoah uses such words as “despicable acts of
violence”. Maybe Mr. Tekoah was not in Palestine in 1948.
I do not know where he wasthen, about twenty years ago.
Has he heard of the massacreof Deir Yassin, a village that
was surrounded at dawn by machine-gunners who killed
every creature, including animals, and destroyed the
houses? Mr. Tekoah speaks about “barbaric insanity” to
describe two frustrated Palestinian desperados, who are
fighting to regain their homeland, and in desperation
perpetrate such acts as occurred at the airport of Athens
and he wishes to attribute their acts to the Lebanese
Government.

169. But the United States made sure, as far as I can
gather from the dispatches I read, that this protest which
the A.ssistant Secretary of State in Washington expressed to
the Israeli representative in Washington did not imply at all
the mconsideration of selling the Phantom jets to. Israel.
There,fore I question whether any action taken in the
Council will be merely words or whether any resolution will
see to’ it that Lebanon receives reparations for the loss it has
sustained by the wanton action on Beirut Airport.

176. When Mr. Tekoah speaks of “piracy on the seaor in
the air”, has he forgotten that there were two million
Palestinians, more than half of whom now live outside their
homeland? Their houses and their orchards have been
taken over. They were driven out by tanks.

170. The Charter is quite explicit about what could be
done in order to stop this usurping State in the Middle East.
Chapter VII of the Charter and other articles speak of
sanctions. Is the United States ready to apply sanctions if
Israel does not offer reparations and an apology to the
Government of Lebanon for what it has done?

177. When Mr. Tekoah speaks of “cowardly terrorism”,
has he forgotten the Irgun bands who even hanged British
Tommies? That is why Great Britain could not remain
there any longer. Of course, Lord Caradon, out of courtesy
perhaps, forgets or wishesto forget about those acts.

171. I need not go over what the former Foreign Minister
of Lebanon has said. I know Lebanon; I was born in
Lebanon. Since the times of the Phoenicians, in the annals
of Lebanese history, the people of Lebanon were never
known to have aggressedagainst their neighbours. I am not
saying this lightly. And the Phoenicians, that were the
ancient Canaanites of the Bible, were the first people to

178. Criticism is levelled against all the Arabs-and by “all
the Arabs” I mean from the Atlantic to the confines of
15

Ir~--.o~le hu~ubxi million of them who he ii\VilkCIlCtf to
the fact that there is a usurping element in their midst,
none other than those European Zionists. The Zionists no
longer say “God gave us Israel, or Palestine”. We refuted
that religious argument a long time ago. They no longer SKY
“Isr3eI is ours because 3,000 years ago We were there’“,
because that argument was refuted here in the C’OUIK~~.
They always cry and say “we have been persecuted”,
forgetting that evu their Rabbi in Engkmd said: ‘“The
history of Jews was glorious in Spain during the Arab
occupation”. IIthat was said only a few days ago. But the)
quote what it suits them to quote from vnrious newspapers.

185.
We are the
paw11s
of the balance of power and poor
Lebanon InlISt pay the price. You can condemn Israel in
aK1)’ rtXdldiOn that YOU may pass. Israel has been condcmwd ht: iUld again. They laugh up their sleeves,Their
leaders have protcsted to the State Department
because
it
said that it ws wrong to commit amession against
Lebanon. What do they care? They have permeated Your
Government. YOU cannot do anything, you court them and
we pay the price in the Arab East, in the who]e Middle
EW Wh)r‘! What hWC we done to you Western countries?
I)0

yOl1

IlOt

haVe

LI UJIlSCkIlC~,

or

iS that

only

in

books?

What h:lVf2 the Arabs done tO you? They opened their
dOWS
wil]C after the First World War and they found
thlmh
mtdcr mandates, colonized. After the Second
World War, yOl1 partitioned part of the Arab homeland,
Wh3t haVC We done? How can we trust you? The
~t~VCt+flnlCIltS
have to deal with YOU; but what about the
Arab ~co@c’! There are a hundred million Arab people, I
do not represent them. They are taking matters in their
OWIl
hl\IldS.
hl
yOU
WilIlt
thC
Arab Governments to be
attacked by the Arib ~XOP~C? That is what will happen if
you pursue your policy. What have we done to You? why
do you not lwve US alone to work out our destiny without
intcrfcrcnce’? We are the pawns of a balance of powerthat
has
existed since the Congress of Vienna, that existed
during the First World War and that foundered miserably
after the Vcrsaillcs Conference. You are repeating the same
pattern for vested interests and for the Zionists who have
permeated your institutions and your Governments. What
huvc WCK~OIICto you’! Why do you not leave us alone?

179. Those poor Palestinians, Iiving in camps or dispersed,
as the Jews at one time were dispersed- I am talking of the
oticntal Jews, the Diaspora.--if they think of their home.
land, they are called “terrorists”‘. Most of lhe nvmbc~
sitting around this table, during the Second World War
called the underground fighters “her~~s”‘~ “the Maquis, the
underground. Some of them were what‘? They WCR Jews,
fighting against the tyranny of Hitler, And rightly SO.
180. But when the Palestinians, who have been robbed of
their property, of their homeland and chased out of their
country, are desperate and try to express their despair by
such acts as we hear of, whether it is in the airport of
Athens or elsewhere. or em11 in Los Angeles where one of
the leaders of this country was assassinated because he
supported the Zionist cause for political reasons- those
people are called “murderers”.

186. What has happened in Lebanon is a serious matter. It
shows that there can be no coexistence between those
European usurpers and the Arab countries. If they aggress
against peaceful Lebxlun
the way they have, what will they
do when they get stronger? “Oh, live in peace with them.”
‘I’hcy will colonise us economically. They will do anything,
without hcing detcrrcd. But there is some morality evenin
nature, He who oppressesothers will finally pay a big price.
r\nd the peopic of I’alcstine have not aggressedagainst the
West or ag&nst the Jews. As 1 have said in many of my
interventions, rIla11y of them may have been Jews and
embraced Christianity or Islam. I have warned this Council
during the last three or four years that the question is ae
longer WC between the Arab States contiguous with Israel
arld the usurping State of Israel. It is between the
I’alestitrian people and those who robbed them of their
homeland. Has that not yet sunk in enough? Do You sot
set how the paIestmians are laying their lives on the pabm
of their hands and throwing them so as to regain *eir
hoIncland? Of COUTS(: YOU see it. But why do You act like
llC]l, because if WC do not act Iike that the Soviet
that?
Union will gain a foothold in the Arab lands.” That is Your
argument; I have heard it time and again; it is in Your
ppcn. But YOU coexist with the Soviet Union. The Soviet
Union is a big power. It has certain interests, and it wants
to develop tlmsc interests. You had interests there before
t]lc
Soviet
[J&n,
but you are SpOihg
Your interests* One
day your interests and our interests may go uP in flames*

181. Are them two yardsticks here in the Security I’ourmil
or in the United Nations? If there arc two Yardsticks, the
United Nations will founder like the League of Nations
foundered before it.
182. “The world remained paralysed”’ those are the
words of Mr. Tekoah~-~“after what had happened in
Athens.” I am quoting Mr.Tekoah: “The people of Israel
were on their owti.”
The people of Israel are on their own
when they are supported by most Western countries, which
furnish ~II~III with arms’! For what: In order to make sure
that the Palestinians will remain out of their homeland; thut
they will bc crushed. And by whom? By the Arab States‘!
183, Let me repeat to you gentlemen here: 110 Arab lcadcr
would dare suppress any Palestinian who says “I must go to
my homeland”, the same as no European who was lighting
to regain his country in the Second World War could have
been called a terrorist or a traitor and no one would have
dared to call him that. Those who did wcrc liquidated in
Europe, and 1 do not want to mention specific countries
now in order not to embarrass some of those rcprcscnted
around this table.
184. Arab aggressors? Why do you not leave us alme, you
Western countries? NOW you arc afraid of the Soviet Union
because it is in the Mediterranean. Who brought the Soviet
Union to the Mediterranean? You brought them.
hlr. Wiggins’ Government brought them. Why should they
not come to the Mediterranean’? The Mediterranean is trot
a Western or an Eastern sea. It belongs to the countries that
surround it.

187. And here Lord Caradon speaks in platitudes Of
rn&irlg peace, Hc reminds me of Mr. Cabot Lodge in 1956*
it t]lc end of that session in 1956 he Mme out wi* two
draft resolutions in order to liquidate the Palestinian
16

questic
refugee
the ref
talk fc
Arabs
countr
tell thf
called
traitor!
no An
try to
self-de.
Is the
How d
them.%
there :
years t
right.
princir
to ela]
took u
is Israe
188.
platitu
lesson.
crush
sea, t
accom
ments,
workel
Palesti
identit
and th
like it
not. 7
eloque
variou:
Leban
action
made
ordere
think
long n
Atlant
and th

189.
the Pi
yet t
newsp
killed
we all
think
people
the pa
wheth
usurpi
ancien
econo
hearts
their I
your 1
You 11

question. Now Lord Caradon brings up the question of the
refugees and its settlement, Why does he not go and poll
the refugees and see what they want? We have no right to
talk for the refugees. No one has the right, not even the
Arabs have the right, to talk for the refugees. It is their
country. He speaks about resettlement. The Arabs cannot
tell the refugees, “Give up your homeland.” They would be
called traitors. The Arab Governments would be called
traitors, and any Arab would be called a traitor, Anyway,
no Arab Government would tell the Arab refugees, “Do not
try to regain your homeland.” Either there is a right of
self-de,termination or there is no right of self-determination.
IS the right of self-determination only for you in Europe?
How d.id the people who lived under the colonial yoke free
themselves except by fighting? Now you concede that
there .is the right of self.determination. It took me eight
years to elaborate that principle of self-determination into a
right. No other than President Wilson enunciated the
principle at the Conference of Versailles, but when we came
to elaborate it into a right here at the United Nations it
took us eight years, because of colonial interests. And what
is 1srae:lbut colonialism by proxy?

control any longer. They bring you votes. Weknow it from
the newspapers: we read it every day. That is your business.
More glory to them if they want to do these things in your
country. But why should the Arabs pay for it? Why should
small Lebanon pay for it? By what right do the eastern
European Zionists plant themselves in Palestine? Only by
the connivance of certain Western Powers, in order to
dominate the whole area, the gateway to the continent of
Asia from the west. I say to the United States: these are
your plans. You sell them Phantoms. You do not wait until
the next President comes in. You sell them Phantoms, We
warned you that this would aggravate the situation, There
will be no peace in the Holy Land of Palestine, unfortunately, until the great Powers-land I addressmyself now
not only to the United States but also to the Soviet
Union-seetoitthatanyresolutionthatmaybeelaborated
and
submitted to the Council demands that reparations should
be made to Lebanon and that if reparations are not made
effective forthwith there will be sanctions under the
provisions of the Charter. Otherwise we shsll be the
laughing-stock of the whole world and the United Nations
arguments would then consist of random talk. We are being
uncovered by the people outside the United Nations, and it
saddens me, because, after all, many of us are dedicated to
the United Nations, for there is no alternative to the United
Nations. If the two major Powers in the Council,do not see
to it this time that reparations are made to Lebanon, with a
warning that sanctions will be applied otherwise, all the
work here in the Council, if you will allow me to say so,
will be like trying to start a fire in an empty hearth by
blowing into the ashes. Let us not deceive ourselves,Let us
be honest with ourselves.

188, Whom are we fooling around this table by talking in
platitudes? Everyone reads his statement as if reciting a
lesson. There is a people there in Palestine. If you want to
crush it, try to crush it. If you want to throw it into the
sea, try to throw it into the sea. If you think an
accommodation can be worked out with the Arab Governments, I wonder whether any such accommodation can be
workeld out. If it does not have the approval of every
Palestinian, it is null and void. They are a people with an
identity, with a personality. Sovereignty lies in the people,
and they have the right to self-determination, whether you
like it or not, whether we, the Arab Governments, like it or
not. That is the fact. That is the truth. Here come the
eloquent representatives of Israel-and I checked again from
variou;s sources that those two Palestinians were not
.Lebanese-and they pick on Lebanon in order to provoke
action, thinking that by that action the Arab people will be
made to yield and submit to their will. As I said, those who
ordered such wanton action either are drunk with power or
think that this is a way which will bring about peace in the
long run. Such action will stiffen the Arab people from the
Atlantic to the confines of Iran, down to the heart of Asia
and the Sudan.

190. I must say one last word to my good friend
Mr. Wiggins, the representative of the host country. We are
all dedicated to free speech, but things‘are getting out of,
hand around the Headquarters of the United Nations. My
colleague from Algeria said something to that effect, In the
West such words as t‘bastards” and “bitches” are common
jargon, but they are insults in our part of the world, We are
Members of the United NationsOf course, we do not ask
that anyone’s mouth be sealed, But there should at least be
a little more consideration shown to States Members of this
Organization.
191. I would ask the Secretary-General to be kind enough
to see to it that a full report is made about these epithets
and what his guards themselves heard. I myself checked,
but I do not want to embarrass this Organization by
reporting anything before the Secretary-General has had a
chance to investigate. At the same time, I request my good
friend Mr. Wiggins to see to it that we are not subjected to
indignities and insults. We are insulted enough in the
newspapers, in writing. After all, we represent sovereign
States. We do not call people names, Even if our enemies
come to us, we are courteous, I am not saying that as a
reflection .on the people of the United States: it is a
reflection on the city of New York, which seemsto have
many pressure groups that sometimes get out of hand and
are discourteous and impolite, I shall not refer to some
letters which I have received during the past three or four
yearsand which would make even a man in his early sixties,
like myself, blush.

189. Israel talks of newspapers in Lebanon writing about
the Palestinian commandos and calls them terrorists, and
yet they have a right to malign the Arabs in their
newspapers all over the world. They say that one Israeli
killed at the Athens airport-whose death as a human being
we all deplore-is worth I do not know how many lives. I
think they have a psychosis. They think they are the chosen
people of God. This is a psychosis. This is discrimination on
the pa.rt of God, We deplore the death of any human being,
whether he be Jew or gentile. But what right have these
usurping eastern European Zionists to use Judaism, an
ancierrt religion, as a motivation for a political and
economic end? They have no right whatsoever, and in your
hearts you know they have no such right. But you plead
their case here because they are financiers and try to ease
your trade. They worm themselves into your governments.
You let them do whatever they want, because you have no
17

disqualified itself as an acceptable partner in the search for
understanding in the Middle East. Until that time. the
world will not accept the Soviet Union in the concert of
peace-loving nations striving to end the twenty-yezr Arab
war against Israel.

192. We must see to it that our personal dignity is
respected, that the dignity and worth of the individual are
respected.
193. In conclusion, I wish to thank the President. again for
giving me the floor. After I have seen any draft resolution
that may emerge from the consultations among members of
the Council, I may ask the President to give me the floor
again-of course with the permission of the members of the
Council.

199. As for the references the Soviet representative made
to precepts of international law, it is clear that he has
offered to the Security Council concepts specially tailored
for this debate. He may be interested to hear the following
comment published today by the well-known Danish
international jurist, Professor Foighel, through the Danish
news agency:

194. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the representative of Saudi Arabia for the friendly and generous
remarks he addressed to me and to my country at the
beginning of his statement.

“I am inclined to agree that the Beirut Airport action
should be regarded as an act of defence. Lebanon did not
put forth an official protest or an expression of regret
when the terror group assumed the full responsibility for
the attack on the Israel plane at Athens Airport.
International law and also the Soviet draft convention to
define the concept of aggression lay down that the State
from ‘whose territory a group of armed men carry out
actions against another State carry the full responsibility
for the acts of the group.”

195, I should also like to inform him, as well as the
members of the Security Council, that I have received a
communication from the delegation of the United States
stating that the people who were causing the difficulties in
front of the building of this Organization have been
removed and order has been restored.
196. The representative of Israel has asked to speak in’
exercise of his right of reply, and I now call on him.

200. I should like to reiterate for the benefit of the
representative of the USSR that there will not be one law
for all nations and another for Israel--not even Soviet law.

197. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): It would be superfluous for
me to say that it is not in order to reply to the last speaker
that I have asked for the floor.

201. The PRESIDENT: There are no other names on the
list of speakers. As members of the Council are aware, very
extensive consultations have been going on and are continuing. It appears that some very encouraging progress is being
made. I am happy to say that perhaps by this*afternoon we
may be in a position to reach a stage in our work that will
allow us to consider an agreed text of a draft resolution.
Therefore, in order to allow those consultations to continue
and to enable us to finish our work by this afternoon, if
possible, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
adjourn the meeting until 3 o’clock this afternoon.

198. We all know that what is a matter of life and death to
one nation may be only a game of dialectics to another.
Yet, even if viewed as a mere game, Security Council
debates are all too serious to entitle a State guilty of
aggression to preach about aggression,a defder of the rights
of nations to parade as a mentor on correct relations
between States, a prime contributing factor to the Middle
East conflict to claim the privilege of giving advise on
Middle East peace. By its unchanged policy, by its
unreserved support of Arab intransigence and belligerency,
by the encouragement it gives continued Arab terror
warfare against Israel, the Soviet Union has made the
attainment of peace in the Middle East more difficult. Until
it modifies its attitude, it must be regarded as having

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1 a.m., Tuesday, 31 December 1968.

‘18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

Sso13-October

1972-2,050

L
1

I
