THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th

MEETING:

NEW

17 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2434)
Adoption of the agenda ,...,.a.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.....I........*....
,.....~........................

I
.,...*.*

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) ,.,“..a

WV.2434

1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Offici~~CRecords o-the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolurions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2434th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 May 1983, at 10.30 am.
President: Mr. UMBA

di LUTETE

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2434)

1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)

1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings
devoted to this item [243Ist to 2433rd meetings], I invite
the representative of Honduras to take a place at the
Council table. I also invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Laos People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Mali, Mauritius,
Mexico, Panama, Sao
Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Venezuela to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr. Zumbado Jimdnez
(Costa Rica), Mr. Roa Kourf (Cuba), Mr. Resales-Rivera
(El Salvador), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Quifionesdmkzquita
(Guatemala), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Vongsaly (Lao
People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Traord (Mali), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius),
Mr, Mufioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Ozores Typaidos (Panama), Mr. Cassandra (Sao Tome and Principe), Ms.
Gonthier (Seychelles) Mr. de Pinids (Spain), Mr. EI-FatW

(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Colombia
and Viet Nam in which they ask to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. AIbdn Holgufn
(Colombia) and Mr* Le Kim Chung (Ret Nam) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter dated 16 May 1983 from the representative of Zimbabwe [S/157683 which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that an invitation
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council be extended to Mr. Ahmed Gora
Ebrahim, representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, to participate in the Council’s consideration of the item ‘Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the
Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15746)‘.”
4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to grant the request made to it to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmed Gora Ebrahim.
5, The members of the Council have before them document S/15766, containing the text of a letter dated 13
May from the representative of the German Democratic
Republic addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
6. The first speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
7. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): At the outset I believe it is very apt and appropri-

its friendly allied country, Honduras. The similarity of
the two arguments-two sets of arguments, let us sayand the concordance of the ideas produced by those two
speakers demonstrated with exceptional accuracy the illomened co-ordination of their countries’ foreign policies
regarding Nicaragua, as well as their vicious cooperation against Nicaragua in the battlefield.

ate to remember a colleague who used to be with us in
the United Nations and who is no longer with any of his
colleagues, either in the United Nations or at home. He
was Mr. Tsogtyn Narkhuu, the representative of the
Mongolian
People’s Republic to the United Nations,
who passed away last week. May God bless him. We
offer our condolences to his family, to his friends, particularly those in his mission who miss him very sadly, and
to his Government , Mr. Narkhuu has left us, and of
course we shall all be following him sooner or later. We
shall be, as he is now, accountable for what we personally did in this world. According to Islamic eschatology,
in the hereafter our personal actions and intentions will
count. No representative to the United Nations will be
able to refer to the instructions of his or her Government
on the day of reckoning. Some representatives have of
course forgotten that, or probably they do not believe in
the hereafter and the day of judgement. The more difficult task of those colleagues of ours is due to that very
lack of belief in the hereafter-but
that is a different
matter and does not really concern us here very much.

13. Both speakers objected to Nicaragua’s having an
army to defend its revolution. What a crime that is. Both
speakers were quite unhappy at the fact that the Nicaraguan people were prepared to take up arms and mobilize
a militia in defence of their revolution. Both speakers
shed crocodile tears over the absence of democracy and
religious freedom in Nicaragua. Indeed, both speakers
did not even attempt to conceal their open, illegal intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua. The United
States representative went so far as to admit the existence
of a debate-of course, a democratic debate-in the
United States over what kind of regime should rule the
Nicaraguan people; a debate which affects the nature of
the congressional mandate to the President regarding the
role of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in Nicaragua. Such blatant confessions in the Council reveal just
how seriously the Council is taken and the extent to
which the Charter of the United Nations matters to
American imperialism, They also show the extent to
which the oppressed nations of the world can count on
this international body, which itself is a victim of the
same oppressive Powers. Yes, the mastermind of imperialism and Honduras both referred to the absence of
democracy and religious freedom in Nicaragua. Therefore, democracy must exist in Honduras, where joint
manoeuvres by the American and Honduran armies were
held-freely and democratically, of course. Democracy
must exist also in El Salvador, where American advisers
as well as mercenaries can be present to suppress the
masses, simply because the masses want to get rid of the
sort of democracy which is offered to them under the
auspices of American military advisers and assistance.

8. What does concern the Security CounciI is the discrepancies between our statements and deliberations in
the Council and those in the divine court of justice.
There, reference to national interest, for instance, in justification of certain positions is not an excuse; here it is the
only excuse. I think it is good for us to remind ourselves
and remember that we shall all be accountable for what
we do, what we say and the role we play. For recalling
this we are indebted to the late Mr. Narkhuu, to whom
we all pay a tribute and for whom we ask mercy of God.
9. Let us also remember that many are dying of hunger,
from bullets or from diseases, simply because we here
and people like us in some of our capitals are not carrying out our duties properly. Let us hope and pray that
our common efforts may lead to a just solution of the
formidable problems a small country like Nicaragua has
been facing for years.
10. Before their revolution the people of Nicaragua
were tortured and afflicted by the mean, inhumane,
imperialist puppet regime of Somoza, and when, after
great sacrifices, they got rid of Somoza, American imperialism provided shelter and means of making mischief
for the counter-revolutionary
elements. That is why,
probably, we are here today in the Council.

14. In the past the American Administration
used to
praise the servile regime of the deceased Shah for maintaining the same brand of democracy in my country
under the boots of 40,000 American military advisers. Of
course there is no democracy in Nicaragua from the viewpoint of the United States Administration.
How can
there be democracy in Nicaragua, where the entire population is ready to take up arms in defence of their revolution? If the Nicaraguans had wanted a democracy which
would please the United States representative in the
United Nations, they would not have overthrown the
Somoza regime and its guards.

11. The actions of the United States were aimed not
only against the Nicaraguan revolution but also at a
show of teeth to the other Latin American nations so
that they would not dream of liberating themselves from
the claws of imperialism. However, the attempt to convince the small, impoverished nations of Latin America
that they had no right to freedom, political, cultural and
economic independence, a health service, education, or
the utilization of their natural resources for their own
welfare and happiness is a vain effort.

15. The Council is only pretending to be unnecessarily
polite, for all its members know very well that American
sputtering about the cause of democracy in other countries is a part of all the problems and is always misrepresented to the Council as a solution. If the Council could
only persuade the benevolent humanists of the State
Department and the CIA just to stop, for heaven’s sake,
worrying, in lieu of the people of Nicaragua, about

12. At the 2431st meeting, on 9 May, the Council heard
the views of the representatives of the United States and
2

democracy in that country, the ‘Council would have done
a great job.

work this month. I am especially pleased in view of the
brotherly relations established with you in the course of
our common work for the cause of the African continent,
its liberation and its unity. I am convinced that as an
African militant you understand completely the meaning
of freedom and appreciate the sacrifices of peoples, and
that the Council will have ample opportunity under your
presidency to achieve successful results.

16. It is also clear why the ability of Nicaraguans to
defend their country is a thorn in the flesh of jmperialism. Let the imperialists know that they are facing a
revolutionary
nation and not an American-trained
puppet regime or puppet army of defeat.

23. For weeks now the Council has been meeting to
discuss the aggression and provocation against the
Republic of Nicaragua and its people. As I have said
before on this subject, this aggression against the people
is not the first and will not be the last.

17. The Council should also remember that next to
every revolutionary country American imperialism has
satanically managed to station a friendly neighbour zealous to restore “democracy” by overthrowing the people’s
revolutionary regime. We heard a lot from both speakers
about Nicaragua’s sources of military hardware, but
neither of them bothered to elaborate on the sources
from which the Somoza mercenaries and counterrevolutionary elements get their arms.

24. We are meeting here again today because of the
escalation of imperialist provocation and American intervention against Nicaragua, its people and its revolution.
We could repeat nearly everything that has been said at
previous meetings-or at least part of it-by the dozens
of States which participated in the debate, the majority of
which are victims of American imperialism in the same
way as the people of Nicaragua. These States are bitter
about this injustice, and they feel that what is happening
in Nicaragua is exactly the same as what happened to
them. My country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, is one
of the States that have been victims of the aggression and
provocation of that same American imperialism and that
continue to be their victims and the target of the provocations of that imperialism, which is the enemy of the
peoples.

18. Personally, I was surprised at Her Excellency’s
boldness when she defended religious freedom in front of
Father Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann, the Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua. It reminded me of
President Carter’s comment on the invalidity of our
interpretation of Islam. Of course, there is no religious
freedom in Nicaragua, where priests are cabinet
members. Religious freedom exists only in El Salvador,
where Cardinal Romero and four American nuns were
murdered in cold blood.
19. I have no doubt whatsoever that no one in the
Council has been convinced by those fallacious arguments of Her Excellency the representative of the United
States and His Excellency the representative of Honduras. What the representative of the United States said in
the Council basically repeated the allegations contained
in President Reagan’s address to Congress, plus some
trivialities that Her Excellency herself contributed. When
President Reagan’s arguments have been refuted even by
some American lawmakers, I wonder why the Council
has not yet taken the necessary measures to extinguish
the American fire burning the oppressed people of
Nicaragua.

25. I hesitated a long time before asking to speak, but
this matter is quite clear, because the aggressor itself recognizes its aggression. The matter does not need to be
defended; it needs to be judged, and only to be judged.
The aggressor admits openly that it is intervening in Nicaragua and is sending arms and mercenaries there. That
is why the cause does not need to be defended but
requires only, as I have said, a verdict. I have said from
the outset that there is a witness from the same camp
here. The best course would be to read to the Council, as
a simple reminder, the reply of Senator Christopher
Dodd to the United States President on 27 April. That
reply is clear testimony which does away with the need
for any other proof in order to denounce the policy of the
American Administration,

20. The Government and the people of the Islamic
Republic of Iran support the revolutionary people of Nicaragua and their courageous struggle against United
States-backed acts of aggression by Somoza mercenaries
and American lackeys, We consider the Nicaraguan revolution to be a great and praiseworthy socio-political phenomenon which has brought the message of freedom and
independence to all the oppressed nations of the area.

26, That Administration defends “freedom fighters”.
That is a new concept of which we are hearing for the
first time, It is also the first time that we have heard the
United States Government speak of freedom and “those
who love freedom”. The mercenaries and the Somoza
gang and its successorsare now described as people in
search of freedom. The Palestinians, however, are terrorists, with whom discussions cannot be held and who
should not have a homeland. Furthermore, after what
Mrs. Kirkpatrick said in a speech entitled “The Russian
Jews”, many Russian Jews are destined to take the place
of Palestinian terrorists, who do not deserve to live,

21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
tabIe and to make his statement.
22. Mr. TREK1 (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): First of all, Sir, on behalf of the delega-

27. The black inhabitants of South Africa are also terrorists, according to the concept and logic of the Ameri-

tion of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, I wish to say how
pleased we are to see you presiding over the Council’s
I
3

for such assistance would be considered an intervention.
Then there is the question of the military advisers: Nicaragua must get rid of all the doctors from Cuba or any
other country and leave the Nicaraguan people without
medical care because of the military advisers. As for the
thousands of American military advisers in El Salvador,
who are killing people in that country every day, that is
permissible, logical, reasonable and acceptable because it
is in accordance with IJnited States democracy, human
rights and the Reagan and Kirkpatrick
“doctrines”.
United States imperialism
deploys its missiles on the
borders of the Soviet Union, and in the Mediterranean its
fleets continue to threaten our shores, and that is considered acceptable. But if a Latin American State asks a
neighbouring or friendly State for help, that is unacceptable; it is interference in an international conflict,

cans, but there are “those who seek freedom” in
Nicaragua. The revolutionaries of El Salvador are mercenaries and the revolutionaries of other Latin American
regions are also mercenaries, but the Somoza gang alone
are freedom-seekers.
28. That is the American concept of democracy.
Democracy means that the people of Nicaragua should
surrender and return Somoza and the multinational
monopolies, because nobody in the world has the right to
say “NO” to the United States, for it is God. It is a Pity
that the present leaders of the American Administration
are drawn from the generation before the Second World
War, the generation of what was called “American isolationism”. They consider that the United States is the
world and that all other peoples must say “Yes” and Pay
a ransom, a tax. If they do not, they are considered to be
rebels, not democrats, and, as the representative of Iran
said, terrorists who do not recognize religious freedom.

34. I think that I heard some colleagues speaking here
about the East-West conflict. There is no East-West conflict in this region. The conflict is between imperialism
and the peoples of the world. I am not here to defend the
Soviet Union, but, while it is a natural ally of the peoples
against United States imperialism, it is not participating
in any conflict in the region. The only conflict is with us,
the small, poor and vanquished peoples who have suffered from colonialism and we wish to free ourselves and
build up our countries. But we are always confronted
with American imperialism, which casts its veto on this
construction and development, There you have the conflict between us and American imperialism.

29. The logic of American democracy is very strange.
Why was there a revolution in Nicaragua? Why is there
now a revolution in El Salvador? Mr. Dodd is a witness,
and he has said that in Latin America, “In country after
country, dictatorship or military dominance has stifled
democracy and destroyed human rights.” If Central
America were not racked with poverty, there would be
no revolution. If it were not racked with hunger, there
would be no revolution. That is the truth of the matter.
30. The Monroe Doctrine, the “Truman doctrine”, the
“Reagan doctrine”, and now the “Kirkpatrick doctrine”,
must all be respected by the world, and all the peoples of
Latin America must submit to and accept Yankee imperialism, and say “Yes”, not “No”.

35. By what right and by what logic does the United
States Government arrogate to itself the right to impose
its trusteeship on the Latin American peoples? It speaks
of the hemisphere, of the region, the Monroe Doctrine,
as if the whole of Latin America were a United States
colony. by what right does the United States speak of
human rights when it is seeking to exterminate the entire
Palestinian people? By what right does the United States
speak of democracy when it practices terrorism and
imposes fascist military dictatorships in many regions,
inter alia in Central America and Latin America? What
kind of democracy is this? Does the United States practise democracy in its own country while refusing to allow
it to be practised in other countries? Furthermore, there
is no real democracy in the United States itself. What
exists there is the democracy of United States companies,
the democracy of monopolies, the democracy of the
whites, a phoney democracy.

31. Today Nicaragua is a victim of this aggression, as
were earlier Iran, Viet Nam, Angola, Libya and many
other peoples, including peoples of Latin America and
Central America. Before Nicaragua there was intervention in the Dominican Republic, an incursion there.
There was the assassination of President Lumumba and
President Allende. That is United States democracy,
That is the Reagan, Kirkpatrick and Truman doctrine.
32. We must now shoulder our responsibilities. It is our
duty to be the judges and to say “No” to the aggressor. If
we do not, a dangerous precedent will be set of allowing
the United States to continue to suppress the sovereignty
of peoples, to terrorize them and to terrorize all the progressive regimes in Latin America and throughout the
world.

36. The United States continues to carry out military
aggression and attacks which must be condemned, and a
stop should be put to United States interference in the
internal affairs of Latin America and the Caribbean.

33. Some people talk about a conflict between East and
West. What is that conflict? Nicaragua is helped by
the Soviet Union to build a factory or to build a fishing
Port. Is there a conflict there? Is that not the right ofNicaragua? In reality, there is no conflict between East and
West, but only a conflict between the people of Nicaragua and American imperialism. The Soviet Union is a
friend of Nicaragua, but it has no right, any more than
Libya or even Cuba has, to help the people of Nicaragua,

37. Grenada, a very small country with some 200,000
inhabitants, wishes to construct an airport; that is a
major crime. President Reagan himself has spoken of the
danger in the construction of an airport in Grenada, and
yet Grenada-in
terms of population-is
smaller than
the World Trade Center. Is Grenada’s construction of an
airport so dangerous for American imperialism, and
4

does Grenada have to stop construction because it constitutes a danger for United States security and safety?

repression, we will . . . find ourselves once again on the
losing side.”

38. BY what logic or right can the President of the
greatest POWer
in the world speak in this manner? Who
are the freedom fighters in Nicaragua and who are the
people supported by the United States? A new concept
would have to be invented to designate the freedomseekers according to American criteria, The Palestinians
are terrorists, the blacks in South Africa are terrorists,
the Libyans also are terrorists, the Soviet Union consists
of dictatorships. The whole world practises dictatorship.
The heroic people of Viet Nam practises dictatorship
because all these people have said “No” to the United
States. They are therefore agents of terrorism, agents of
the Soviet Union, as the United States claims.

That is the real opinion of the American people concerning the intervention by the United States Government in
Nicaragua and in Central America.

39. We would like relations in Central America and
Latin America to be the same as those existing between
Libya and the Soviet Union These are friendly relations
and not relations of hegemony, relations that are
imposed. the Soviet Union has never imposed itself and
we will never allow it to impose itself by force, But there
is a moral and political terrorism being carried out
against the Central American peoples. An economic
blockade against Nicaragua, starvation of its people, the
colonial policy of “divide and rule”, rousing the peoples
and Governments of Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador against Nicaragua-such
is the aim of United
States policy, and such is the United States view of
things.

That is the true opinion of the American people,

43. Speaking of “freedom fighters”, as President Reagan called them, Mr. Dodd said:
“The insurgents we have supported are the remnants of the old Somoza regime-a rCgime whose corruption, graft, torture and despotism made it
universally despised in Nicaragua. The Sandinistas
may not be winners, but right now we are backing sure
losers.”

44. The United States and its present Administration
should finally understand that what they are doing is not
in the interest of the United States or of the peoples. Nor
is it in the interest of history or of the past of the American people, which defended its liberty in its time. In the
last analysis there will only be defeat. It seems that the
memory of the United States Administration is so short
that it has forgotten the Viet Nam defeat of only a few
years ago. The peoples of Nicaragua and Central America in general are following the example of the valiant
----I- -I? 77:-r ?.T..45. At the end of his statement, Senator Dodd said:

40. The United States is playing the role of policeman,
although it is an outlaw in the eyes of the world; this
should stop. The United States should be told that, however strong it may be, the rights of the peoples are
stronger, the will of the peoples is invincible. The policy
of sowing dissension and practising genocide, the policy
of encouraging the aggression in Palestine and South
Africa and the fascist regimes cannot continue.

“We can take the road of military escalation,
But,. . what we really don’t know [is], , , where it will
lead or how much it will cost.
“This much, however, we do know. It will mean
greater violence. It will mean greater bloodshed. It will
mean greater hostilities. And, inevitably, the day will
come when it will mean a regional conflict in Central
America.”

41. As was clearly stated by Mr. Dodd himself, the
United States is paying one billion dollars-or almost
$140,000 in tax dollars for each revolutionary-in
order
to counter 7,000 revolutionaries in El Salvador, to establish democracy there. You have seen, as 1 have, the
report submitted to the Foreign Affairs Committee of
the United States Congress, which states that democracy
has made progress in El Salvador: the number of dead
had been reduced from 200 to 150. That is improvement,
that is big progress in democracy. The number is smaller,
but it appears that last week democracy had progressed
still further, as the number of dead was more than 300. In
the view of the United States, democracy had progressed
further in El Salvador!

That is the true opinion of the people of the United
States regarding the actions of the United States
Administration,
46. We must state our own opinion. We must denounce
imperialist American intervention and assist the people
of Nicaragua, because what has happened in Nicaragua
and Libya and in other regions will take place in yet
other regions and affect everybody. We do not say this
out of hatred of a desire for revenge, for we all desire
better relations with the American people. We have no
interest in maintaining bad relations with the United
States, but we refuse to be slaves, because we are free. We
have sacrificed a great deal for that freedom. The people
of Nicaragua, too, have sacrificed a great deal to be free.
That is why we must safeguard that freedom.

42. Mr, Dodd clearly stated that
“American
dollars alone cannot buy military
victory-that
is the lesson of the painful past and of
this newest conflict in Central America. If Wecontinue
down that road, if we continue to ally Ourselves with

47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
last speaker for this morning’s meeting is the representa5

tive of Panama. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
48,

Mr. OZORES

TYPALDOS

(Panama)

East-West confrontation,
eliminate
the external
conflicts.

(interpreta-

they agreed on the need to
factors intensifying those

the congratulations
of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of
May.

“They made an urgent appeal to all countries of the
Central American area to engage in dialogue and
negotiation so as to reduce tension and lay the foundations for a permanent atmosphere of peaceful coexistence and mutual respect among States.“’

49. This important United Nations organ is meeting
once again at the request of the Government of Nicaragua to consider the serious situation in the area, which
could endanger peace and security in the region unless
practical measures are taken as a matter of urgency, in
good faith and with the necessary will. These are the
essential ingredients if satisfactory, desirable and lasting
results are to be achieved.

53. Little more than three months after the establishment of the Contadora Group, the situation in the Central American area seriously deteriorated, which is why
the Group’s members decided to make joint visits to
Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala on 12 and 13 April, at the invitation of the
Governments of those countries,

tion from Spanish): I should like first of all, Sir, to express

54. As a result of that trip, the Foreign Ministers said
that among the matters which require the most attention
the following should be mentioned:

50. Panama, which, in the honourable company of
Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela, is a member of the
body known as the Contadora Group, shares the justifiable concern of an increasing number of countries at the
difficult problems besetting our brothers in the area.
There is a convergence of views among those who desire
to see a negotiated political solution-the
only viable
form of settlement-without
foreign interference of any
kind, so that peace may be achieved by the Central
Americans for the benefit of all. In this regard, the Contadora efforts must be regarded as a way of achieving
conciliation.

“the arms race, arms control and reduction, the
transfer of armaments, the presence of military advisers and other forms of outside military assistance,
actions aimed at destabilizing the internal order of
other countries, threats and verbal aggression, warlike
incidents and frontier tensions, the violation of human
rights and individual and social guarantees, and the
grave economic and social problems which are at the
heart of the region’s present crisis” [see S/15727,
annex].

51. We regard it most important to refer-as has the
representative of Mexico [2432nd meeting]-to
certain
paragraphs of the joint declaration made recently by the
Presidents of Brazil and Mexico regarding the situation
in Central America. The two Presidents

On another highly important

subject,

“It was agreed that rigid and inflexible approaches
which might obstruct the common purpose of bringing about detente and promoting peaceful coexistence
must be avoided. To that end, agreement in principIe
was reached concerning the procedures of consultation and negotiation to be followed in the near future
in such a way as to adapt them to the diverse nature of
the subjects, irrespective of whether the latter are
regional or bilateral in scope.” [Ibid]

“considered it urgent that effective negotiations be
conducted between the parties involved in the crises
and urged them to refrain from any actions that might
further worsen the situation, Furthermore, they recognized that a permanent solution would be possible
only in the absence of foreign interference.”
They also agreed that

55. Last week the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora
Group held an urgent meeting at Panama City to consider urgently, among other things, the request of the
Government of Costa Rica-which, it should be noted,
had already been agreed upon by Costa Rica and
Nicaragua-and
the course of the debate then going on
in the Security Council. At that meeting, the four Foreign Ministers noted

“The Central American crisis derives from the economic and social structures that prevail in the region
and, therefore, efforts to resolve it should be aimed at
avoiding the tendency to describe it as a chapter in the
East-West confrontation.”
52. We wished to quote those paragraphs because they
demonstrate perfectly the spirit which must prevail, as
was made clear by the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora Group in their information
bulletin issued in
January:

“with deep concern the development of the Central
American conflict over the past few days and the
repeated violation of essential principles of the international legal order.

“In expressing their deep concern about direct or
indirect foreign interference in the conflicts of Central
America and noting that it is most undesirable that
those conflicts should be included in the context of

“These circumstances have given rise to various
initiatives aimed at seeking the intervention of multilateral organizations.” [See S/15762, annex.]
6

56. We are taking part in this debate on the basis of two
paragraphs of the most recent information bulletin of the
Contadora Group [ibid], which state that
“It would be highly desirable that in the deliberations taking place in the aforementioned forums, and
especially those currently under way in the Security
Council, there should be a strengthening of principles
which should guide the activities of States in the international arena.
“These principles include: self-determination
and
non-interference in the affairs of other States, respect
for the territorial integrity of other States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State to be used for
committing acts of aggression against other States, the

peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition
the threat or use of force to resolve conflicts.”

of

57. We believe that the Security Council has sufficient
grounds for taking a decision on the problem under discussion; the seriousness of the situation certainly calls for
one. We must be aware that peace in Central America, as
in any other part of the world, can be achieved only
through dialogue and political negotiations among all
the parties involved.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

NOTE
‘See

A/38/68,

annex, p. 2.
