A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/105
9 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 95 (g)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/617/Add.7)]
50/105.

Developing human resources for development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 48/205 of 21 December 1993, 46/143 of
17 December 1991 and 45/191 of 21 December 1990, as well as its
resolutions S-18/3 of 1 May 1990 and 45/199 of 21 December 1990,
Reaffirming that people are central to all activities related to
development and that human resources development is an essential means of
achieving sustainable development goals,
Recognizing that human resources development should contribute to total
human development, which enlarges the choices available to people in
developing their lives and fulfilling their aspirations, and that there is a
need to integrate human resources development into comprehensive strategies
for human development that mainstreams a gender perspective, taking into
account the needs of all people, in particular the needs of women,
Stressing that there is need for a supportive and favourable
international economic environment that will enhance human development in
developing countries and promote economic growth and development,
Recognizing that, while economic reforms and structural adjustment
programmes are intended to promote economic growth and development, elements
of such programmes may have an adverse impact on human resources development,
and also that there is a need to take action, in the formulation and
implementation of these programmes, to mitigate any negative effects,
Stressing the need for adequate resources to enhance the capacity of
Governments of developing countries to promote human resources development in
pursuit of their national programmes, plans and strategies for development,

96-76495

/...

A/RES/50/105
Page 2

Stressing also that Governments of developing countries have the primary
responsibility for defining and implementing appropriate policies for human
resources development,
Recognizing the vital role that South-South and North-South cooperation
play in supporting national efforts in human resources development,
bilaterally as well as multilaterally,
Emphasizing the need for coordination and integration among the organs
and organizations of the United Nations system in assisting developing
countries to foster the development of their human resources, especially that
of the most vulnerable, and for the United Nations to continue to give
priority to human resources development in developing countries,
Recognizing the importance accorded in the Copenhagen Declaration on
Social Development and in the Programme of Action of the World Summit for
Social Development to the human component of development, 1/
Recognizing also the importance of the Platform for Action adopted at
the recently concluded Fourth World Conference on Women, 2/ held at Beijing
from 4 to 15 September 1995,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developing human resources for development; 3/
2.
Emphasizes that, in the development of human resources, an
overall, well-conceived and integrated approach that mainstreams a gender
perspective and takes into account the needs of all people should be adopted,
incorporating such vital areas as population, health, nutrition, water,
sanitation, housing, communications, education and training, and science and
technology, as well as taking into account the need to create more
opportunities for employment in an environment that guarantees opportunities
for political freedom, popular participation, respect for human rights,
justice and equity, all of which are essential for enhancing human capacity to
meet the challenge of development;
3.
Encourages all countries to accord priority, in particular in
national budgets, to human resources development in the context of the
adoption of economic and social policies;
4.
Emphasizes the need to ensure the full participation of women in
the formulation and implementation of national policies to promote human
resources development;
5.
Calls upon the international community to support national efforts
to develop human resources for development by increasing the priority of
resources for those activities;
6.

Calls upon the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the

1/

See A/CONF.166/9, chap. I, resolution 1.

2/

A/CONF.177/20 and Add.1, chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

3/

A/50/330 and Corr.1.
/...

A/RES/50/105
Page 3

United Nations system to ensure the coordination of activities in support of
national and regional action in the area of human resources development;
7.
Emphasizes that structural adjustment programmes should include
social development goals, in particular the eradication of poverty, the
promotion of full and productive employment, and the enhancement of social
integration;
8.
Also emphasizes that Governments and relevant institutions should
ensure, where appropriate, an adequate social safety net under structural
adjustment programmes and should develop policies to reduce the negative
effects of these programmes and to improve their positive impact, bearing in
mind that social safety nets associated with economic restructuring are shortterm by nature and should be considered as complementary strategies;
9.
Acknowledges the action taken thus far by the United Nations
system in operational activities in the area of human resources development,
and urges further action in accordance with resolutions of the General
Assembly on human resources for development;
10.
Notes with serious concern the worrisome trend of a decrease in
overall development assistance, which affects the level of resources for human
resources development, and emphasizes that financial commitment to human
resources development is of critical importance in contributing to the
enhancement of the concept of people-centred sustainable development;
11.
Calls for follow-up action to be taken as recommended in the
Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social Development and in the
Platform for Action adopted at Beijing, in order to ensure the strengthening
of human resources development;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to take into account the outcome of
the upcoming United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in
the context of human resources development;
13.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the
activities of the United Nations system in human resources development and to
submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including further action taken by
the United Nations system with regard to human resources development and the
enhancement of inter-agency coordination;
14.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session, under the item entitled "Sustainable development and international
economic cooperation", a sub-item entitled "Human resources development".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
