S/2014/697

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2147
(2014), in which the Council requested me to report to it on the implementation by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of its commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1
The report covers developments since the issuance of my report of 5 March 2014
(S/2014/153) and describes recent peace and security initiatives with regard to eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region prior to 31 August. The report
contains information on progress made in advancing the objectives of the Framework,
including measures taken by relevant stakeholders to implement the regional plan o f
action adopted by Heads of State in Addis Ababa on 31 January 2014.

II. Recent developments
A.

Political and security developments
2.
Although some progress has been achieved in the implementation of the
Framework since my previous report, several obstacles continue to obstruct its full
implementation. On the political and security fronts, while the general security
situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has generally improved, lack
of trust between neighbouring countries, the activities of several armed groups and
slow progress in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations (the Kampala
Dialogue outcome documents signed in Nairobi on 12 December 2013 by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the former rebel g roup

__________________
1 In this context, the region is defined as covering the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and

Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African R epublic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four
intergovernmental organizations act as guarantors for the Framework: the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the United Nations. For further information, see S/2013/119 and S/2013/131,
annex.

14-61526 (E)

011014

*1461526*

S/2014/697

Movement of 23 March (M23)) continue to threaten long-term stability in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and undermine bilateral relations between some
countries in the region.
3.
On 17 July, I appointed Said Djinnit to be my new Special Envo y for the Great
Lakes Region. Mr. Djinnit replaced Mary Robinson, who has accepted new
responsibilities as my Special Envoy for Climate Change.
4.
On 18 April, in a letter addressed to Heads of State and other high -level
officials in the region, including the Chairperson of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and my Special Envoy, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) announced their readiness to surrender and
demanded an inter-Rwandan dialogue as a condition for disarming. They reiterated
their demand in a letter to the Security Council on 4 August. As at 31 August, only
103 FDLR combatants and 202 dependants had surrendered in North Kivu, handing
over 102 weapons, while 83 combatants with 236 dependants had disarmed in Sout h
Kivu, handing over 83 weapons. Those individuals are currently in two transit
camps run by MONUSCO, one in Kanyabayonga (North Kivu) and the other in
Walungu (South Kivu).
5.
The President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, in his role as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), has been leading
regional efforts to build consensus on the eradication of armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. To reinforce regional resolve on the issue, on
1 June a team of my special envoys and special representatives comprising my
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United States Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region
and the European Union Senior Coordinator for the Great Lakes Region issued a
joint statement calling for the complete and unconditional surrender of FDLR and
demanding accountability for FDLR combatants suspected of serious crimes. In the
statement they noted that the surrender of limited numbers of low -ranking
combatants was not encouraging and called for military action against the armed
group, in the absence of a credible surrender and disarmament process.
6.
At the initiative of the United States Special Envoy, the team of special envoys
and special representatives met FDLR representatives in Rome on 26 June, under
the auspices of the Community of Sant’Egidio. The special envoys and special
representatives took that opportunity to reiterate their demand for the complete and
unconditional disarmament of FDLR. They made it clear that the disarmament
process should result in the complete dismantling of the organization and the
surrender of its senior commanders, within the context of ongoing efforts aimed at
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of
foreign armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They reiterated the
need to hold accountable those suspected of serious crimes. A delegation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo led by the Vice -Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Célestin Tunda ya Kasende, participated in the meeting.
7.
Against the background of the new dynamic generated by the FDLR volunt ary
disarmament process, ministers of foreign affairs and defence of States members
ICGLR and SADC held a joint ministerial meeting in Luanda on 2 July. The
participants in the meeting discussed, in addition to the FDLR issue, the
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. Also on the agenda was the escalation

2/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

of tensions between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. My Special
Envoy conveyed to the ministers the importance of a unified regional approach to
addressing those challenges. Following deliberations, the ministers issued a joint
communiqué in which, inter alia, they urged FDLR to disarm within six months and
scheduled a midterm review of the process in October. These positions were
reiterated during an ICGLR mini-summit held in Luanda on 14 August. The
mini-summit was convened by the President of Angola and attended by: the
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila; the President of
Uganda, Yoweri Museveni; the Minister of State for Transport, Civil Aviation and
the Merchant Marine of the Congo, Rudolphe Adada; the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Rwanda, Louise Mushikiwabo; and the Minister of Defence and
National Service of the United Republic of Tanzania, Hussein Ali Mwinyi.
Participants in the mini-summit gave FDLR a six-month ultimatum to disarm and
decided to plan military actions against the group in the absence of progress by the
midterm review in October. They also proposed that a joint ICGLR -SADC summit
be held in October to review the disarmament process and decide on a course of
action. The six-month time frame for FDLR disarmament was endorsed at the thirty fourth Summit of SADC Heads of State and Government, held in Pretoria on 17 and
18 August.
8.
Meanwhile, the pace of implementation of the Nairobi Declarations has
remained generally slow. In my previous report, I welcomed the promulgation by
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on 11 February 2014, of an
amnesty law, as stipulated in the Nairobi Declarations. After mont hs of delay, I am
pleased to report that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
sent a technical team to Uganda and Rwanda, in April and July respectively, to
identify and process some 2,000 former M23 members who had fled to those
countries in 2013. In the presence of representatives of the Office of my Special
Envoy, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and ICGLR, the Government delegation held
constructive discussions with the former combatants and the Ugandan and Rwandan
authorities on how to grant amnesty and repatriate those individuals and their
dependants. The Congolese delegation also registered the former combatants who
were present in their cantonments at the time of the visit.
9.
The relevant institutions in Kinshasa are now processing the data collected
during the visits of the technical team to Rwanda and Uganda. In that regard, I
welcome the flexibility demonstrated by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo during an informal ministerial meeting held in New York on
7 August. At the meeting, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo suggested that the Government would still be willing to
consider the applications of former M23 combatants after the expiration of the
mid-August deadline set in the amnesty law, as they were not responsible for delays
in the handling of their cases. Proper handling of the amnesty and repatriation
process will contribute to restoring trust between the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. It will also facilitate
progress in the implementation of other critical provisions of the Nairobi
Declarations.
10. On the security front, clashes occurred between the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo — FARDC) and the armed forces of Rwanda (Rwanda Defence Force —

14-61526

3/16

S/2014/697

RDF) in the border area of Kibumba, North Kivu, on 11 June. The incident, the first
military confrontation between the two countries in years, resulted in casualties on
both sides. Both my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and my Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo urged the parties to
exercise restraint and to de-escalate tensions. The rapid intervention of the ICGLR
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism enabled an investigation into the incident to
be conducted, at the request of both countries.
11. In its findings, the Mechanism noted that the deployment of the two national
armed forces in close proximity to each other along the porous border between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda was a significant trigger of conflict,
especially given the acrimony that exists between the two countries. The findings
also indicated that it was likely that further confrontations would occur unless
urgent measures were taken to address the situation. In that regard, the Mechanism
recommended that the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda avoid deploying their armed forces in close proximity to one another,
especially in contentious border areas.
12. With regard to foreign and local armed groups still operating in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese armed forces, supported by
MONUSCO, have continued to carry out military operations against the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain, as indicated in my past two reports on MONUSCO (S/2014/450 and
S/2014/698). While the capacity of ADF to cause harm has been reduced, the group
remains active and mobile, in particular in Ituri district (Orientale Province) and has
continued to attack the national armed forces, which suffered their heaviest loss on
1 May, when 26 soldiers were killed in an ADF ambush north-east of Beni, North
Kivu.

B.

Humanitarian situation
13. The humanitarian situation throughout the region and in the De mocratic
Republic of the Congo remains challenging owing to the continued high numbers of
internally displaced persons and refugees. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
despite continued efforts to improve the lives of populations in conflict -affected
areas, some 6.3 million people, of whom an estimated 2.6 million were internally
displaced, were still in need of assistance at the time of finalizing the present report.
While humanitarian entities have continued to provide vital aid to millions of
people, the resources available for humanitarian operations continue to fall seriously
short of existing needs. The humanitarian response plan for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains critically underfunded, having received only 35 per
cent of the $839 million required.
14. The defeat of M23 in November 2013, which brought relative stability to some
areas of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, generated hope that some
refugees and internally displaced persons would return to their places of origin.
Indeed, 1.8 million internally displaced persons returned to their homes between
November 2012 and May 2014. Furthermore, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has reported a decrease of 40 per cent in the number of
persons in displacement camps around Goma between November 2013 and May
2014.

4/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

15. Nonetheless, the activities of armed groups have caused new waves of
displacement, as many refugees and internally displaced persons continue to fear for
their safety. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
over 492,000 people have been newly displaced since January 2014, including
125,000 in North Kivu and 140,000 in Katanga. Katanga is the province with the
highest increase in displacements since December 2013. The displacements in
Katanga are due to clashes between the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and armed groups, and growing tensions between the Pygmy and Luba
communities. Food insecurity is worsening and human rights violations, includin g
sexual and gender-based violence, are still commonplace. The Office estimates that
some 75,000 children in the Katanga conflict zone will face acute malnutrition in
2014.
16. In many camps for displaced persons in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, only the most vulnerable have received food assistance over the past six
months. The decision to target the most vulnerable was taken after an exercise was
carried out at all sites where internally displaced persons had been living and
receiving food assistance, some of them for as long as three years. In parallel, the
World Food Programme (WFP) made it a priority to provide resources to newly
displaced people, in line with their vulnerability status. The prioritization plan was
dictated by the need to direct limited financial resources towards life-saving relief
activities. The ability of WFP to provide assistance to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and many other countries has been challenged by an increase in the need
for food assistance due to the unprecedented number of large-scale and
simultaneous emergencies that occurred in 2013 and 2014, including in countries
such as the Syrian Arab Republic and the Central African Republic.
17. In addition to the relatively large size of the internally displaced population in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, approximately 432,500 Congolese refugees
currently live in neighbouring countries, an indication that persistent insecurity and a
failure to eliminate the root causes of conflict in the Democratic Re public of the
Congo continue to hinder lasting voluntary returns. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), however, reports that, despite these
challenges, over 182,000 Congolese refugees returned to their country between 20 11
and 30 June 2014. In addition, since the beginning of 2014 Congolese refugees who
arrived in Uganda over the past year also began to return spontaneously to the Beni
area. The fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself is host to 118,000
refugees from neighbouring countries exacerbates the country’s already difficult
humanitarian situation.
18. In accordance with international refugee law and pursuant to the Congolese
refugee law of 2002, Rwandan refugees and asylum seekers of all nationalitie s
residing in the Democratic Republic of the Congo fall under the mandate of the
Government and UNHCR. The UNHCR comprehensive strategy for the Rwandan
refugee situation addresses the particular situation of Rwandan refugees who
entered the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) between 1959 and
1998 and recommends that all aspects leading to a cessation of refugee status
(including exemption procedures) for Rwandans who fall in the aforementioned
category be implemented progressively. UNHCR works with the Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda within the framework of
tripartite agreements that uphold the voluntary character of returns while advancing
the implementation of durable solutions, including voluntary repatriation and local

14-61526

5/16

S/2014/697

integration of Congolese and Rwandan refugees. To date, 133,862 Rwandan
refugees have voluntarily returned to Rwanda from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; 2,552 of them did so in 2014.

C.

Update on human rights and sexual and gender-based violence
19. The activities of armed groups and some elements of the security forces
remain a serious cause for concern on the human rights front. The political space
remains constrained, human rights violations continue in several countries in the
region and more efforts are needed to tackle impunity. Violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual and gender-based violence,
have continued in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other States
signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. There are strong
indications that violations are being committed by all parties without exception. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, armed groups and members of the
Congolese defence and security forces continue to commit rape as a weapon of war,
along with other forms of sexual violence and human rights violations, during and
after rebel attacks on communities.
20. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in May 2014, the Operational
Military Court handed down its decision in the Minova case, in which 39 officers of
the national armed forces were charged with rape and other war crimes. Specifically,
the officers were charged with the rape of more than 130 women and girls in
Minova, South Kivu. The trial is viewed as a test of the Government’s ability to
fight impunity and encourage a culture of accountability for conflict -related sexual
violence, crimes against humanity and war crimes. While only two low -level
soldiers were convicted of rape, the judgement offered constructive lessons for the
prosecution of atrocities in the region in the future.
21. There continue to be calls within the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a
specialized chamber to try war crimes, crimes against humanity and conflict -related
sexual violence. Such specialized mechanisms can be highly effective in prosecuting
alleged perpetrators of international crimes. On 2 May 2014, a bill creating a
specialized, mixed chamber was formally received by the Parliament but sent back
to the Government owing to constitutional concerns raised by the National
Assembly. The Minister of Justice and Human Rights has indicated that a revised
bill will soon be considered.
22. On 8 July 2014, the Parliament of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
passed a law (No. 14/025) allowing the ratification of the African Union Convention
for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, adopted
on 22 October 2009 in Kampala. I welcome this development and encourage the
Congolese authorities to take further steps to protect all persons displaced in their
country.

6/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

III. Implementation of the commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
23. During the reporting period, limited progress was achieved in the
implementation of the national commitments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My report on MONUSCO of 25 September 2014 ( S/2014/698) contains
further information on the modest advances made in that regard.
24. With the support of MONUSCO and international partners, the National
Oversight Mechanism developed benchmarks, indicators of progress and priority
actions for the six national commitments set out in the Framework, through a
participatory process involving national and provincial administrations, civil society
and international partners. On 12 July, participants in a national seminar organized by
the Mechanism and the Ministry of Planning endorsed a matrix comprising more than
50 benchmarks and more than 300 indicators. Among the participants were the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for the Budget, Daniel Mukoko Samba, along with
other officials and representatives of the United Nations, the diplomatic corps, civil
society and the private sector. The benchmarking process has strengthened the
partnership between the Mechanism, the Ministry of Planning and the international
community, which will help in identifying activities to be included in the 2015 budget.
25. During the reporting period, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo approved its national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
plan, estimated to cost $85 million. On 11 July, the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister of Defence, Alexandre Ntambo, shared the plan with the diplomatic corps
to seek financial support from donors. During the meeting, the Minister also
announced that the Government would contribute $10 million to the plan .
MONUSCO has pledged $8 million for the identification of former combatants and
the provision of food supplies to demobilized armed groups still in transit camps.
Notwithstanding the finalization of the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plan, the development of benchmarks and other modest achievements,
some critical aspects of the national commitments have yet to be implemented.
These include sustained security sector reform, consolidation of State authority,
decentralization, economic development, reconciliation and democratization.

B.

Commitments of the countries in the region
26. Despite persistent challenges to the stabilization of eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in relations between countries in the region, leader s in
the region have continued to take ownership of and interest in advancing the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. By and large,
the countries in the region have continued to adhere to their commitments, in
particular those related to non-interference in the internal affairs of neighbouring
countries and assistance or support to armed groups, despite unverified reports to
the contrary. The verification activities of the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism continue to be critical. While regional and economic cooperation has
increased among countries in the region, much more needs to be done to enhance

14-61526

7/16

S/2014/697

the administration of justice through regional judicial cooperation and to ensure that
those who have committed war crimes, crimes against humanity, acts of genocide or
crimes of aggression, or persons targeted by United Nations sanctions, are held
accountable.
27. As noted above, the President of Angola, as Chair of ICGLR, has helped to
bring together the States members of ICGLR and SADC, the two organizations in
the region that are key for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. In his
capacity as Chair, the President has convened one ordinary summit, three mini summits and a number of ministerial meetings to discuss is sues related to the
objectives of the Framework. During those events, States members of ICGLR and
SADC sought solutions for the neutralization of armed groups operating in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the implementation of the Nairobi Declarat ions
and the improvement of relations between some countries, among other key pending
issues. In addition, Angola has strengthened relations with countries in the region in
order to push ahead its agenda for peace, security and economic affairs. On 15 May,
the Minister of External Relations of Angola, George Chikoti, visited Kigali, where
he and his Rwandan counterpart co-signed a general cooperation agreement, an
agreement on a joint cooperation commission and a memorandum of understanding.
The documents aim to regularize political and economic relations between the two
countries.
28. Regional cooperation in the context of the northern corridor integration
projects and the East African Community was also reinforced during the reporting
period. On 24 June, the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda signed a service
contract for the development of the Kampala-Kigali portion of the northern corridor
railway project. The agreement was reached after a decision had been taken earlier
in 2014 by Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda to enter into a tripartite arrangement to
accelerate regional integration. The development is part of the planned construction
of a railway connection along the northern corridor between Mombasa, Kenya, and
Kampala through Nairobi and Kigali, with a possible extension to Juba. The project
is expected to be completed by March 2018. On 2 July, the ministers of economy,
finance, foreign affairs and infrastructure of Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda,
South Sudan and Uganda met with the Secretary-General of the East African
Community in Kigali to discuss ongoing northern corridor integration projects,
including in the areas of infrastructure, transport, commodity exchange, human
resources capacity-building, air space management and crude oil pipeline
development. The next summit of the northern corridor countries is scheduled to be
held in Kampala in September 2014.
29. During the reporting period, the Technical Support Committee of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism also met regularly in Nairobi, under the co -chairmanship of
the Special Adviser to my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Modibo I.
Toure, and the African Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region,
Boubacar Diarra. The Technical Support Committee held its seventh meeting in
Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 20 to 22 May, with the support of
MONUSCO, the Congolese authorities and the Office of my Special Envoy. While
in North Kivu, the members of the Committee visited a camp for internally
displaced persons, a police training centre and a centre de regroupement
administered by the national armed forces in Mubambiro, which hosts about
420 former combatants from various armed groups. These field visits enabled
Committee members to gain a better understanding of the situation on the ground

8/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

and, therefore, to better advise their respective Governments. The Committee also
suggested ways to strengthen the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism,
accelerate the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, neutralize illegal armed
groups operating in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and reinsert former
combatants into civilian life.
30. While multilateral and bilateral cooperation has improved in the region during
the reporting period, much more needs to be done to rebuild trus t among the core
signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and accelerate the
implementation of the regional plan of action. My Special Envoy and the African
Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes Region have prepared a report
with key recommendations on ways to boost the implementation of that plan of
action. The report, which takes into account the work of the Technical Support
Committee, was submitted to the Regional Oversight Mechanism at its fourth high level meeting, held on 22 September in New York in the margins of the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly.

C.

International commitments
31. On 11 June, in collaboration with the United Nations Global Compact, my
Special Envoy convened a private sector responsible investment round table in
Addis Ababa that was attended by over 100 participants from the private sector,
civil society, academia and government, as well as other representatives from the
region. It was one in a series of steps designed to raise the aware ness of
stakeholders on the issue of investment in the Great Lakes region, in preparation for
a private sector investment conference to be held in the first quarter of 2015. The
round table also provided a regional platform for dialogue between the public and
private sectors on the issue of investment in the States signatories to the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
32. An investment opportunity brief for the region has also been prepared with the
support of the United Nations Development Programme, the African Development
Bank, the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation. The brief is
designed to provide potential investors with information on priority investment
areas and projects identified through a consultative process in all the signatory
countries. A regional ministerial consultation on the brief is scheduled to be held in
Luanda in late 2014, with the participation of Governments and private sector
stakeholders. Key findings and recommendations will be presented for endorsement
by the Regional Oversight Mechanism at its fifth meeting, to be held in Addis
Ababa.
33. During my joint visit to the Great Lakes region with the President of the World
Bank Group, Jim Yong Kim, in May 2013, the World Bank pledged $1 billion to
support activities in the region that further the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. The World Bank is on track to implement all
its commitments within the 24-month timeline set during our visit. Between May
2013 and July 2014, a total of $538 million was approved by the World Bank for
regional programmes in the areas of energy development, combating sexual and
gender-based violence, women’s health, capacity-building for ICGLR and
improvement of information and communications technology connectivity. A key
project was approved on 26 June 2014, under which $106.9 million will support the

14-61526

9/16

S/2014/697

Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender-based Violence and Women’s Health
Project, which covers Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
The project aims to benefit more than 641,000 women and girls, half a million of
whom are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and will also support a regional
policy approach endorsed by the Heads of State and Government of countries in the
Great Lakes region in the 2011 Kampala declaration on sexual and gender-based
violence.
34. In addition, the World Bank and the Office of my Special Envoy have
established a facility for technical assistance to ensure that projects to be
implemented in the region with the support of the World Bank are conflict-sensitive
and in line with the economic and regional integration objectives of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. Meanwhile, other resources have been
pledged to the region by various development partners. For instance, at least
€3.2 billion has been allocated to Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia under the Eleventh
European Development Fund (2014-2020).

IV. Activities of my Special Envoy
35. My Special Envoy has continued to engage regional leaders, bilateral and
multilateral partners and civil society organizations to ensure that the broadest
possible range of actors remain committed to and supportive of the Peace, Securit y
and Cooperation Framework. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy Mary
Robinson and her staff visited several countries in the region, including Angola,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kenya and Rwanda, where they engaged in various activities related to the
Framework. In addition, she continued to engage regional and international partners
in Addis Ababa, Brussels, London, New York and Washington, D.C.
36. Also during the reporting period, my Special Envoy met with the Chair of
ICGLR, lending her support to his good offices to advance high -level political
dialogue with fellow Heads of State, to reach consensus on issues of common
concern. In that regard, she visited Angola from 7 to 9 May, where she met the
Vice-President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Economy and the
Secretary of State for Defence to discuss how to advance the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and maximize opportunities for
synergy with Angola. Topics discussed included accelerating the implementation of
the Nairobi Declarations, tackling FDLR, strengthening the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism and preparing for the Great Lakes private sector investment
conference. I was pleased to learn about the commitment of Angola to devote efforts
and resources to the fulfilment of the mandate of the Chair of ICGLR.
37. My Special Envoy travelled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
17 and 18 March and again on 2 and 3 June, with the other envoys and
representatives. During her meetings with the Presid ent and other senior government
officials in Kinshasa, she raised the issue of elections, as well as the status of
implementation of the country’s national commitments under the Peace, Secur ity
and Cooperation Framework. She emphasized the need for the timely release of a
comprehensive electoral calendar for local, provincial and general elections, and
assured the President of international partners’ readiness to work with his

10/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

Government on all critical issues. She also commended the Government for
conducting military operations against ADF and conveyed her condolences for the
casualties suffered by the national armed forces.
38. On the issue of elections, the President of the Democratic Repu blic of the
Congo stated that this was a sovereign matter. He noted that, for purposes of
neutrality and impartiality, the conduct of the elections was handled by the
Independent National Electoral Commission and that, therefore, all technical
questions should be addressed to the Chair of the Commission, Apollinaire Malu
Malu.
39. On 7 April, I led a high-level delegation, which included my Special Envoy, to
Rwanda to participate in the events marking the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide. I stressed that the world should learn from the tragic experience of
Rwanda and acknowledged that the United Nations should have done more to
prevent the genocide. I commended the impressive transformation of the country
and called for continued efforts to protect human rights and promote democracy. In
his speech, the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, highlighted some factors behind
that successful transformation, notably inter-ethnic reconciliation and accountability
for serious crimes.
40. On 6 May, my Special Envoy travelled to Brussels and met with the members
of the European Union Political and Security Committee. She discussed some of the
priority activities arising from the regional plan of action, in particular the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources, regional judicial cooperation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the return of refugees (especially
minorities) and civil society and youth.
41. Within the context of her engagement with youth and children, my Special
Envoy participated in the Children’s Forum of Hope, held in Bujumbura on 31 May
and 1 June. The event enabled children from seven countries of the region to bond,
build trust and become “ambassadors of hope” who would champion the objectives
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in their respective countries. My
Special Envoy also participated in the ICGLR summit on youth employment held in
Nairobi on 24 July, which brought together youth, experts and government officials
from the 13 signatory countries of the Framework. The purpose of the summit was
to develop a coordinated approach to youth unemployment and underemployment in
the Great Lakes region.
42. My Special Envoy also reached out to the Heads of State and Government of
countries in the Great Lakes region in Washington, D.C., from 4 to 6 August, in the
margins of the 2014 United States-Africa Leaders Summit. On 7 August, in New
York, she addressed the Security Council for the last time as my Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region. Later that day, she and the Minister for Africa of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland co-chaired an informal ministerial
meeting on the Great Lakes region to promote the rapid disarmament of FDLR and
the full implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. My incoming Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Djinnit, attended both meetings.
43. Recognizing that addressing forced displacement is key to promoting peace,
security and cooperation in the region, my Special Envoy has made it a priority to
support efforts to alleviate the conditions of refugees and internally displaced
persons by promoting conditions for durable, voluntary and safe returns in dignity.

14-61526

11/16

S/2014/697

From 20 June to 4 July 2014, a joint mission composed of staff from the Office of
my Special Envoy, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
UNHCR travelled to Uganda, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(North Kivu) and Burundi in order to assess the conditions of refugees, to identify
challenges hampering their safe and sustainable return and to devise medium- and
long-term strategies. Finding durable solutions for internally displaced persons and
refugees is an immense task that will continue to take a significant amount of time,
concerted efforts and national, regional and international commitment.
44. The World Bank and UNHCR are conducting an in-depth study on forced
displacement in the Great Lakes region; it is expected that a report based on that
study will be issued during the last quarter of 2014. The aim is to obtain information
on the development needs of displaced persons, opportunities for development
interventions in support of displaced persons and recommendations for activities to
improve resilience and social cohesion in border communities of the Great Lakes
region.
45. In order to maximize synergies and promote a coordinated approach within the
United Nations system, the Office of my Special Envoy, together with the United
Nations country teams and United Nations representatives, met in Kigali from 28 to
30 May to lay the foundation for a common strategy for the Great Lakes region in
support of the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Further work is under way to formulate an integrated approach to advance the
implementation of the Framework.
46. During the reporting period my Special Envoy intensified her engagement with
civil society actors during her visits to the region. I was pleased that a coalition of
civil society organizations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo issued a report
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework on the
first anniversary of the agreement. This development suggests that civil society
actors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are fully prepared to monitor the
implementation of the Framework and to hold their Government accountable. My
Special Envoy also engaged with civil society representatives from Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, to collect their views on
the implementation of the Framework.
47. Following the launch of the Women’s Platform for the Framework earlier this
year, my Special Envoy and the Office’s staff have concluded arrangements to
render the Platform operational. The Platform’s advisory board held its inaugural
conference call on 8 July 2014. The advisory board is a team of experts with
experience and expertise in development and women’s rights in the Great Lakes
region and is mandated to provide guidance on the implementation of the Platform’s
objectives. I am pleased that Mary Robinson will continue to be involved in the
Women’s Platform as a key member of the advisory board.
48. The implementation of projects to benefit women in the Great Lakes region
has also been at the core of my Special Envoy’s activities. As a result of her
advocacy efforts with the Governments of the Netherlands and Ireland, over
30 grants will be awarded to projects intended to improve the living conditions and
livelihoods of women in rural, conflict-affected areas of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. The grants will focus on:
(a) monitoring of and advocacy for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework;
(b) implementation of regional and national plans of action under Security Council

12/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

resolution 1325 (2000); (c) combating violence against women and assisting women
affected by violence; (d) supporting women’s livelihoods and development
activities; and (e) making clean energy accessible to communities at the local level.

V. Observations and recommendations
49. Over the past six months, there have been notable efforts to stabilize the
security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and advance the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Nonetheless,
delays in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, mistrust between
Governments and leaders in the region, disagreements over the voluntary
disarmament of FDLR and slow implementation of the regional plan of action
represent significant obstacles that must be overcome if sustainable peace and
stability is to be brought to the region.
50. One of the most pressing issues remains the lack of expeditious
implementation of the Nairobi Declarations, which perpetuate s mistrust among
Member States. Progress on this front would help build trust and confidence, reduce
the risk of a relapse into armed conflict and consolidate the stability of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. Every effort must there fore be
made to implement all commitments of the Declarations and to prevent any reversal
of the gains achieved. Accordingly, the technical visits by officials of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Uganda and Rwanda in April and July to
process eligible M23 members should be followed by concrete steps to achieve their
immediate repatriation. I commend the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for its efforts so far. I encourage it to work closely with the Governments
of Rwanda and Uganda to establish clear timelines and appropriate follow-up
actions to conclude the repatriation of former M23 combatants. Furthermore, the
National Oversight Mechanism should accelerate the follow-up processes, with
support from ICGLR and the Office of my Special Envoy, to ensure that the Nairobi
Declarations are fully implemented.
51. The neutralization of all armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including FDLR, through non-military and military actions, should also
remain a high priority. I welcome the road map agreed by Heads of State in the
region at the 14 August mini-summit convened by the President of Angola, in his
capacity as ICGLR Chair, and the endorsement of the six-month time frame by
SADC Heads of State, in their communiqué of 18 August. FDLR must disarm
unconditionally and in a timely manner. In that respect, I look forward to a positive
outcome of the joint ICGLR-SADC midterm review in October. Immediate and
decisive actions should quickly be taken thereafter to complete the pr ocess of
neutralizing FDLR, for the sake of peace and stability in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.
52. I commend the President of Angola for his efforts to build a regional
consensus on the neutralization of FDLR and other armed gr oups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also support his efforts to lead a high -level
dialogue on sensitive issues that adversely affect regional cooperation and durable
peace. Furthermore, I welcome the unified and strong message on FDLR issue d by
the Security Council on 26 August. It is my hope that the team of envoys, led by my
Special Envoy, will continue to support regional efforts to definitively address the
issue of FDLR.

14-61526

13/16

S/2014/697

53. I am pleased to note that the Expanded Joint Verification Mech anism, despite
continuous logistical and political challenges, remains a viable security mechanism
for building confidence among the countries in the region, although it needs to be
strengthened further. I call upon all Member States in the region to incre ase
collaboration through existing regional mechanisms, such as the Mechanism and the
Joint Intelligence Fusion Cell, as well through joint bilateral commissions. My
Special Envoy is committed to rallying international support for the Mechanism. I
also urge the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to exercise restraint in
border areas and to engage through the Joint Bilateral Commission and the African
Union Border Programme to resolve any border-related issues. In that regard, the
findings and recommendations of the Mechanism on the recent military skirmish
between the two countries warrant serious consideration.
54. The root causes of conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo will
not be fully addressed unless the commitments made in Addis Ababa in February
2013 are implemented in full. In this regard, I welcome the positive steps taken by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the other
Governments in the region over the past six months, which show that they remain
committed to the objectives of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I
also welcome the continuous engagement of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which remains seized of matters related to the Great Lakes region, as
demonstrated by its sessions on the implementation of the Framework held in Addis
Ababa on 17 June and 22 August. Despite our collective engagement, the overall
implementation process remains slow and every effort must be made to energize it.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, implementation is lagging in several
critical areas such as security sector reform, decentralization, reconciliation,
tolerance and democratization. I urge the Government to accelerate the
implementation of its commitments under the Framework and to follow through on
the priority recommendations arising from the concertations nationales (national
dialogue). I call upon the Government to start implementing the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan and to accelerate measures to
restore and consolidate State authority throughout eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In that regard, priority should be accorded to the establishment of a rapid
reaction force, as provided for in Security Council resolution 2098 (2013). In the
same vein, I call upon the other signatories to the Framework to remain fully
committed to its objectives and to honour their commitments.
55. In the region, leaders have shown their resolve to work together fo r peace and
security in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. I
commend the countries of the northern corridor of East Africa for their resolve in
accelerating regional integration. It is my hope that similar progress will be made in
the context of the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries, whose
leaders have not met at the summit level in over 20 years, despite significant
interaction at the ministerial and technical levels. Reviving the Community would
no doubt boost conflict prevention and confidence-building efforts in the Great
Lakes region, notably through enhanced economic cooperation and social
transformation in the countries involved.
56. The Technical Support Committee of the Regional Oversight Mechanism has
been serving as a forum for dialogue and confidence-building in the region, under
the leadership of my Special Envoy and the African Union Special Representative
for the Great Lakes Region. More concrete actions are needed, however, to expedite

14/16

14-61526

S/2014/697

the implementation of the regional plan of action and achieve all the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. To this end, I welcome the
report on progress made with regard to the Framework that was jointly presented by
my Special Envoy and the African Union Special Representative for the Great Lakes
Region at the fourth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in New
York on 22 September. I urge the countries in the region to carefully consider the
recommendations made in the report and to take the steps necessary to accelerate
the implementation process. I also count on members of the Technical Support
Committee to play a more active role in the implementation of the Framework in
their respective countries, with support from the Office of my Special Envoy.
57. Coordinated and coherent support by international partners remains critical to
ensure that progress is made in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. In that regard, the development partners conference, which is s cheduled to
be held towards the end of 2014 in Brussels, is a positive step towards achieving the
promises of the economic pillar envisaged in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. I welcome the commitments made by various development partners,
including the World Bank, the European Union and other bilateral partners to the
Great Lakes region, and I commend their continuing commitment to the region. I
encourage multilateral and bilateral partners to strengthen their collaboration with
regional organizations and the Governments in the region to promote sustainable
development. To that end, I am encouraged by the significant progress that the
Office of my Special Envoy, together with ICGLR and the Government of Angola,
has made towards organizing a Great Lakes private sector investment conference,
including through the development of an investment opportunity brief that identifies
catalytic cross-border development projects. I appeal to all key partners, including
private investors, to participate in this conference with a view to supporting projects
that will bring development and stability to the region.
58. The issue of the return of refugees and internally displaced persons remains a
major humanitarian concern. No effort should be spared in finding durable solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons in the Great Lakes region. My Special
Envoy will continue to work with mandated agencies to encourage coordinated
action at the national, regional and international levels to promote an envir onment
conducive to sustainable returns. I encourage key actors to support the Governments
in the region to ensure that State authority, the rule of law, basic services, property
and land rights, and economic opportunities are in place when people do begin to
return. I call on donors to help ensure that agencies such as WFP, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and UNHCR have the funds necessary to
assist persons in need.
59. I remain concerned about recurrent reports of violence, includi ng sexual and
gender-based violence, by armed groups and the national armed forces in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I commend the Government for
its efforts to investigate these crimes and prosecute those responsible, and encoura ge
all Governments in the region to create effective mechanisms to address them and
hold perpetrators, including government officials, accountable. I also urge the
Governments in the region to develop a strategy to foster regional judicial
cooperation, in line with their commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

14-61526

15/16

S/2014/697

60. I am pleased to note that from 20 August to 14 September, during his
introductory tour of the region, my new Special Envoy received unequivocal
assurances of support from Governments and leaders in the region. Building on the
work of his predecessor, he will continue to work closely with the ICGLR Chair and
other leaders in the region, as well as international partners, to ensure a coordinated
approach to the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
He will also continue to work in close cooperation with the African Union, ICGLR,
SADC and the team of envoys to ensure that regional and international efforts
complement and reinforce each other. Through his Office, my Special Envoy will
continue to develop specific initiatives to advance regional social and economic
cooperation, encourage the full participation of women, youth and civil society in
all aspects of the Framework, and develop synergies with partners.
61. Finally, I wish to thank my outgoing Special Envoy, Mary Robinson, for her
contribution to peace in the Great Lakes region. I also thank my Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO,
Martin Kobler, as well as the staff of special political missions and peacekeeping
missions in the region. I call on the Security Council and other international partners
to provide my current Special Envoy, Said Djinnit, with all the support necessary to
revitalize and ensure the effective implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

16/16

14-61526
