S/PV.7519

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7519th meeting

Thursday, 10 September 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Santa Rosa
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Klein
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Thirtieth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2015/620)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-27587 (E)
*1527587*

S/PV.7519

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Justice and his Government on the leadership provided
during the Ebola crisis, and now as the country works
toward recovery. I would also take this opportunity
to express my profound admiration for the people of
Liberia, who galvanized themselves at every level,
including at the community level. I also express
my appreciation for the Council’s mobilization of
international support for the countries most severely
impacted by Ebola, including Liberia.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Thirtieth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2015/620)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I
welcome His Excellency Mr. Benedict Sannoh, Minister
of Justice and Attorney General of the Republic of
Liberia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair
of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Sweden.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/620, which contains the thirtieth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: At this time last year, the situation
in Liberia was of deep concern. The country was in
the throes of a national tragedy, an unprecedented
health emergency that was devastating families and
communities, threatened to reverse the political and
security gains made since the end of the civil war and
risked tearing apart Liberia’s fragile social fabric. The
Security Council recognized that this health emergency
posed a threat to international peace and security.
Fortunately, the country has since turned a corner.
The people of Liberia endured the trauma of Ebola
with resilience, dignity and a profound determination
to overcome. Indeed, their efforts were rewarded: on
3 September, Liberia was again declared Ebola-free by
the World Health Organization. I would therefore like
to begin my remarks by commending the Minister of

2/8

10/09/2015

Liberia is making progress on a number of
fronts, including important momentum on essential
political reforms. The Government has launched a
deconcentration programme, which is a critical first
step in decentralizing the reach of the State — which,
for the time being, is concentrated primarily in
Monrovia — so that local officials are empowered and
citizens throughout the country are able to benefit from
the most basic of services.
The constitutional review process has also made
progress. Last month, President Johnson-Sirleaf
transmitted to the legislature 25 proposed amendments
that emerged from that process, along with her
recommendations. I note that the President categorically
rejected — and suggested that Liberia’s elected
representatives should also reject —exclusionary
provisions such as declaring Liberia a Christian
nation and requiring African ancestry for citizenship.
Recommendations also include proposed changes that
the President supported, such as a shorter term for
elected officials, including presidents and legislators.
Meanwhile, litigation related to last December’s
senatorial elections is nearly completed, with only one
appeal still pending. I think that the 2014 electoral
process demonstrated many encouraging elements
about the independence and maturity of Liberia’s
democracy, including with respect to the capacity of
national institutions to conduct elections throughout the
country in circumstances, we recall, that were difficult
and with limited means. The subsequent appeal process
has demonstrated the continuing commitment of the
political class of the country to seeking the resolution
of disputes through legal channels.
I turn now to the security situation, which remains
generally stable, although public order is still a source
of concern, as demonstrated by periodic incidents,
for instance, between the police and motorcycle taxi
drivers in Monrovia, and some public disturbances at
concessions. But I am pleased to note that since the

15-27587

10/09/2015

The situation in Liberia

S/PV.7519

Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/620) was issued on
13 August, there have been no major security incidents.

firearms control bill that the Secretary-General recently
flagged as critical in the context of the sanctions regime.

In the meantime, Liberia is working hard to
build its institutions, pass legislation and put in place
mechanisms that will enable it to maintain stability
without the presence of a peacekeeping force. All but
one of Liberia’s counties have established a county
security council that brings together security actors
to share information, provide early warning of risks,
and advise national decision-makers. This is an
important tool for channelling local-level knowledge
and capacities in order to prevent localized disputes
from spiralling into larger conflicts. Most recently,
the council of Grand Gedeh conducted an assessment
of community complaints about the cross-border
encroachment on farmland by foreign nationals, with
a view to formulating recommendations to mitigate the
spread of that dispute.

The quadripartite mechanism bringing together
UNMIL with its sister mission, the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as Liberian and
Ivorian officials, resumed in March with a meeting held
in Abidjan. However, the formal joint border security
operations that were suspended in early 2014 due to
concerns about Ebola and concerns that it might spread
into Côte d’Ivoire have, regrettably, not yet resumed.
Planned meetings of chiefs and elders in the border
area, and the voluntary repatriation of Ivorian refugees
living in Liberia, especially in the area of Zwedru, are
still suspended until after the elections in Côte D’Ivoire
in October. In the meantime, UNMIL is working closely
with the Mano River Union to implement its security
strategy.

The Government remains committed to making
every effort to mobilize the resources needed to
develop its capacity to maintain stability and protect its
population independently of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). Last week, the President signed
into law the 2016-2017 national budget of $622 million,
which includes $20 million in resources allocated to the
security transition. However, the Government estimates
that $37 million are still required for the transition
process.
Last week, the joint implementation group — which
brings together the Government and its key partners,
including UNMIL, which oversees the security
transition — agreed to reprioritize tasks and associated
costs in order to ensure the effective achievement of
key milestones in the transition process. It also agreed
to undertake a more robust approach to measuring
progress against planed benchmarks and activities.
UNMIL and the country team are supporting the
establishment of a programme management office for
the security transition, which is focused on project
implementation, with particular emphasis on fiscal
responsibility and timely delivery.
The legislature is also doing its part. It has actually
postponed its recess so as to be able to review essential
pending draft legislation, including proposed acts for
the police and immigration that include important
provisions for civilian oversight. However, some
important legislation remains pending, including a

In April, the Council decided to resume the
progressive drawdown of UNMIL, which had been
suspended during the crisis. Since the adoption of
resolution 2215 (2015), UNMIL has been reduced by
1,221 troops, reaching this month its new military
strength of 3,590 personnel. Additionally, the authorized
strength of UNMIL’s police component now reflects its
actual deployment of 1,515 personnel, including eight
formed police units, individual police officers and
immigration advisers.
In the report before the Council, the SecretaryGeneral recommends further reductions to military,
police and civilian components of UNMIL, taking into
account the Council’s expectation that the Government
of Liberia will be fully responsible for security as of
30 June 2016. The strategic concept that underpins
these recommendations is the consolidation of the
remaining armed capacity of UNMIL, which would be
able to provide rapid response in support of the Liberian
security institutions in the event of a serious, sudden
deterioration of the security situation.
Specifically, by the conclusion of the security
transition in the precise middle of next year, the
UNMIL force would be reduced to 1,240 personnel,
including one battalion with support and enabling
units, especially aviation. The police component
would likewise be reduced to 606 personnel, including
three formed police units, in addition to police and
immigration advisers, as well as prison advisers. It
will, however, be important for UNMIL to retain the
capacity to provide such support for some months after

15-275873/8

S/PV.7519

The situation in Liberia

10/09/2015

the conclusion of the security transition so as to test
the capability of Liberian security personnel to protect
civilians and respond to security incidents in order to
mitigate any risk of reversal.

behalf of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I wish also to thank UnderSecretary General Ladsous for his very pertinent
briefing this morning.

I should also note that the Secretary-General’s
new Special Representative for Liberia, Mr. Farid
Zarif — whom many here know well — deployed
last Monday. He has considerable experience in
peacekeeping, particularly in Liberia, and I am sure
that he will provide critical leadership at this important
period in the Mission’s lifecycle.

First, I, too, wish to congratulate Liberia on having
been declared Ebola-free last week by the World Health
Organization. The Peacebuilding Commission has been
very impressed by the steadfast determination of the
Liberian people and the Government, represented here
by the Minister, to fight the disease, and I am heartened
by the fact that full attention can now be geared
towards recovery. As we have continuously stressed,
peacebuilding must form part and parcel of rebuilding
after the Ebola crisis. The crisis exposed gaps in the
peacebuilding and State-building efforts made to date,
including in the area of building trust between citizens
and the State, and with regard to strengthening the
social fabric. The economic downturn that followed
after the Ebola crisis must be met with increased support
from the international community for revitalizing
socioeconomic development.

Liberia is a country that can be characterized by the
remarkable ability of its people to overcome seemingly
impossible adversity. These are a people who have
endured and are still enduring the devastation wrought
by more than a century of systematic exclusion, decades
of dysfunction, and 14 years of successive, brutal civil
wars. For more than a year, the people of Liberia were
confronted with a national tragedy that took shape in the
form of a medical emergency. And yet, once again, the
country has turned a corner and transcended adversity.
Thus, there is yet again an opportunityto create a better
Liberia.
Now, it is with the people and Government of
Liberia that lies the important work of continuing to
build a nation — a unified, reconciled nation with a
Government that has to be accountable and committed
to addressing corruption within its ranks; a nation in
which all citizens share the benefits of the country’s
abundant natural resources; a nation that has to be fully
responsible for its own destiny, with institutions and
a Government able to provide the basic guarantees of
security, protection and services to all its citizens.
The decision taken by the Council to set 30 June
2016 as the date for the full assumption of security
responsibilities by national authorities is, I believe,
a remarkable demonstration of confidence that the
country has overcome both the instability and the
dependency of the past, and that it is moving steadfastly
in the direction of building a viable, united and fully
independent nation. We shall continue to support
the people and the Government of Liberia in that
endeavour, with the hard-won stability enduring for all
of the succeeding generations of the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to address the Council this morning on
4/8

Let me turn to the main focus of today’s briefing:
the continued drawdown of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) and the handing over of security
and stability tasks to the national authorities at the
conclusion of the security transition, by 30 June 2016.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report
(S/2015/620), the assumption of responsibility for
security in the country by the Government of Liberia
will be an important milestone in post-conflict Liberia
and a demonstration of confidence that the country has
turned the corner from conflict, as Mr. Ladsous just
pointed out.
In this regard, the leadership of and ownership
by the Liberian Government will be absolutely
essential as the national authorities prepare to take
over. The international community will, of course,
have to maintain an important role in supporting and
accompanying Liberia in this transition phase.
At the same time, it will be important to not only
focus attention on what needs to happen until June 2016,
but equally so on what needs to follow the conclusion
of the security transition. Early and proper planning is
needed. Only by identifying longer-term peacebuilding
needs can we now jointly ensure that the required
capacity and support structures are in place to reinforce
national efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission
will continue to stress the imperative of greater
focus on institutional reforms and capacity-building,
15-27587

10/09/2015

The situation in Liberia

socioeconomic development and the strengthening
of the justice sector in the context of consolidating
Liberia’s peace efforts.
The international community has generated
experience and a body of knowledge on United Nations
mission transitions, upon which we should now seek to
draw. In our view, there are no excuses for not learning
from past successes as well as failures. We know that
the drawdown of United Nations missions constitutes
a defining moment on the path to sustainable peace
and development. However, we are still experiencing
significant gaps in political attention, as well as in
the financing of critical processes, programmes and
institutions. We could certainly do better when it comes
to transitioning between different modes of United
Nations engagement on a general level. In this regard,
we are fortunate to have had two recent reviews on
how to strengthen peace operations that offer a detailed
analysis. The PBC stands ready to learn from these
analyses and to do our utmost to provide effective and
relevant support to Liberia in its crucial next phase.
The Peacebuilding Commission will continue to act
as a convener and to advise and help mobilize resources
for Liberia’s key longer-term peacebuilding priorities.
The Liberia configuration, which I chair, intends to soon
host a meeting with all relevant stakeholders involved in
peacebuilding efforts with the aim of identifying needs,
discussing capacity and potential gaps, and looking
at where funding is falling short and where donors
could do more. Such a meeting would constitute an
opportunity for the Liberian Government to brief on the
progress made under its transition plan and for UNMIL
to provide an update on the security transition. The
meeting will also help shed light on local perspectives
of civil-society organizations and grass-roots actors.
We hope that these discussions will complement and
add to the work undertaken in the joint implementation
group in Monrovia, which is tasked with monitoring
the implementation of the Government’s plan for the
UNMIL transition. The Commission is ready to share
the conclusions of those deliberations with the Council.
In addition, in order to ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission plays a relevant role beyond the transition,
the configuration has taken steps towards the revision
of its current instruments of engagement with Liberia.
The Commission has invited the Secretary-General
to make recommendations for a updated framework
of engagement for the PBC in view of the security
transition. This strategic input by the United Nations

S/PV.7519

system will be critical to enabling the Commission to
play an effective role and will help align our support for
the efforts made by the operational actors in the field.
Those actors include the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank.
The key priorities of our current engagement
remain valid, namely, reform of the security sector,
national reconciliation and the rule of law. The
updated instrument is intended to align and bring
together existing national plans, including the Agenda
for Transformation, the Government’s plan for the
UNMIL transition and the Ebola recovery plan. The
configuration looks forward to engaging with the
Liberian Government on updating our framework of
engagement, and we will keep the Council informed on
this exercise as well.
As Liberia is preparing for the security transition,
it is simultaneously grappling with a number of other
reforms with a bearing on peace consolidation. The
preparations for the elections in 2017, the current
constitutional review and the process of decentralization
will also remain on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as these processes will affect fundamental
aspects of State- and nation-building. Similarly,
implementing the strategic road map for national
healing, peacebuilding and reconciliation also remains
imperative. We will also try to highlight land issues and
their relevance to the crucial area of natural-resource
management, not only to ensure reduced tensions
between affected communities and concessionaires,
but also to help Liberia develop a sustainable source
of domestic revenue. Lastly, tackling corruption with
continued vigor will be key in order to raise public trust
in Government institutions.
In closing, one might say that the value-added
of the accompanying role of the Peacebuilding
Commission is clearly being tested as a post-conflict
country approaches a milestone in its journey towards
sustaining peace. Liberia has a challenging year ahead.
The Council and bilateral and multilateral partners
have accumulated experience and knowledge that we
must continue to deploy in support of Liberia’s own
efforts to consolidate peace. The Commission that
I chair stands ready to contribute to all these efforts
focused on national priorities and sustained peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to Mr. Sannoh.

15-275875/8

S/PV.7519

The situation in Liberia

Mr. Sannoh (Liberia): It is an honour and a
privilege for me to address the Council as it considers
the thirtieth progress report of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) (S/2015/620).
On 3 September 2015, Liberia was declared
Ebola-free for the second time by the World Health
Organization. Although this would not have been
possible without the strong leadership of our President,
Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and the
resilience of the people of Liberia, we owe a debt of
gratitude to the United Nations and our international
partners for walking along with us to cross this bridge. It
has been a difficult road for us as a people and a nation.
The steep decline in the economy due to the Ebola
crisis remains the greatest challenge to our nation, and
the reverberations of that decline will continue to have
an impact on all sectors of the Government, especially
the justice and security sectors.
Permit me therefore to express appreciation to
the Secretary-General, members of the Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Liberia
configuration, as well as our bilateral and other
multilateral partners, for their invaluable support,
which enabled us to contain the Ebola scourge.
The Secretary-General has noted in his report
(S/2015/620) that the assumption of security
responsibilities for UNMIL will mark a historic
moment in post-conflict Liberia, whereby the fate of
the country and the protection of its citizens will, for
the first time in more than a decade, be completely in
the hands of the national authorities. I agree fully with
the Secretary-General that this will be an important
turning point in our nation’s history. The Government
is doing everything possible to make this a reality.
As Council members may be aware, the plan for
Liberia to assume this responsibility has five strategic
objectives. The first objective is to fill immediate
security gaps created by the UNMIL drawdown
throughout the country. The second objective is to
strengthen response capacity in threat-prone regions
of the country. The third objective is to simultaneously
pursue all normal conventional security operations
throughout the country. The fourth objective is to
reform the legal frameworks of the sector agencies.
The fifth objective is to build the capacity of the
sector. Significant progress has been made towards the
achievement of these objectives.

6/8

10/09/2015

In close collaboration with our partners, the
Government now has a clear road map, especially
with regard to the structural and implementation
arrangements of the plan. The Government has
disaggregated the plan. The priority activities for
implementation between now and June 2016 have been
identified and costed with timelines. They include
those responsibilities that the Government is to take
over from UNMIL and those challenges that pose
immediate threats to the consolidation of peace. The
total budget for these activities is $38.8 million. Against
this amount, the Government of Liberia has allocated
$20 million in its 2015-2016 budget, and 50 per cent
of this amount is to be deposited in a dedicated trust
account to enhance timely disbursement and rapid
implementation. With the support of the United Nations
Development Programme, a transition implementation
unit has been established within the Ministry of Justice
to coordinate the various activities of the plan.
With respect to the legal framework, in July 2015,
the Legislature opened public consultation on a draft
firearms act. A draft police act and a draft bureau
of immigration and naturalization act have been
drawn up, approved by the Cabinet and the National
Security Council, and forwarded to the Legislature for
enactment. On Monday, 8 September, these draft bills
had their first reading in the legislature. Work is also
currently in progress on a draft alien and nationality
law. These reforms will lead, inter alia, to a strong,
coherent and modern legal framework for the justice
sector, improving civilian and democratic oversight of
the sector’s governance system, reducing inter-agency
overlapping of functions, professionalizing the sector’s
management systems and ensuring accountability and
efficiency.
Progress is also being made in the area of training.
On Saturday, 12 September, the Bureau of Immigration
and the Liberian National Fire Service will be graduating
328 officers who have undergone three months of
intensive training. The Police, the Drug Enforcement
Agency, the Armed Forces of Liberia and the Bureau
of Corrections and Rehabilitation are also conducting
trainings. Procurement plans are now being finalized
for the bulk purchase of needed items prioritized under
the disaggregated plan.
I would like to note at this juncture the Government
of Liberia’s appreciation for the work of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the support of the
partners in furtherance of the transition. However, the

15-27587

10/09/2015

The situation in Liberia

Government is concerned about the slow pace of funding
commitment or support for implementation of the plan.
There is as yet no funding commitment to close the
$60 million gap for this fiscal year. It is imperative to
give new impetus to resource mobilization initiatives in
support of Liberia as foreseen in the statement of mutual
commitments with the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Secretary-General has expressed concern
about the about the recent surge in violent public
disturbances and has linked this surge to deficiencies
in the response capacity of the national police, public
discontent, alienation and slow pace of reconciliation.
However, the violence alluded to represents isolated
incidents which relate to motorcyclists and few
concession areas. It needs to be taken in context. The
essence of any Government is to maintain peace and
stability of the body politic, protect human rights
and promote the economic and social development of
its people. No responsible Government can condone
lawlessness, criminality and direct challenges to its
constituted authority. As the number of motorbikes in
Liberia has increased exponentially, the challenges to
the Government have also increased. Working closely
with the unions, the Government has now instituted
new measures, including limiting the use of motorbikes
to certain communities, mandatory registration
of all motorbikes, and training and licensing of
bike operators, which have considerably decreased
motorcycle-associated violence over the past five
months.
The violence in the concession areas is related
to unresolved employer-employee issues and
disagreements among the communities’ leadership in
the negotiation process on the granting of additional
land beyond that covered under concession agreements.
To each incident of violence, however, the Liberia
National Police responded and restored control. Where
human rights violations by the police have been alleged,
the accused are investigated and brought to justice if
they are found to be culpable.
With
respect
to
the
Secretary-General’s
observations of public discontent, alienation and slow
pace of reconciliation, it is the Government’s view
that through its ongoing programmes in areas such as
access to justice, infrastructure development, including
an improved road network that facilitates the movement
of people and commerce, and the decentralization of
governance, it is in fact promoting reconciliation and
addressing alienation and discontent.

S/PV.7519

Both Mr. Ladsous and the PBC Chair have
commented on the situation in Liberia and the
challenges that we face. We thank them for their
perspectives. However, some significant developments
have not been fully covered. First, the initial reactions
to the proposed amendment to declare Liberia a
Christian State, which caused divisions along religious
lines during the constitutional review process, as noted
in paragraph 10 of the report, have all been quietened,
as the parties realized that it was just a proposal subject
to the approval of the Legislature and a referendum.
The Constitution Review Committee has now
completed its task and submitted 25 recommendations
to the President, who transmitted them to the national
legislature along with her comments. Some of the key
recommendations advanced relate to dual nationality,
ownership of land, and reduction of the terms of the
President, Senators and members of the House of
Representatives. These recommendations, if approved,
will be subject to referendum, which will take place
concurrent with the 2017 general elections.
While it is true that corruption continues to
dominate public attention, as reported in paragraph 14
of the report, some progress continues to be noted. The
Government obtained indictments and prosecuted a
number of high profile cases including the National Oil
Company of Liberia case, the case of the illegal issuance
of logging permits involving officials of the Forestry
Development Authority, and the case involving the
National Drug Service. As I noted in my most recent
statement to the Council (see S/PV.7438), in response
to the twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/275), capacity and resource constraints still pose
a threat to the fight against corruption. The Ministry of
Justice has restructured the Prosecutorial Department
and created five new divisions, one of which is focused
on anti-corruption litigation, exclusively handling cases
referred to the Ministry by Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission and the General Auditing Commission.
The Government of Liberia remains committed to the
fight against corruption and calls upon its partners
to help strengthen the investigative and prosecutorial
capacity of the Ministry of Justice.
On regional issues, the Government has made
diplomatic representations to the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire regarding the cross-border movement and
activities of Ivoirians and Burkinabés. With general
and presidential elections slated for October in Côte
d’Ivoire, and with more than 38,000 registered Ivorian

15-275877/8

S/PV.7519

The situation in Liberia

refugees still within the proximity of the border, it is
imperative, and the Government has taken steps to
ensure, that the borders be routinely monitored with
a view to taking actions to avoid conflict along this
corridor. We welcome the joint aerial reconnaissance
initiative by the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire and UNMIL in that regard.
On the human rights front, it is important to
underscore that no country is free from human rights
violations. The insatiable yearning of the people of
Liberia for respect of their rights, grounded by our
historical commitment to make Liberia a beacon
of hope and freedom, makes it very difficult for any
Government in Liberia to engage in any persistent
patterns of violations of human rights. Therefore,
Liberia is making progress. We have intensified efforts
to address sexual and gender-based violence, rape
and pretrial detentions. Following our participation in
the second round of the Universal Periodic Review in
Geneva in May, Liberia will be returning to Geneva
on 24 September to react to the recommendations put
forward by the Human Rights Council. Liberia has
complied with its reporting obligations under several
human rights conventions, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Liberia remains committed to enhancing the work of the
Independent National Commission on Human Rights.
In conclusion, when the Council mandated the
Government of Liberia to formulate a plan to assume

8/8

10/09/2015

full responsibility over the security architecture of the
country by June 2016, the Government entertained
the hope that the financial requirements for the
implementation of the plan would not be left to Liberia
alone, especially given the steep decline in the economy
due to the Ebola crisis. The Secretary-General’s report
buttresses this hope when, in welcoming the progress
made in Liberia, it states that
“challenges remain that will require additional
assistance on all fronts in order to complete
the transition by 30 June 2016 in line with the
expectation of the Security Council.” (S/2015/620,
para. 72)
The Government and the people of Liberia
therefore call upon the Security Council to leverage
its position to mobilize international support for the
implementation of the transition plan. We also look
forward to forging increased engagement with the
Peacebuilding Commission to fully consolidate peace
in Liberia. The support of Council members will
facilitate Liberia turning the corner from conflict to a
future of sustained peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-27587
