A/66/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

32

nd plenary meeting
Tuesday, 11 October 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou
(Benin), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/492)
The Acting President (spoke in French): If there
is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Fifth Committee that is before it.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote. The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in plenary meeting a delegation should,
as far as possible, explain its vote only once, either in
the Committee or in the plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different from
its vote in the Committee. May I also remind
delegations that, also in accordance with General

Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes.
Before we take action on the recommendation
contained in the report, I should like to inform
representatives that we are going to proceed to take a
decision in the same manner as in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments for
the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/4).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda items 63 and 13
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/202)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-53871 (E)

*1153871*

A/66/PV.32

(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/214)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Note by the Secretary-General (A/66/169)
The Acting President (spoke in French): In his
report on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD) (A/66/202), the SecretaryGeneral stresses the progress that African countries
have made in implementing what we can rightly call
Africa’s own vision for its development. Appropriately,
the report coincides with NEPAD’s tenth anniversary.
NEPAD’s objectives are by now well known:
implementing priority programmes and projects at the
regional and continental level, strengthening
partnerships,
mobilizing
resources,
seeking
cooperation efforts in order to advance development in
Africa, creating a favourable environment for private
sector development, creating links among institutions,
and using existing technical resources in support of the
NEPAD agenda.
Today we can confirm that the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development is making encouraging
progress in many areas — particularly peace and
security, democracy and revitalization of the
economy — that are foundation stones for new
national, regional and continental efforts, as are
partnerships with the international community. The
programme has laid a foundation for Africa’s recovery
in all areas — health, infrastructure, agriculture and
food security — and for renewed international
cooperation for the development of the continent.
But many challenges remain to be addressed,
primarily through the efforts of African countries —
since NEPAD should be implemented through national
programmes adopted by the countries themselves —
but also with the support of the international
community. The debate we will begin today focuses on
this.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I have the privilege to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the
10 member countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). Since this is the first time for
ASEAN as a group to deliver its statement in the
plenary at this session, I wish to offer on ASEAN’s

2

behalf our congratulations through you, Sir, to
Ambassador Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his
assumption of the presidency of the Assembly at its
sixty-sixth session. We are committed to supporting
and cooperating with the presidency during this session
in order to ensure its successful conclusion.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive reports under agenda items 63
(A/66/202 and A/66/214) and 13 (A/66/169).
Striking events and important changes have taken
place all over the world in the last few years. Africa is
one of the places where we have witnessed positive
shifts, but at the same time difficult humanitarian
situations.
Although domestic leadership is a key to Africa’s
development, the international community plays an
important role in supporting their efforts. ASEAN
affirms its commitment to continue building synergies
and friendship with Africa through the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and
the New Asian-African Strategic Partnership adopted
by all leaders of Asian and African countries in 2005.
In conjunction with the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of NEPAD, we need to think afresh how
resources and creative energies could be better
channelled. Let us explore opportunities to build on the
progress made in implementing NEPAD projects. More
importantly, since people are a country’s most
important asset, we should also focus on capacitybuilding and human resource development in Africa.
As emphasized in the Secretary-General’s report, the
tenth anniversary of NEPAD should be viewed as a
turning point from business as usual towards policy
actions and results.
Action is vital, considering that one of the
distressing facts coinciding with NEPAD’s tenth
anniversary is uneven progress on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), where Africa lags far
behind other regions. More can be done to support
implementation of the eight MDGs.
On trade, although there has been virtually no
progress on the conclusion of the Doha Round,
ASEAN and NEPAD have a common interest in
upholding the primacy of the multilateral trading
system. We should continue to renew our commitment
to finding solutions for common interests and concerns
in this negotiation process.

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

ASEAN views the African Peer Review
Mechanism as an innovative instrument for
strengthening Africa’s position for advancing good
governance and socio-economic development. We are
pleased to hear that 30 countries have joined the
Mechanism, and we would like to encourage more
African countries to join. ASEAN therefore urges
strategic partners to lend their support to this process.
Our discussion this year is taking place against
the backdrop of the devastating impact of climate
change, especially in East Africa and the Horn of
Africa. It is therefore important that our work in the
plenary here contribute to the larger goal of reaching a
successful outcome of the United Nations Climate
Change Conference in Durban and of the preparation
for the Conference on Sustainable Development next
year.
Climate change also has an impact on health in
Africa. The 2001 Third Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change showed
that with even a small rise in temperature the risk of
malaria transmission would be greatly increased. While
progress has been made towards meeting the goal of
malaria control, and the recorded cases and deaths due
to malaria in African countries have fallen by 50 per
cent, malaria continues to affect the more vulnerable,
and it remains a leading killer of children under five
years old.
ASEAN and Africa share the same concern on the
need to combat malaria. ASEAN urges all countries
and development partners to show their political will in
fighting this infectious disease. Furthermore, ASEAN
supports the recommendations in the global plan for
artemisinin resistance containment, not only to increase
people’s awareness of this risk but also to preserve
artemisinin-based combination therapies as an effective
treatment for falciparum malaria. There is also an
urgent need to build a human network for infectious
disease control through promoting human resources
and capacity-building
ASEAN believes that in order to achieve stability
and security and spur legitimate economic activity it is
absolutely vital that the parties concerned take
effective and sustained measures against the many
challenges they face, including maritime security, drug
trafficking, organized crime, youth unemployment and
extreme poverty, which are all often mutually
reinforcing.

11-53871

ASEAN emphasizes the importance of postconflict peacebuilding strategies when dealing with
countries emerging from conflict in the region. To that
end, ASEAN reaffirms its commitment to the role and
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In
ASEAN’S view, the promotion of the peacebuilding
agenda in those countries will contribute not only to
the creation of environments conducive to the
attainment of durable peace but also to sustainable
development in Africa.
ASEAN supports all initiatives focusing on
enhancing youth employment, as many young people
engage in illicit activities because of poverty and
unemployment. We believe that the PBC can assist
countries to encourage and support home-grown
programmes, including on youth employment,
vocational training for youth and education.
ASEAN also commends the role and work of
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, NEPAD and the Economic Community
of West African States, in assisting countries in the
region, in particular those under the PBC agenda.
Finally, ASEAN countries stress the importance
for the United Nations, development partners and the
international community to continue to strengthen their
work and focus on assisting African countries. While
we believe inclusiveness is important, we also
recognize the need for effective, timely decisionmaking and implementable results.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): On behalf of the African
States, I wish to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his reports on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD), including on progress
in implementation and international support (A/66/202)
and on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(A/66/214), and his report on the Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
(A/66/169). We also thank both traditional and new
development partners for their support for the NEPAD
programmes and projects.
As we celebrate the tenth anniversary of NEPAD
this year, we are all reminded of the need to strengthen
governance structures and institutions, deepen the
democratic ethos, and reform our investment climate
and make it business-friendly in order to increase our
collective competitiveness. Enhancing the quality of
educational institutions, particularly for higher

3

A/66/PV.32

education, and making them practical is also of the
utmost importance.
The African Group expects that our development
partners will renew their political commitment to
ensure meaningful support to programmes and projects
to meet Africa’s development needs. The Group is of
the opinion that an enabling international environment
is indispensable. Our priorities are many, but the most
urgent ones include industrialization, infrastructure
development, agricultural transformation and the
building of human capital, as well as, of course, the
fundamental aspects related to trade, which include
market access and the development of a modern
service infrastructure.
Partnerships with both traditional and new
development partners should therefore seek to integrate
Africa
into
the
global
economy
through
industrialization, diversification, infrastructure and
human
capital
development.
Furthermore,
a
development reorientation from the export of primary
products to manufactured or processed goods is urgent
and must be pursued. NEPAD recognizes the critical
role of the private sector, both domestic and foreignowned, as the continent’s engine of economic growth.
Africa continues to be plagued by long-term and,
in some cases, interrelated crises, including violent
conflicts that have caused immense human suffering.
In the light of the serious implications of conflict for
several aspects of the development of Africa, initiatives
from peacebuilding to post-conflict reconstruction and
development have been launched throughout the
continent.
A central theme in the African Union/NEPAD
agenda is bringing together the issues of peace and
security, governance and constitutionalism, economic
development, and international partnerships — and the
way those partnerships drive governance and economic
development. African countries will continue to pay
special attention to those matters.
Trade is an important tool for economic growth
and development. However, Africa’s share of global
trade remains negligible. Africa accounts for only 3 per
cent of world trade, while its share in global
manufactured exports is close to zero. The African
Group has put in place measures aimed at increasing
the volume of intraregional trade throughout the
continent through regional blocs.

4

On the same note, Africa wants to improve its
external trade with all its partners. However, the
faltering process in concluding the Doha Round is
impeding Africa’s market access to trade. We call on
all parties to show flexibility and conclude the trade
talks as a matter of urgency. Aid for trade should be
further emphasized to improve our supply-side
constraints and enhance our participation in
international trade.
Foreign direct investment flows to Africa should
also target labour-intensive infrastructure development
projects. They should include transfer of knowledge
and technology and should build up the service sector,
such as banking, insurance and medicine, and the
industrial sector, such as aeronautical and automotive
components,
information
and
communications
technology, off-shore food processing, et cetera.
We urge development partners to take urgent
collective actions to fulfil all their aid commitments to
Africa, as official development assistance contributes
to economic growth in important ways. The continent
urges partners to fulfil their commitments to double
official development assistance to Africa to support
Africa’s development. I also wish to point out that
emphasis should shift from aid effectiveness to
development effectiveness, to better measure the
impact of the resources that have been contributed to
Africa.
With regard to the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), Africa has made significant progress.
However, the continent remains off-track on the way to
achieving some of the MDGs by 2015. Concerns
remain with regard to quality education, infant and
maternal health, malnutrition, safe drinking water and
basic sanitation. Social protection programmes and job
creation are required to reduce poverty and contribute
to the achievement of the MDGs as well.
The role of the NEPAD Agency as a planning unit
is to facilitate and coordinate the implementation of
regional and continental programmes and the
mobilization of resources for the implementation of
Africa’s priority programmes and projects. It remains
central to the collective manner in which the African
Union and Africa will be doing business collectively.
The role of the NEPAD Agency in conducting and
coordinating research and in knowledge management
will create an enabling environment to help Africa
achieve the food security, agricultural development and

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

infrastructure expansion — all, we hope, in the next
5 to 10 years.
In that regard, the African Group looks forward to
constructive engagements during the forthcoming
informal consultations on the need to establish a
monitoring mechanism to follow up on all
commitments related to Africa’s development needs.
With the mechanism in place, the Group hopes that
commitments by both African Governments and their
development partners will be reviewed and enhanced,
possibly by the beginning of the sixty-seventh session
of the General Assembly.
Malaria infects over 170 million Africans each
year, crippling economic growth and undermining the
growth of gross domestic product (GDP), to the tune of
a 2 per cent loss in growth every year. In the African
Leaders Malaria Alliance (ALMA) heads of State and
Government are determined to remove that debilitating
impediment to progress once and for all. As members
of the African Union and of ALMA, heads of State and
Government pledged to end the scourge of malaria.
Those efforts have the potential to bear fruit and save
at least $12 billion per annum in direct costs, freeing
up much needed resources for implementation, service
delivery and acceleration of development.
It is encouraging to know that in high-burden
African countries that have achieved high rates in
providing their populations with insecticide-treated
nets and treatment programmes, recorded cases and
deaths due to malaria have fallen by 50 per cent. This
has greatly supported the achievement of MDG 6 and
has helped to reverse the incidence of malaria
throughout the continent. In addition, the findings that
the lives of more than 750 million children across
34 malaria-endemic African countries have been saved
through vector control have been very encouraging.
In conclusion, I wish to state that the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development —
the Rio+20 Summit — to be held in June next year in
Brazil constitutes an important opportunity to reaffirm
and renew political commitment to implement previous
decisions and undertakings in accordance with the Rio
Declaration, Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation and all of the relevant outcomes of the
major conferences and summits on sustainable
development. The Conference must therefore aim to
achieve substantive progress on its objectives and
themes.

11-53871

In that regard, the African Group is committed to
working with all partners and stakeholders to take
forward the needed action to ensure the success of the
Conference. Accordingly, the continent is already
holding consultative meetings in line with the Malabo
Declaration adopted by the heads of State and
Government of the African Union in June. We will
work towards the formulation of a common position
during the forthcoming Africa regional preparatory
conference on Rio+20, scheduled to take place at the
African Union headquarters in October. The African
Group wishes to reiterate that the objectives and
themes of the Conference are mutually supportive and
must be pursued in a comprehensive and integrated
manner.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): In today’s debate on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), I
have the honour, on behalf of the member States of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), to renew our
solidarity and partnership in the cause of Africa’s
progress.
I wish to begin by paying tribute on behalf of our
Community to the life and memory of a distinguished
daughter of Africa: the noted environmentalist,
women’s activist and Nobel laureate Wangari Maathai
of Kenya, whose passing is a loss not only to her native
home, but to Africa and to the world. Ms. Wangari
served the cause of peace and sustainable development
as a champion for the downtrodden.
CARICOM also extends sincere congratulations
to the three joint recipients of the 2011 Nobel Peace
Prize, two of them from Africa: Her Excellency
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of Liberia, her
compatriot Ms. Leymah Gbowee and Ms. Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen. They have distinguished themselves
as a potent force for change in the face of towering
odds. We hope that women everywhere will take
courage and inspiration from that development.
In this tenth anniversary year of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, CARICOM
reaffirms its strong support for NEPAD. The New
Partnership
represents
Africa’s
blueprint
for
socio-economic advancement for the benefit of the
more than one billion people who call the continent
home. CARICOM’s support for NEPAD is based on
fundamental respect for Africa’s ownership and
leadership of its own development process. The
success of NEPAD will contribute to enabling Africans

5

A/66/PV.32

to fulfil the promise of their potential and Africa to
assume its rightful place in the global economy.

remain a key focus for development efforts over the
next five years.

Much has changed on the continent since our last
debate on these issues, during the sixty-fifth session
(see A/65/PV.30 and A/65/PV.31). We have witnessed
momentous developments in North Africa and the
Middle East as people have sought to give renewed
expression to their quest for higher standards of life in
larger freedom. Those developments have doubtless
begun to change the face of Africa. The role of youth
in that context will be instructive for future policy in
Africa, where on average some 60 per cent of the
population is under the age of 25. The SecretaryGeneral has therefore rightly called attention to issues
pertaining to youth, education and employment on the
continent.

United Nations efforts in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding also remain critical to
Africa’s quest for durable peace and sustainable
development. We welcome the focus in this regard on
preventive diplomacy. CARICOM supports continued
active engagement in these areas so that the spectre of
conflict and division will yield to a new paradigm
where the vast resources of its many great people will
be deployed in service of their welfare and to lay the
foundations for enduring progress.

The past year has also seen the birth of a new
African State, the Republic of South Sudan.
CARICOM countries welcome the Republic of South
Sudan into the community of independent States and
offer our support to the South Sudanese people and
Government as they embark on building the new
Republic. The actions taken so far by the international
community in support of that country also enjoy the
appreciation of our Community. At the same time, we
recognize that several issues remain to be resolved
between South Sudan and the Republic of the Sudan.
We urge that they be settled peacefully through
negotiations.
On another front, CARICOM has been deeply
troubled by the havoc being wreaked on human life as
a result of the devastating famine that has struck the
Horn of Africa. A number of our member States have
made tangible contributions to the humanitarian
response effort. We urge the international community
to ensure that life-giving support is extended to all
affected populations throughout the region.
As the Secretary-General’s report attests, recent
developments in Africa point to the promise and the
pitfalls that lie ahead for the region. The continent has
recorded positive economic growth and an
improvement in socio-economic and development
indicators. At the same time, the number of people
living in extreme poverty has increased. Africa faces
the greatest risk in all the developing world of falling
short in the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and will therefore necessarily

6

The successes recorded in recent years in United
Nations peacekeeping in Africa and the emergence of
more African countries from conflict are encouraging
signs, although recovery in some instances is fragile
and the risk of relapse is still very present. These facts
underscore the importance of United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and the imperative of creating the
necessary conditions both inside and outside the
continent for those efforts to prosper.
In many ways, therefore, Africa represents a
beacon of opportunity for international cooperation and
partnership. The international community has to stay
the course, create a favourable economic environment,
honour its commitments and expand opportunities
Africa’s trade. Developed countries must fulfil their
commitments to Africa.
At the same time, South-South cooperation and
partnerships are an integral part of the international
response and are fundamentally altering the continent’s
economic relationships with the rest of the world. The
Caribbean Community stands ready as a partner with
Africa to advance our mutual objectives in the
political, economic, social, environmental and cultural
domains.
Our two regions face a number of challenges in
common, not least in the area of health. The scourge of
HIV/AIDS continues to seriously affect our respective
populations. This unwelcome reality is nevertheless an
opportunity for collaboration and the exchange of
experience and best practices. CARICOM is grateful
for the support extended by African countries to the
CARICOM initiative on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, which resulted in the
adoption a Political Declaration (resolution 66/2) at the
High-level Meeting on the Prevention and Control of
Non-Communicable
Diseases.
The
Declaration

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

provides a framework for concerted action by the
international community on this issue. CARICOM also
strongly supports efforts to roll back malaria on the
continent and thereby enhance the lives and livelihoods
of over 170 million Africans.
CARICOM takes note of the progress recorded
under
the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme in the priority areas of
agriculture and food security, as well as of the actions
taken in respect of the development of infrastructure,
transport and energy. The growth of agriculture is
critical to Africa’s development prospects. CARICOM
strongly supports and encourages the work currently
under way to promote an African green revolution with
a view to ensuring that Africa will be self-sufficient in
food by 2015. We urge the international community to
continue and strengthen its support for Africa’s efforts
to realize these objectives.
The challenge posed by climate change is a test
of our common future. Africa will host the seventeenth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in
November and December. An ambitious and
comprehensive global response to the threat posed by
climate change is especially urgent for the many
countries in Africa, the Caribbean, the Pacific and
elsewhere that are on the frontlines of this looming
catastrophe. We call for an urgent scaling-up of
international action to ensure the delivery of credible
results when the Conference meets in Durban, South
Africa.
CARICOM is ever mindful of the complex
interrelationships between governance, peace and
development. The Caribbean Community promotes and
encourages the adherence to democratic principles,
good governance, the rule of law and the protection of
human rights. We support the ongoing efforts of
African countries to improve economic and political
governance and to strengthen mechanisms for the
participation, inclusion and empowerment of all
segments of African society.
The instrumental role of the African Peer Review
Mechanism in these efforts is worthy of note, as is the
support of the Mechanism as reflected by the
30 African countries that have so far subscribed to it.
CARICOM also believes that focused efforts must
continue to be made to eliminate the combination of

11-53871

internal and external factors that engender conflict and
stymie development.
The African continent, which served as a cradle
of ancient civilization and the birthplace of the Arab
Spring, now beckons as a new frontier of human
progress. As Africa charts its way forward, the
continued support of the international community
remains vital to its success. But that success will not be
Africa’s alone; the fruits of progress on the continent
will inevitably contribute to progress in other parts of
the world. CARICOM will continue to stand as a
willing partner in the cause of Africa’s progress.
Mrs. Kaur (India): It gives me great pleasure to
attend today’s joint debate on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the promotion of
peace and development in Africa, including in its
efforts to fight malaria.
In the immortal words of India’s first Prime
Minister, Mr. Jawaharlal Nehru, Africa is our sister
continent. India’s links with Africa are civilizational;
they are anchored in centuries of trade across the
Indian Ocean, in the shared struggle against the yoke
of colonialism, in our endeavour of post-colonial
nation-building, and in our common quest to unshackle
our people from the bondage of poverty, disease,
hunger, illiteracy and apartheid. We also owe a debt of
gratitude to that great continent for being the political
birthplace of the father of our nation, Mahatma
Gandhi, who first tested his central precepts of nonviolence and peaceful resistance in South Africa.
After the adoption of NEPAD, it is befitting to
recognize the noteworthy progress made so far in
pursuing
sectoral
priorities
in
agriculture,
infrastructure, health, education, science, information
technology and the environment. Nevertheless, this
decadal milestone also offers an opportunity for sober
reflection on the unfinished tasks ahead in fulfilling the
vision of socio-economic growth and sustainable
development that was envisaged when the framework
was first conceived.
Particularly relevant to this discussion is the
pivotal contribution of international cooperation to
Africa’s development, especially in its efforts to make
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
and in surmounting the difficult challenges confronting
post-conflict and transitional societies in Africa.

7

A/66/PV.32

As rightly emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report (A/66/202), the international community
needs to step up its efforts and bridge the gap between
promise and delivery. The shortfall of $18 billion in
meeting official development assistance commitments
to Africa is a cause for concern. In these times of
political uncertainty and fragile transitions in many
African countries, it is more crucial than ever for the
continent’s development partners to stay the course and
help African countries to achieve their development
goals.
On India’s part, we have together with our
African partners, transformed our age-old and special
engagement into an enduring and multidimensional
relationship. Having been carefully nurtured over
successive years, our partnership with Africa today is
aligned with the priorities integral to the development
goals of Africa and is built on the foundations of
mutual equality and common benefit. Sectoral areas of
cooperation that have been accorded high priority
include infrastructure development, capacity-building,
agriculture, health, food security and technical
cooperation.
Earlier this year, we reaffirmed our abiding
commitment to working with our African partners at
the Second India-Africa Forum Summit, held in Addis
Ababa in May. At the Summit, India announced fresh
lines of credit worth $5 billion over the next three
years for Africa and an additional $700 million in grant
assistance
for
human
resource
development,
technology transfer and the creation of new institutions
and training programmes, in consultation with the
African Union, the regional economic communities and
our African partners.
In keeping with NEPAD’s emphasis on
infrastructure development, we have also decided to
support the development of the new Ethio-Djibouti
Railway in the amount of $300 million. We are also
discussing with the African Union how to increase
capacity in the development of regional railway
structures.
Building on the success of the Pan African
e-Network project, which shares with all African
countries our expertise in the fields of health care,
education through satellite, fibre optics and wireless
links, we are looking at setting up an India-Africa
virtual university. The proposed university will set
aside 10,000 new scholarships for African students. In

8

addition, we are going to significantly raise the number
of African beneficiaries of our scholarships and
training slots, including under our flagship technical
and economic assistance initiative, the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme. We
have committed ourselves to offering more than 22,000
scholarships to African students over the next three
years.
With a view to encouraging trade and investment
flows, there is also a proposal to establish an IndiaAfrica business council. India is already unilaterally
making available duty-free and quota-free market
access for goods from 34 of the least developed
countries (LDCs) in Africa, which covers 94 per cent
of India’s total tariff lines and provides preferential
market access on tariff lines that comprise 92.5 per
cent of the global exports of all the LDCs.
India’s private sector has played an increasingly
important role in recent years in supporting trade and
investment flows. Indian companies have made large
investments in African industry, agriculture, services,
human resource development and infrastructure. The
Indian conglomerate Tata has emerged as the second
largest investor in sub-Saharan Africa. New initiatives
to establish an India-Africa food processing cluster, an
India-Africa integrated textiles cluster, an India-Africa
civil aviation academy, an India-Africa centre for
medium-range weather forecasting, and an India-Africa
institute for agriculture and rural development are all
on the anvil.
India has also contributed actively in efforts to
maintain peace and security on the African continent
through our six-decade involvement in United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. Our most substantial presence
remains in Africa, including in the latest peacekeeping
mission in South Sudan. Further, India will contribute
$2 million to the African Union Mission in Somalia, in
line with our consistent support to the development of
African capacities in the maintenance of peace and
security. We have consistently held the position that the
international community must further encourage
regional and subregional organizations in Africa to
play a more important role both in peacekeeping and in
peacebuilding issues within Africa.
Before concluding, I would like to speak on the
global anti-malaria campaign, particularly in Africa,
dealt with in the World Health Organization report
transmitted by the Secretary-General (A/66/169). The

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

report emphasizes the need to intensify efforts to reach
recently revised and more ambitious targets by 2015.
The analysis presented in the report draws on empirical
evidence to suggest a strong link between the injection
of significant funding and the rise in the number of
lives saved as a result of anti-malaria efforts. The fact
that funding has stagnated in the past two years is
therefore particularly worrisome. We would urge all
donors to step up efforts at this critical juncture.
India’s own cooperation agenda with Africa
includes capacity-building programmes for medical
and health specialists to tackle such pandemics as
malaria, filariasis, polio, HIV and tuberculosis. India’s
private sector has been investing in establishing
pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities in African
countries. We are willing to do more.
In conclusion, India’s vision of the twenty-first
century sees a great and dynamic role for Africa as an
emerging growth pole of the world. We will offer our
fullest cooperation to translate this vision into reality.
We will take our partnership, founded on mutual
solidarity and kinship, from pillar to pillar, to harness
the great potential of the more than 2.1 billion Indians
and Africans.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Today’s debate on progress in the implementation of
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) and international support for that initiative is
important on three counts.
It enables us to engage the international
community with the celebration of the tenth
anniversary of NEPAD. It also allows this universal
forum to assess the multidimensional changes that have
taken place in Africa since NEPAD began and the
launch of its renewal programme. Finally, it is a
valuable framework for assessing the contributions of
the international community and to give new impetus
to the global partnership in support of the dynamic
being pursued towards new progress in Africa.
We note first that NEPAD was born of the
realization that we needed to raise Africa out of its
marginalization and that Africans themselves needed to
take ownership of the political, economic and social
development of the continent. Africa must itself make
the main effort in its process of renewal, which will
requires a qualitative change in its relationship with the
rest of the world, replacing traditional modes of

11-53871

cooperating with a genuine partnership based on
reciprocal commitments.
That is why, since it was launched, NEPAD has
been a credible approach to fomenting change to
respond consistently to the interrelated challenges of
peace and security, good governance and the
optimization of the human and economic potential of
Africa.
After 10 years of implementation of this
multidimensional approach to development, we can
now see significant results in three strategic areas.
In the area of peace and security, undeniable
progress has been made in conflict prevention,
settlement and management. That willingness on the
part of Africa to strengthen its leadership in the area of
peace and security on the continent is opening the way
for greater opportunities to solve long-standing
conflicts and solve new crises.
On the subject of governance, it is widely
recognized that democracy is now widespread and that
its further entrenchment is making good progress.
Likewise, our economies are being increasingly well
managed. In the area of human development,
significant progress has been made through an increase
in public expenditure on education and health care and
reforms to improve the quality of and access to
education. Particular attention has been paid to
agricultural
development
through
increased
investment, research and the introduction of techniques
developed to increase production of basic foodstuffs,
which is vital to food security.
All of those factors together have contributed to
an average growth rate of 5 per cent over the past
decade, for the first time exceeding the rate of
population growth. Incidentally, the pace of growth
could have been even higher if the international
environment had been more favourable, but the global
financial, economic, food and climate crises have
affected the dynamics of growth and the fight to reduce
poverty, compromising our ability to achieve some of
the Millennium Development Goals.
Allow me to underline that NEPAD has become
the reference point for the activities of international
partners and institutions that support African
development programmes. For their part, the agencies
of the United Nations system have integrated the
approach and goals of NEPAD into their respective

9

A/66/PV.32

operations. That has undoubtedly contributed to
improving the consistency of international cooperation.
The dynamic process that Africa has undertaken
and the convergence of approaches with its partners
have made it possible to develop a promising
partnership. We are all aware that the challenges of
achieving stability and development and the fight
against poverty require even further collective effort to
maintain and accelerate the process of African renewal.
The priority areas for a strengthened partnership in this
new phase are the promotion of investment in job
creation, the development of infrastructure networks at
the national and regional levels, the facilitation of
access to markets for African exports, the
diversification of our economies, and regional
integration.
The excellent report of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon on NEPAD (A/66/202) reflects the clear
resolve of the United Nations to engage even further
and in a more coordinated way in responding to the
priorities and needs of Africa and to help it in its drive
to spur renewed efforts. The development of Africa, so
vital to its peoples, should also be seen as an
opportunity for the world economy and as a
contribution to the economic and social progress of all
of humankind.
Mr. Sene (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to extend the thanks of the
Republic of Senegal to the President of the Assembly
for convening this important debate on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). This
year we celebrate the tenth anniversary of its adoption
in July 2001 in Lusaka as a result of combining the
Millennium Africa Recovery Plan and the Omega Plan
of President Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal.
In the same vein, I would like to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Secretary-General for
the excellent reports he has prepared, featuring
pertinent and useful recommendations for the
socio-economic renewal of the African continent.
The continent-wide initiative that is NEPAD has
always been founded on a concept of development
from within and a will for remediation of the
institutional and infrastructural disparity between
North and South through a partnership of equals that
circumvents the constraints of assistance. NEPAD
offers a new concept of the nature and focus of the
relations Africa should have with the rest of the world.

10

NEPAD’s ambitious programme exhorts Africa to take
principle responsibility for its own development, but it
also posits actions on the part of the international
community to assist our continent in its tireless efforts
to
free
itself
from
the
circumstances
of
underdevelopment.
As the Secretary-General highlights so well in his
report (A/66/202), it is clear today that, in the course of
NEPAD’s first 10 years, Africa has made significant
progress in many respects, especially in quelling
hotbeds of tension, restoring economic growth, good
governance and democracy, as well as in promoting
human rights and gender equality.
We must admit, however, that despite the
encouraging signs pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral, progress remains slow and difficulties
continue to weigh heavily on our continent’s potential.
Indeed, in many other areas we find the grim portrait of
failure, made bleaker by the recent economic, food,
energy and environmental crises, which have kept
Africa in intractable difficulties and left it at a
crossroads in its quest for development.
Even more worrying and dire are the high
statistics on poverty, which runs at two-fifths of the
African population; on HIV, which has infected more
than 20 million people; on malaria, which is rampant
on our continent and kills 9 out of 10 of those infected
worldwide; and on infant and maternal mortality.
Clearly, Africa will have trouble finding its economic
wings if we do not mitigate those overwhelming
constraints.
It is through pledges and funding that the
international community can really help Africa’s
initiatives. Today, the formulation of the NEPAD
sectoral priorities has led to on the launch of several
building projects, whose success will require major
international support. Of the $64 billion pledged at
Gleneagles, Africa has received only $46 billion. At the
same time, the pledge to increase by $25 billion the
total of official development assistance to Africa has
yet to be honoured. That is one illustration, among
many others, that show that the international
partnerships have been slow in rising to the meet their
stated expectations and goals.
Of course, as I said earlier, the need for
international assistance does not at all relieve every
African State of its primary responsibility to set in
motion its own development. Senegal commends the

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

Secretary-General’s recommendations that African
countries further strengthen mechanisms to ensure the
participation, inclusion and involvement of all strata of
society in policy and development.
The tenth anniversary of NEPAD could represent
a turning point in the actualization of its sectoral
priorities. Resolve and leadership will be necessary to
transform the vision of Africa’s development and
international pledges into real results and political
action. We agree with the Secretary-General that
“the option of ‘business as usual’ should not be
an alternative as it would lead to broken promises
and further delay the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and the
implementation of NEPAD”. (A/66/202, p. 2)
Senegal also welcomes the decision to integrate
NEPAD into the institutional architecture of the
African Union Commission via the creation of the
NEPAD Planning and Coordination Agency in
February 2010. We welcome full discussion of that
measure, which assures the increased consistency and
effectiveness of our institutional mechanisms. Senegal
also welcomes the choice made by NEPAD’s new
leadership, along with the African Union Commission,
to promote the continent’s development through road
and railway infrastructure projects. As the lead
engineer of the project to link Dakar and Djibouti,
Senegal pledges to ensure the completion this
ambitious programme for the economic and political
integration of the continent.
In the context of the African renaissance, the
touchstone of NEPAD, my country appeals to the
international community to support initiatives whose
implementation will have a more than positive impact
on the future of our continent. I refer to the
strengthening of the African Peer Review Mechanism,
an important lever for promoting good governance,
increasing public spending on agriculture to 10 per
cent, in accordance with the Maputo Declaration, and
protecting the environment with the Great Green Wall,
which would cross the Sahel from the Atlantic to
Djibouti. These African initiatives deserve the support
and assistance of the international community.
African development will perforce require
stability and lasting peace. In this connection, we
welcome the return of Côte d’Ivoire to constitutional
order. After a period of great pain, that country is now
demonstrating to the world its ability to overcome the

11-53871

past and its attachment to the cardinal principles of
democracy, justice and peace that were so dear to the
founder of the Ivorian nation, the late President Félix
Houphouët-Boigny. My country believes in the genius
of the Ivorian people and reiterates its unwavering
support for that brotherly country and friend as it
embarks on a sensitive phase of its march towards
stability, peace and progress.
We express the same hope for peace and restored
stability with regard to Somalia, Darfur and
Madagascar, as well as Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. All
those countries need the special attention of the United
Nations if they are to achieve sustainable peace.
Following the events collectively referred to as the
Arab Spring, which brought unexpected shocks to the
stability of that region of Africa, Senegal reiterates its
urgent call for implementation of the reforms that
would place our continent on the pedestal of lasting
peace.
Senegal also wants the United Nations to focus
enhanced and reinvigorated attention on the new State
of South Sudan, whose arrival on the international
scene marked the end of decades of crisis and tension
and was the object of numerous mediation efforts, the
most decisive of which took place in Eldoret in Kenya.
Africa is also facing the challenge of malaria,
which is seriously undermining our efforts towards
economic recovery. This devastating illness continues
to kill thousands of Africans, especially young people,
women and children. We recognize the immense
sacrifices that have led to increased funding for the
Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.
The media continue to portray Africa as the
continent most afflicted by economic, financial,
environmental, energy and food crises. Africa is home
to 32 of the world’s 48 least developed countries. Yet it
is struggling and mobilizing with immeasurable
determination and self-denial to emerge from the
labyrinths of poverty. It faces towering obstacles, both
endogenous and exogenous, and will emerge into
health only in the context of just and equitable
partnership based on truth and sincerity, far from the
lofty promises and commitments that are rarely
honoured.
Mr. Al-Shammari (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation is honoured to participate in today’s
debate on the New Partnership for Africa’s

11

A/66/PV.32

Development (NEPAD). We read very closely the
report of the Secretary-General (A/66/202) on the
progress made in the implementation of and
international support for NEPAD. Kuwait attaches
great importance to our partnership with Africa and its
concerns and interests, given our close and historic ties
with its countries.

“efforts to relieve the external debt burden of
African countries within the framework of the
heavily indebted poor countries… debt initiative,
the multilateral debt relief initiative… and at the
bilateral level, the amount of debt and debt
servicing has been drastically reduced since its
peak in the mid-1990s” (A/66/202, para. 54).

It has been 10 years since the adoption by African
countries of NEPAD, which seeks to achieve equitable
development on a large scale, to reduce poverty and to
enable Africa to become economically integrated into
the world economy. We hope that sustainable
development, which has repeatedly been emphasized in
resolutions adopted at a number of conferences held by
African countries, will allow us to establish a fair
partnership between developed and developing
countries in order to contribute to the stability of
economic relations between those nations. We also
hope that it will lead to a fair and balanced world trade
that will respond to Africa’s special needs.

The total external debt of sub-Saharan countries
used to be 73 per cent of gross national product (GNP).
That rate was reduced to 25 per cent of GNP by 2010,
which has freed up the funds necessary to enable those
countries to spend more on initiatives to reduce
poverty and achieve the Millennium Development
Goals.

At the high-level panel to evaluate progress made
in the implementation of NEPAD, Deputy SecretaryGeneral Asha-Rose Migiro emphasized the slow pace
of progress being made on the African continent
towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. That reality, I believe, should spur
us even further to help Africa overcome the obstacles it
faces in making progress towards development.
The efforts of African countries to emerge from
the vicious cycle of debt and to free up funds for
development are among the major challenges that the
continent is facing. Some highly indebted countries
have benefited from bilateral debt cancellation by
donor countries, while the International Monetary Fund
has launched an initiative for highly indebted poor
countries.
Debt cancellation is a positive step to which
Kuwait contributed even before the establishment of
NEPAD. We call for the alleviation of the debt burden
of highly indebted poor African countries, in line with
the statement made by the late Emir Sheikh Jaber
Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah of Kuwait at the forty-third
session of the General Assembly in 1988, in which
asked countries to cancel the debt weighing heavily on
the economies of developing countries and countries
experiencing significant economic difficulties (see
A/43/PV.8). In this respect, we stress the comment in
the Secretary-General’s report that

12

Kuwait continues to provide development aid to
developing countries, and to African countries in
particular, through its public and private institutions.
This ongoing policy is based on our belief that
supporting the economies of African countries is
important to helping them achieve the MDGs, which
will ultimately benefit everyone and enable us to
improve partnerships and cooperation and to strengthen
the international economic and trading systems.
The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic
Development helps to strengthen a number of African
and international development funds, such as the
African Development Fund, the Arab Bank for
Economic Development in Africa and the Special
Programme for sub-Saharan Africa, as well as a
number of financial institutions that fund African
development. Kuwait has spent approximately
$500 million on such initiatives. We have also helped
to support the provision of basic foodstuffs and of
funds to combat HIV/AIDS.
In conclusion, let me stress that African countries
themselves must strengthen their own efforts in this
international initiative. They must reach out to the
donor countries and more emphatically raise the
awareness of the international community of the need
to create a NEPAD that is integrated into Africa’s
structures and operations, with the help of the public
and private sectors and civil society. A partnership is
not a short-term thing; it is an ongoing process, and we
commend the pioneering role of international
institutions in mobilizing support for this initiative.
African countries have made significant efforts to
convince the international community that their

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

development should be a priority and that peace and
stability are essential to creating that development.
It is high time that the international community
made meaningful progress in honouring its
commitments and began to help African countries to
implement a number of specific NEPAD programmes
and projects, as well as in guaranteeing the climate of
peace that is so essential to development.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the President
for convening this debate on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the Decade to
Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries,
Particularly in Africa.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of NEPAD, and draw closer to the deadlines we have
set ourselves for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), it is essential that we
take stock of these issues. I will briefly address each in
turn.
Australia itself has rapidly expanded its
engagement with the countries and institutions of
Africa in recent years. We needed to, and we have done
so because we recognize Africa’s growing global role
and leadership, and the opportunities and dynamism
that the continent offers. Our relationship with the
African Union and our development cooperation are
important parts of this. We have tripled development
cooperation with Africa since 2007. We expect it to
double again by 2015, in an overall development
assistance budget that will also have doubled by then,
to around $10 billion.
Our development cooperation is focused on
supporting African priorities, including those
expressed, importantly, through NEPAD, in order to
achieve the MDGs. We seek to make a practical
contribution in areas where we have expertise and
experience: agriculture and food security, maternal and
child health, water and sanitation, mining governance
and human resource capacity-building. NEPAD helps
us, as a growing donor, by setting priorities and
helping us coordinate with regional and national
initiatives.
We welcome the integration of NEPAD into the
structures and processes of the African Union.
NEPAD’s
Comprehensive
Africa
Agriculture
Development Programme, as an example, has helped
Australia focus our food security assistance,

11-53871

coordinating with others and avoiding duplication. I
would also like to commend the work of the African
Peer Review Mechanism, a product of NEPAD, which
is providing Member States with frank analysis of their
progress on governance.
We should all recognize NEPAD’s achievements;
we know that. However, we must also note a few
significant challenges as we look forward. These
include the dangerous global economic outlook and the
stalling of the Doha Round of trade negotiations.
Australia will continue to press for an ambitious,
comprehensive outcome of Doha that liberalizes trade,
including, importantly, agricultural trade. Agricultural
trade liberalization, combined with effective aid-fortrade activities in the region, will help Africa trade its
way out of poverty.
NEPAD can continue to play a useful role in
supporting improved intraregional trade, which,
although increasing, remains too low. This could
include supporting regional integration efforts, such as
the rationalization of regional trade agreements.
NEPAD could also play an enhanced role in helping
attract private sector investment in support of muchneeded and essential infrastructure development.
When it comes to Africa’s development, it is
important that donor countries do what they say they
will do, and that they honour their commitments —
that we honour our commitments. This is what
Australia seeks to do. In this spirit, we look forward to
working on the process, to be facilitated by Kenya and
Sweden, for establishing a monitoring mechanism to
follow up on commitments related to Africa’s
development.
I now turn briefly to the issue of malaria. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the World
Health Organization (WHO) for the report on the
Decade to Roll Back Malaria (A/66/169). Australia
acknowledges the impressive global gains made in
malaria control. These include saving the lives of
almost three-quarters of a million children across
34 malaria-endemic African countries, representing
98 per cent of the at-risk population in Africa.
However, much more needs to be done to ensure that
MDG 6 and its targets are achieved by 2015.
As we have heard, malaria continues to have a
serious human and economic impact worldwide, and
the vast majority of cases and deaths still, of course,
occur in Africa. As the representative of Kenya has just

13

A/66/PV.32

noted, more than 170 million Africans are affected
each year. Young children and pregnant women are
particularly afflicted.
Australia’s own commitment to malaria
prevention and control in Africa and other affected
regions is demonstrated by our three-year,
$210-million commitment to the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and our multi-year
commitment through the WHO. We also support
national malaria programmes in our own immediate
region, the Asia-Pacific. Since 2003, for example,
Australia has helped reduce malaria cases by 80 per
cent in Vanuatu and by more than half in the Solomon
Islands. These results show that targeted action by
national Governments and their development partners,
working very closely together, can achieve significant
progress.
But, of course, problems remain in this region.
We are particularly concerned about the threat posed
by the emergence of drug-resistant malaria in the
Mekong region in Asia. The cost in terms of lives and
economic impact could be significant, particularly if
drug-resistant malaria spreads to Africa and the Pacific.
Australia, in partnership with the WHO, the Global
Fund and others, is commissioning research to inform a
multi-donor strategy to address drug-resistant malaria
in the Mekong region. The results, of course, will
apply beyond.
In concluding, I should say that Australia remains
very firmly committed to achieving the targets for
MDG 6 by 2015, and, ultimately, to contributing to
saving the lives of millions by bringing an end to the
malaria epidemic worldwide. To do that, we must
accelerate global efforts, including through effective
partnerships, innovative research and increased
financial investment. We are committed to doing so but
it is, of course, a collective responsibility.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
the blueprint for development designed by African
countries themselves and the programme for economic
and social development established by the African
Union, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) embodies the strong desire of African
countries to make joint efforts for common
development. With the support of the international
community, in recent years NEPAD has gained more
substance, improved its mechanisms and set priority
areas, such as agriculture and infrastructure, thus

14

playing a positive role in promoting the development
and revitalization of Africa.
However, owing to factors such as the volatility
of the international financial market, the political
instability of some areas, frequent natural disasters,
rising food prices and the energy shortage, Africa still
lags behind other regions of the world in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). On the
occasion of NEPAD’s tenth anniversary, the
international community should use that opportunity to
take stock and to sum up experience. On that basis, it
should increase support to Africa to help it make
greater strides in implementation so as to promote the
stability and prosperity of the continent.
First, aid commitments should be effectively
honoured. Although the total volume of official
development assistance has shown some increase in
recent years, it still falls far short of the committed
goals and Africa’s actual needs. The 2010 High-level
Meeting on the MDGs called on the international
community to implement its aid commitments to Africa
(see resolution 65/1). The Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries adopted
the Istanbul Programme of Action, giving new impetus
to efforts for the accelerated attainment of the MDGs
in Africa.
The international community, in particular
developed countries, should effectively honour the
commitments made, increase assistance and support to
Africa, work to help Africa build capacity for selfdevelopment, and make active efforts to create
favourable international economic, trade and financial
conditions for Africa.
Secondly, the ownership of African countries
should be respected. In providing help to African
countries, the international community should have
faith in the wisdom of the Government and people of
African countries; respect the ownership and leadership
of the recipient countries; respect the development path
chosen by African countries themselves based on their
national conditions; support them in addressing African
affairs by themselves; help Africa maintain and
consolidate peace and stability; and provide safeguards
for its development.
Thirdly, active efforts are needed to tackle the
challenge of climate change. Confronted with the
multiple challenges posed by climate change, such as
frequent floods and droughts, desertification, poor

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

harvests and the degradation of the ecological
environment, African countries urgently need to
enhance their capacity for adaptation. The international
community should understand and support the
legitimate concerns and claims of African countries,
help them cope with climate change as an integral part
of the effort to enhance their capacity for sustainable
development, and promote the full and balanced
development of Africa in a comprehensive and
integrated way.
Fourthly, South-South cooperation should be
strengthened. Recent years have seen vibrant trade and
investment activities among countries of the South and
the establishment of new mechanisms and initiatives
among developing countries. That has injected new
vitality into South-South cooperation and vigorously
promoted the economic and social development of
Africa. That kind of cooperation should be further
strengthened.
At the same time, I wish to emphasize that SouthSouth cooperation is a form of mutually beneficial
cooperation among developing countries. It is different
from North-South cooperation and can only be a
supplement to, and not a substitute, for the latter.
Fifthly, efforts should be made to achieve durable
peace. Recently, Africa has made good progress in
conflict prevention, management and settlement and in
post-conflict reconstruction. The United Nations
system, Member States and regional and subregional
organizations should work in coordination and
cooperation, focus on the elimination of the causes of
conflict in Africa, and strengthen efforts in conflict
prevention and peace consolidation.
The
United
Nations
should
strengthen
cooperation with the African Union in peace, security,
political and humanitarian areas, and support it and
other regional organizations in enhancing their
peacekeeping
capability.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission should reinforce its partnership with the
countries concerned, respect national ownership and
address their special needs in terms of reconstruction
and social integration in a coordinated way, thus laying
a solid foundation for durable peace and sustainable
development.
China is the largest developing country in the
world. Its development remains an arduous and longterm task. In that context, China provides assistance to
Africa within the framework of South-South

11-53871

cooperation as part of mutual assistance between
developing countries. China’s assistance to Africa dates
back to 1956. The Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, established in 2000, is an important
contemporary platform for dialogue between China and
African countries and an effective mechanism for
pragmatic cooperation. As of the end of 2009, there
were 51 African countries that had received assistance
from China on a regular basis.
In providing assistance to Africa, we have
adhered to the principles of equality and mutual
benefit, stressing practical results and keeping pace
with the times, without attaching any political
conditions, with a view to helping African countries
build up capacity for self-development. We have thus
created a unique form of South-South cooperation.
China has always attached importance to and
supported NEPAD. The priority areas of China-Africa
cooperation are largely consistent with NEPAD’s
priority
areas
of
agriculture,
infrastructure,
construction and human resources development. ChinaAfrica cooperation has made and will continue to make
positive contributions to the implementation of
NEPAD.
As an active response to the call to roll back
malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
China undertook effective cooperation with African
countries in combating malaria. Over the past three
years, China has built 30 malaria prevention and
treatment centres in African countries and provided
artemisinin anti-malaria medicines worth ¥190 million,
or about $30 million, contributing in no small measure
to the implementation of the Global Malaria Action
Plan.
There is a saying in Chinese that just as distance
will test a horse’s strength, so will time reveal a
person’s heart. Going forward, whatever the future
vicissitudes in the world situation may be, the
friendship of the Chinese people for the African people
will remain the same, and our determination to deepen
mutually beneficial cooperation with Africa and
achieve common development will endure. China will
as always support the implementation of NEPAD to
help Africa realize its tremendous potential and enable
the African people to truly benefit from global
economic and social development.
Mrs. Jusu (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone fully
associates itself with the statements made by the

15

A/66/PV.32

representatives of Kenya and Argentina on behalf of
the African Group and the Group of 77 and China,
respectively. We join other delegations in thanking the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and forwardlooking reports. My delegation further expresses its
appreciation to the Special Adviser on Africa, UnderSecretary-General Cheick Sidi Diarra, and his
dedicated team for their advisory and advocacy work in
promoting Africa’s development agenda.
We are reviewing reports on the progress of
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (A/66/202), the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/66/214) and Decade to Roll
Back Malaria (A/66/169), at a very crucial and
challenging moment in global peace and security as
well as the global economic architecture.
The tenth anniversary of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) provides an
opportunity for deeper reflection on the success and
challenges in actualizing Africa’s transformation
agenda and how to leverage the various opportunities
to advance sustainable development in Africa. Clearly,
the entire global community is grappling with the
deepening effect of an unprecedented economic and
financial crisis, which undoubtedly is having a much
graver impact on the developing world. In particular,
the least developed countries, most of which are in
Africa, remain challenged by the task of attaining
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), by the
target date of 2015.
Despite the gloom, there are visible prospects on
the horizon. With the support of the international
community, significant progress has been made in
fostering the objectives of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development. With accelerated growth over
the past decade, improvement in governance, the
spectre of conflict receding and improvement in
leadership, it is clear that Africa is at a critical turning
point. Steady progress has also been recorded in
malaria control and prevention mechanisms, with many
households sleeping under insecticide-treated bed nets.
As a further commitment, some African Heads of
State, including the President of Sierra Leone, have
committed to achieving the Secretary-General’s goal of

16

ensuring universal access to malaria control
interventions and launched the African Leaders Malaria
Alliance with the goal of ending preventable malaria
deaths by 2015.
The integration of NEPAD into the African Union
is a milestone in advancing the socio-economic
transformation agenda of the continent. It provides a
window for strategic partnership to explore areas of
cooperation to address such global challenges as the
debt issue, climate change, trade and regional
integration and sustainable development. We are
encouraged by the ongoing implementation of NEPAD
projects ranging from the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme, infrastructure,
the environment, gender mainstreaming, education and
training
in
information
and
communication
technologies.
At the level of governance, advances in the
implementation of the African Peer Review Mechanism
have demonstrated the continent’s resolve and
commitment
in
promoting
democracy,
good
governance, peace and stability in the continent.
Worthy of note and commendation is its system of
early warning of impending threats to peace and
stability in Africa.
In order to build on these gains and further
strengthen our development strides, it is in the best
interest of the African countries to increase domestic
savings and lessen dependence on foreign aid. In that
regard, foreign direct investment aimed at creating
public-private partnerships and a vibrant private sector
remains a viable option in addressing unemployment
and underemployment, as well as in promoting
socio-economic development. Among the key strategic
issues, it is important to support continental resource
mobilization and public-private partnerships to finance
the implementation of NEPAD.
African Governments and national and regional
institutions, including the regional economic
communities, need strengthened development roles to
support the promotion of intra-Africa trade and other
key objectives. In that regard, my delegation calls upon
the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency to
focus the next decade on implementation aimed at
improving Africa’s global standing and on improving
the linkages with the continent’s regional economic
communities. The decision taken at the fourteenth
African Union Assembly in February 2010 to integrate

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

NEPAD into the structures and processes of the African
Union added further impetus to the role of NEPAD as
the continent’s flagship development programme.
The establishment of the NEPAD Planning and
Coordinating Agency as both a technical body of the
African Union to replace the NEPAD secretariat and as
the main institutional vehicle to deliver NEPAD’s
vision and agenda was also a significant milestone.
On our part as a country, despite the present food
and economic crises, Sierra Leone has made
tremendous progress in implementing its agenda for
change which is aligned with the Joint Vision of the
United Nations Family for Sierra Leone. That
development and the peacebuilding framework have set
clear priorities targeting the drivers of growth and
necessary conditions for human development in key
areas such as energy, agriculture, infrastructure, health,
youth unemployment and education. The strategies for
delivering those priorities include, among other things,
improving public service capacities and enhancing
public and private sector partnerships and our domestic
financial system. In that regard, we are intensifying our
cooperation in the context of triangular and SouthSouth cooperation.
There is an increasing awareness that the
responsibility for peace and security in Africa,
including the capacity to address the root causes of
conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner,
lies primarily with African countries themselves. The
African Union and the subregional organizations have
undertaken to strengthen their capacity in conflict
prevention and resolution. They are also taking the lead
in peacekeeping operations on the continent.
The peaceful independence referendum in
Southern Sudan, the adoption of a new Constitution in
Kenya, the transition of Guinea and Niger from
military to civilian rule, resolving the post-elections
crisis in Ivory Coast, responding to the humanitarian
situation caused by drought in the Horn of Africa,
actively seeking a peaceful resolution to the uprisings
in some parts of North Africa, and the peacekeeping
efforts in Darfur and Somalia are clear indications of
the continent’s preparedness to rise to the occasion,
with the much-needed support of the international
community and the United Nations.
While these efforts are ongoing, we are also
witnessing a new wave of challenges involving violent
protests and uprisings, transnational organized crime

11-53871

and narcotic drug trafficking, piracy and issues of
governance, human rights and corruption. Furthermore,
while the reduction of extreme poverty and hunger
remains the main development challenge, most African
countries are also grappling with the problems of the
youth bulge and unemployment, climate change and
inadequate productive capacity.
Those challenges frustrate efforts by African
countries to achieve the MDGs. Coordinated
partnerships must therefore be forged to strengthen
capacities to respond to crises and security threats
associated with the above challenges, particularly in
conflict and post-conflict countries, for such
partnerships remain vital in ensuring durable peace.
In this connection my delegation commends the
comprehensive review, requested in 2010, of the
implementation of the 1998 recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, in the light of new and
emerging issues affecting human security in Africa. My
delegation
notes
the
policy
proposals
and
recommendations in that report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/66/214).
The Doha Round remains stalled. Various
international commitments, including those made at
Monterrey and Gleneagles, are yet to be fulfilled.
Slower progress is recorded in addressing poverty
reduction, unemployment, environmental sustainability
and most health-related goals. Moreover, factors such
as the additional burden imposed by the adverse impact
of the global financial, food and energy crises, climate
change and weak employment growth on the continent
have constrained achievement of the MDGs.
We therefore call upon our partners to intensify
their efforts. First, distorting trade barriers must be
eliminated by promoting and facilitating market access
to developing countries, especially the least developed
countries. Secondly, we ask them to deliver on their
commitment to achieve the official development
assistance target of between 0.15 and 0.7 per cent for
the developing and least developed countries,
respectively. Thirdly, the unsustainable debt burden of
heavily indebted poor countries must be addressed.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Sierra
Leone’s commitment to furthering the objectives of
NEPAD: the promotion of good governance,
sustainable peace and development on the continent.

17

A/66/PV.32

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his reports on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) (A/66/202), on the
implementation of the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (A/66/214), and on the Decade
to Roll Back Malaria in Developing Countries,
Particularly in Africa (A/66/169).
I wish to align myself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the
African Group.
The adoption of NEPAD, 10 years ago, embodied
Africa’s common resolve to address the dual scourges
of poverty and marginalization that have characterized
our continent for decades, and to do so through an
African-owned common vision and action plan that
was rightly based on our needs and priorities. That
vision was based on accountability and regional
complementarity.
As a founding member of the NEPAD initiative,
Egypt is proud of the major strides the African
countries have made over the past decade in the main
thematic areas of the NEPAD agenda, particularly in
agriculture and food security, regional integration,
infrastructure, human development, information and
communication technology, the empowerment of
women and capacity-building.
By the same token, the establishment and
operationalization of the African Peer Review
Mechanism — which includes 30 countries and
represents more than 75 per cent of the total African
population — is another manifestation of Africa’s
commitment to promote good governance and respect
for human rights and democratic values, which go hand
in hand with other achievements in the developmental
fields.
Our commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
NEPAD provides an important opportunity to reflect
not only on the achievements of NEPAD but also on
the challenges facing us and how to address them. In
this regard, Egypt believes that in order to consolidate
the progress made towards achieving NEPAD’s main
objectives — reducing poverty, putting Africa on a
sustainable development path, increasing Africa’s
integration into the world economy and empowering

18

women — African Governments and their development
partners must step up their efforts in a way that leads to
stronger partnerships and continued economic growth
in the interest of all sectors of society.
Achieving NEPAD objectives undoubtedly
requires fairer trade terms for Africa, alleviating the
debt burden, increasing foreign direct investment
inflows to Africa and addressing the marginalization of
the continent in international economic decisionmaking processes. Africa’s development partners must
also fully meet the official development assistance and
other aid commitments they have made in various
forums, including the Group of Eight Gleneagles
Summit, the General Assembly in the political
declaration on Africa’s development needs (resolution
63/1), the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Millennium Development Goals, and the Fourth
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries — the majority of which are African
countries.
In this context, we look forward to the
consultations on the establishment of a review
mechanism to follow up on all commitments related to
the development of Africa in order to make such a
mechanism operational by the end of the Assembly’s
sixty-sixth session, as agreed in resolution 65/284.
In the same vein, Egypt attaches great importance
to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development and stresses that its outcome should fully
take into consideration the enormous developmental
challenges faced by Africa.
Over the past months, Africa has experienced
profound changes that we believe are evidence that we
are on the right path towards freedom, democracy and
social justice. The democratic change in Côte d’Ivoire,
the changes moving towards freedom and respect for
human rights in North Africa, the transition in Guinea
and Niger, and most recently the peaceful transfer of
power in Zambia are manifestations of our continent’s
commitment to fulfil its obligations regardless of the
many challenges it faces.
However, if our continent is to continue on this
path with resolve and persistence, more concerted
national, regional and global efforts must be directed
towards addressing the multiple and interlinked
challenges that still exist in Africa. These include
intra-State conflicts, social exclusion, unconstitutional
changes of Governments, election-related violence,

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

illegal exploitation of natural resources, terrorism,
piracy, food security, climate change, and illicit
trafficking in small arms, light weapons and drugs.

be achieved by 2015, especially Millennium
Development Goal 6 and especially in Africa, where
the risk of infection is the highest in the world.

As
the
interlinkage
between
security,
development and respect for human rights has become
the fundamental basis for the work of the United
Nations, Egypt concurs with the Secretary-General that
there is a need to refocus existing development
strategies in order to establish stronger institutional
frameworks that can better tackle the interconnected
challenges of peace and development. In particular,
more attention must be given to the problems faced by
the youth, who are the leading force of social
dynamism and development in our continent. Egypt
underlines the need for all stakeholders to adopt a
comprehensive approach that focuses all their existing
tools in the areas of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding on addressing the
causes of conflicts, including the socio-economic
engines of those conflicts.

The eradication of malaria requires a
comprehensive approach in which the implementation
of national prevention and treatment programmes is
complemented
with
successful,
sustainable
development efforts. This is particularly true with
regard to revamping the infrastructure of the economic,
educational and health sectors of African countries.
This would lead to early detection of and treatment for
diseases. We must spread awareness and prepare
trained personnel, and that cannot be financed by the
African countries alone.

In this context, Egypt commends the increasing
partnership between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations, which has proven to be of significant
importance in addressing many challenges to peace and
security in Africa, particularly in Somalia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Guinea and Niger. Egypt believes that the
establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union will positively impact AU-United
Nations cooperation in all areas of peace, security and
development.
The international community took considerable
steps during the Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa, that
resulted in the successful elimination of the disease in
nearly half of malaria-infected countries. In addition,
tangible reductions in the infection rate were achieved
in a number of other countries as a result of the
programmes implemented in cooperation with the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations, civil
society organizations and the private sector. As a result
of the increase in available funding for such
programmes in Africa, access to prevention and
treatment was improved for nearly two thirds of
Africans.
However, the continuing proliferation of the
disease in many countries reaffirms the need to
continue support and to ensure the sustainability of
funding so that the Millennium Development Goals can

11-53871

Egypt reaffirms the vital role played by regional
organizations and initiatives in this connection and the
need for access to the required assistance. In particular,
the African Leaders Malaria Alliance initiative has
helped sustain the national efforts of African
Governments, particularly as regards mobilizing
international support for the implementation of
prevention and treatment programmes and promoting
preventive measures to combat the spread of malaria.
The success of efforts to combat malaria is
directly linked to the need to resolve the trade-related
problems connected to the intellectual property rights
of existing malaria detection means and medications.
The international community has a responsibility to
ensure the effectiveness of the efforts to eliminate
malaria and thwart the risk of its continued
proliferation in order to realize Millennium
Development Goal 6 by 2015.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): This year, we
celebrate the tenth anniversary of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), which is the
blueprint for the socio-economic development of
Africa’s 1 billion people and a vision for Africa’s
renewal, with the primary objective of eradicating
poverty and achieving sustainable growth and
development.
When taking stock of the level and rate of success
of cooperation within NEPAD, there is no doubt that it
has made an important contribution to accelerating the
pace of development in African countries. However,
the success of NEPAD is threatened by the ongoing
financial and economic crisis, the energy crisis, the
food security crisis and the challenges of climate
change.

19

A/66/PV.32

Africa currently faces a humanitarian emergency
in the Horn of Africa, which because of drought is
experiencing the most severe food crisis in the world
today. Most African countries remain off track in terms
of achieving Millennium Development Goal 1, on the
eradication of extreme poverty and hunger, due to the
food security crisis.
In Africa, agriculture is the primary source of
food. The African leaders have established the NEPAD
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme (CAADP), which is a framework for
agricultural development. The African leaders have
committed to raising the share of their national budget
allocated to agriculture to 10 per cent and, through
CAADP, have called for annual agricultural growth
rates of 6 per cent.
The international community needs, therefore, to
support these efforts by the African leaders by
delivering on their commitments, under the 2009
L’Aquila Joint Statement on Global Food Security, to
mobilize $20 billion over three years for agricultural
development, and those made at the 2009 World
Summit on Food Security to increase aid substantially
so that Africa can attain the objectives contained in the
CAADP.
Africa has increasingly emphasized the
importance of infrastructure for both economic growth
and social development. In this context, the African
Governments have made commitments in energy,
transport, water and information and communications
technology under the Programme for Infrastructure
Development in Africa to strengthen national planning
frameworks and reform the regulatory environment to
improve the efficiency of existing infrastructure.
His Excellency the President of the Republic
South Africa, Jacob Zuma, has been elected to lead this
infrastructure development programme. South Africa is
doing its best for the African continent to achieve
improved access to integrated regional and continental
infrastructure networks and services. South Africa calls
for more investment in agriculture and infrastructure
on the continent.
We also call for strengthening the role of the
United Nations system in supporting NEPAD
cooperation. It is vital, as we do so, that the
international community come on board so as to
enhance the NEPAD vision for Africa’s development.

20

The world has made remarkable progress in the
fight against malaria. Statistics indicate that globally,
malaria deaths have dropped greatly. However, much
more still needs to be done, especially on our
continent, Africa, where malaria is affecting many
young children and pregnant women. Over 90 per cent
of deaths occur in Africa. Moreover, the economic
impact on the continent is huge, as an estimated
$12 billion in productivity is lost annually.
We commend the work done by the Roll Back
Malaria Partnership to coordinate global action against
malaria. A number of new agencies end initiatives have
contributed immensely to the fight against malaria,
including the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria, the United States President’s Malaria
Initiative, the World Bank Booster Programme for
Malaria in Africa, the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, the International Drug Purchase Facility,
the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the Office of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Malaria. We
need to develop more such alliances to conquer the
scourge of malaria. We should further strengthen
private and public sector partnerships and not leave
civil society behind in our endeavours.
Some of the most important partnerships are
those between neighbouring countries. In the Southern
African region, there are a few cross-border initiatives
that have been very successful. In the Lubombo
Initiative, a cross-border partnership between
Mozambique, Swaziland and South Africa, malaria
incidence rates have dropped by 85 to 90 per cent, with
the number of deaths reduced by 90 per cent.
In the MOZIZA Project, a partnership between
Mozambique, Zimbabwe and South Africa, a
significant reduction in malaria cases has been realized
for the period 2000-2010 by using indoor residual
spraying with DDT as the main strategy. So far, DDT
has been found to be the most effective agent in the
control of the malaria vector. Countries in the Southern
African region that adopted the use of DDT in indoor
residual spraying have significantly reduced the
number of malaria cases by up to 80 per cent; four of
them have reached the pre-elimination stage. Vector
control is vital for the African region to deal effectively
with malaria.
Other strategies that can help advance the success
of malaria control include investment in new
technologies, such as rapid diagnostic kits, long-lasting

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

insecticide-treated nets, and effective anti-malaria
drugs such as vaccines, all made available at affordable
cost. Some countries have done well by taking
additional measures, such as waiving taxes and tariffs
for the products needed for malaria control.

determine their future independently and assume basic
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security, economic governance, the sustainable use of
natural resources, the fight against corruption and the
effective use of development assistance.

Working together, we can achieve our goal of
eliminating malaria by 2015, so that all our people can
enjoy the high standard of physical and mental health
that they deserve. We can do this successfully through
increased access to prevention, diagnosis and
treatment.

Russia regards NEPAD as an essential benchmark
and instrument for ensuring the sustainable
development of Africa and actively participates in
coordinated efforts to provide comprehensive
assistance both bilaterally and within the framework of
existing international mechanisms, including the Group
of Eight Africa Action Plan.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia has consistently called for greater
involvement by the United Nations in addressing the
challenges facing Africa. We firmly believe that
without the active, full-fledged engagement of African
countries in international affairs it will be impossible
to launch fruitful cooperation on a global scale and to
establish an integral and stable global security system
based on the supremacy of international law.
In order to make this a reality, we need first to
overcome the most acute problems that prevent the
normal economic and social development of the
African continent, namely, poverty, famine and disease.
We call for a comprehensive and integrated approach
to a solution, and for an effective global partnership to
achieve these goals based on a combination of
international support with efficient measures by
Africans themselves.
In recent years, African countries have started to
take a more active part in global political, economic
and humanitarian processes. They play a notable role
in the United Nations and other multilateral forums,
making significant contributions to the development of
coordinated approaches to resolving key contemporary
problems. Africa has confidently embarked on a path
towards broad-based transformation and modernization.
Much has been done to speed up growth rates and
strengthen political, economic and cultural unity. We
call for more active and coordinated efforts on the part
of Governments, international financial institutions, the
business
community
and
non-governmental
organizations to ensure the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals on schedule.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), an
initiative of the African Union that represents the
aspirations of the countries of that continent to

11-53871

One of the major areas of Russia’s assistance to
Africa is the alleviation of the debt burden of countries
of that region. As of late 2010, Russia has written off
African debt in the amount of $20 billion. We are
presently holding consultations with a number of
African countries on signing inter-Governmental
agreements to use that forgiven debt to finance
development projects. The estimated total remaining
debt to be cancelled is over $500 million. By the end of
2011, Russia will contribute $50 million to the World
Bank Trust Fund to support vulnerable countries, first
and foremost in sub-Saharan Africa.
Russian humanitarian aid to the countries of the
region totalled $6 million in 2010. African countries
enjoy broad trade preferences. Traditional export
products of the least developed countries, most of
which are in Africa, have been exempted from import
customs duties in Russia.
We also provide substantial assistance to African
countries in the form of professional training.
Currently, more than 4,500 Africans are studying in
Russian universities. Approximately 50 per cent of
them are on federal budget scholarships. In the
2010-2011 academic year, the quota of Government
scholarships for Africa was increased. From 2008 to
2012, we will have allocated $42.9 million to the
World Bank programme to improve the quality of basic
education in developing countries, including in Africa.
Substantial assistance is provided to African
countries in the area of public health. The total amount
of our voluntary contributions to the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria reached
$40 million. By the end of 2011, we will have
contributed $20 million towards the implementation of
the World Bank programme to combat malaria, and an
additional $18 million to the World Health

21

A/66/PV.32

Organization for the elimination of polio in Africa. In
2010-2011, Russia continues to participate in
supporting the budget of the Secretariat of the Africa
Partnership Forum in the amount of $200,000 annually.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia makes a significant contribution to the
elaboration of strategic policy and practical measures
for the international community to strengthen peace
and security in the region. We participate in many
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. We
have significantly expanded our training programmes
for African peacekeepers and law enforcement officers.
We believe that a key factor in ensuring a prosperous
future for the African continent is the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict. We note with satisfaction
the active work of the African Union to create an
African standby force and an early warning system for
conflicts. We welcome the open dialogue between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union on the
resolution of acute crisis situations.
Those positive developments clearly require
additional support. A more durable peace on the
continent requires active involvement on the part of
Africans. Measures need to be taken to combat illicit
armed factions, to strengthen good neighbourly
relations and to expand cooperation in order to ensure
border security. Borders should be strengthened to
prevent the spillover of conflicts and the infiltration of
weapons and mercenaries, as well as to suppress mass
violations of international human rights law and
impunity for crimes against humanity.
Russia provides consistent political support to the
relevant efforts by the African community and is
prepared to further assist in strengthening Africa’s
crisis prevention capacity. We are certain that all
impediments to the transformation of Africa into a
continent of security and stability and sustainable
development can be overcome on the solid basis of
international law, African unity and the solidarity of
the friends of Africa with African nations. Naturally,
Russia considers itself a friend of Africa.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): The great Rabbi Hillel once
declared, “If I am only for myself, what am I? And if
not now, when?” As we take up this important debate, I
am reminded of his famous words. At this critical
moment, the international community must move
forward with the urgency of Rabbi Hillel’s call,

22

actively partnering with the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) to build a brighter
future for the African continent.
Today Africa stands at a turning point. Significant
progress has been made in the continent’s
development. However, while we see the promise of
great opportunities on the horizon, the challenges of
the present endure. We continue to witness drought and
famine, hunger and poverty, conflict and instability. All
of these remain significant obstacles to unlocking the
vast potential of Africa and its people.
My country has been deeply engaged in African
development for more than five decades. In 1958,
Golda Meir, then serving as Israel’s Foreign Minister,
undertook a historic visit to the newly independent
States of Africa. She saw first-hand that many of those
countries faced development challenges similar to
Israel’s, such as a difficult climate and poor farming
conditions.
Golda Meir resolved to share Israel’s growing
expertise, driven by her Zionist values and the spirit of
what we call tikkun olam, the Jewish principle that
calls on us to “mend the world” and make it a better
place. At that time, Israel was in its infancy. We were a
developing nation facing a range of overwhelming
challenges. Yet she saw assistance to the newly
independent nations of Africa as an imperative. She
said that like them, we had shaken off foreign rule; like
them, we had to learn for ourselves how to reclaim the
land, how to increase the yields of our crops, how to
irrigate, how to live together, and how to defend
ourselves.
Thousands of Israeli experts of every sort —
scientists, doctors, engineers, teachers and irrigation
experts — set out for the continent. Among them were
my parents, who brought me with them. As a young
child in what was then Tanganyika, I remember vividly
how Israelis worked hand in hand with their African
counterparts to share our knowledge. They worked
together on the ground, out in the fields of farms, in the
halls of schools, and in the corridors of hospitals. The
connections that were forged in those days have
blossomed into an extensive programme of cooperation
overseen by MASHAV, Israel’s agency for
international cooperation.
That programme has expanded as Israel has
advanced on its own journey from a developing nation
to a member of the Organization for Economic

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

Cooperation and Development. In Israel, we have
transitioned from growing oranges to producing
Orange mobile phones, and from cultivating apples to
designing Apple computers.
Allow me to highlight a few examples of Israel’s
development cooperation in Africa today.
In Ghana, Israel administers a network of
community-based prenatal and healthy-baby clinics,
known as tipat chalav, which is Hebrew for “a drop of
milk”. Initially developed for mothers and children in
Israel, these clinics have proved highly effective in
reducing child mortality and improving maternal health
in Ghana.
Israel has focused extensively on education in
Africa. In 2010 alone, MASHAV trained more 1,200
people from more than 35 African countries, both in
Israel and in their own countries. We are also providing
support for United Nations educational programmes
such as UNESCO’s teacher-training initiative for
sub-Saharan Africa.
Israel continues to provide immediate relief to
African nations following major crises, such as the
acute humanitarian situation now facing the Horn of
Africa. In response to the crisis, Israel contributed to
the World Food Programme, supporting the delivery of
food packages to Somali refugees in Kenya. We have
also donated funds to the Ethiopian Government,
which have been used to purchase locally produced
food aid for Somali refugees there. To address the
long-term challenges posed by the drought, MASHAV
continues to expand its programmes that have a
specific focus on agriculture and food production. For
example, today Israel is partnering with Ghana and
Germany to improve the efficiency of smallholder
Ghanaian citrus farmers. That project combines
agricultural assistance, capacity-building and elements
of microfinance and microcredit.
Another highly successful Israeli project is the
Techno-agricultural Innovation for Poverty Alleviation
programme (TIPA). It has been implemented in a
number of African countries, including as part of a
triangular partnership with Italy in Senegal. TIPA relies
on relatively simple, low-cost drip irrigation
techniques that allow farmers to produce crops yearround and improve the quality of their fruits and
vegetables.

11-53871

The results of the project speak for themselves.
Farmers have moved from poverty to self-sufficiency.
Hunger has been drastically reduced in many
communities. Rural women have found new
opportunities for empowerment. Projects such as TIPA
highlight the importance of sharing agricultural
technology to promote sustainable development. To
bring focus to this effort, Israel will be submitting its
biennial draft resolution on agricultural technology for
development to the Second Committee this year.
NEPAD has served as an invaluable framework
for advancing major goals on the African continent,
spurring important progress. While African nations
have primary responsibility for their social and
economic development, the international community
must support and facilitate those efforts, driven by our
common destiny and common humanity.
As we take in the encouraging progress that has
been made and resolve to meet the challenges ahead,
let us be big in our dreams and bold in our actions.
Golda Meir’s clear vision of the fundamental
connection between the people of Israel and the people
of Africa endures. In the same spirit as the early
Zionist pioneers who left their newly reborn nation to
help plant the seeds of new nations in Africa, Israelis
continue to stand with our brothers and sisters on the
continent as they seize the promise of new
opportunities.
In Hebrew we say hineni, meaning “Here I am”.
On Africa’s journey towards growth and prosperity,
Israel is here — as a supporter, as a partner and as a
friend.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election to the
presidency of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session. We firmly believe that thanks to his wisdom
and skills, we will achieve the objectives we have set
for this session.
Development efforts in Africa since the launching
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) have not lived up to our expectations. We
have reached the midway point in the implementation
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), slated
for achievement by 2015; however, Africa remains the
only continent that continues to face major obstacles in
eliminating poverty and want — hence the need to
redouble our efforts in the area of international

23

A/66/PV.32

cooperation to implement NEPAD projects and to
honour the commitments made. That needs to be done
as swiftly as possible in order to permit the African
continent to achieve its sustainable development goals.
The response to Africa’s development needs, the
evaluation of the implementation of commitments, and
addressing existing challenges are all positive steps
towards strengthening NEPAD. The report of the
Secretary-General on progress in the implementation of
and international support for NEPAD (A/66/202)
underscores the commitment of Heads of State and
Government and the United Nations to focus on the
needs of Africa, as set forth in the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2) and reflected in the
Monterrey Consensus and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation.
Above and beyond the harnessing of financial,
human and technical resources for the elimination of
poverty, hunger and underdevelopment, we need to
translate our commitments into concrete action. In this
connection, we call on the international community to
honour its commitments to eradicating poverty and
strengthening sustainable development in the context
of a new, fair and comprehensive world economic
order that takes into account the needs of developing
countries, especially in Africa, and enables them to
gain access to international markets.
The role of regional organizations in peacebuilding in
Africa is crucial to the cause of building lasting peace,
particularly in post-conflict countries. In this connection,
we call for the full implementation of the 10-year capacitybuilding programme for the African Union, which is
designed, inter alia, to enhance Africa’s peacekeeping
capacities. We also call for the consolidation of related
mechanisms in the context of NEPAD.
Peace is a prerequisite for economic and social
development. The Sudan has extensive experience in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. Resourcesharing arrangements are essential components of the
comprehensive peace agreements in South Sudan, East
Sudan and Darfur.
Paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General’s report on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(A/66/214) refers to the situation in Abyei. Let me say
that, since the entry of the Sudanese Armed Forces into
Abyei, security and stability have been restored and
there have been no incidents of destabilization there.

24

The Government of the Sudan is committed to
implementing Security Council resolution 1990 (2011)
on the deployment of forces in Abyei and is
cooperating with all parties to facilitate the deployment
of Ethiopian peacekeepers in the region. In this way,
the situation in Abyei can be kept under control until a
definitive peaceful settlement is reached that enables
all inhabitants of the region, regardless of their ethnic
origin, to engage in economic activities.
The report also mentions that military attacks in
Southern Kordofan have led to large population
displacements from that region. My delegation notes
that the attacks were the result of clashes between
northern and southern rebel movements that were
triggered when the leader of the southern forces lost
the gubernatorial election in Southern Kordofan. The
rebels took up arms against the population, which
indeed resulted in large displacements. The Sudanese
Armed Forces then intervened in accordance with our
Constitution and national duty, with a view to restoring
peace in the south. In the wake of these events, the
displaced persons have returned to their homes and
resumed their agricultural activities for the
development of the region.
We call on the United Nations to persuade the
rebels to honour their commitments under the
Comprehensive
Peace
Agreement,
return
to
negotiations, demobilize and lay down their arms in
order to reach a peaceful settlement, which is a
prerequisite for countries in conflict to achieve
sustainable development within the framework of
NEPAD. In this context, we reiterate our unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of all conflicts
through negotiation.
Turning now to agenda item 13, “Decade to Roll
Back Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa”, as the Assembly knows, malaria affects a very
large number of people; more than 3.3 billion — half
the world’s population — have been exposed to this
serious disease. The Sudan is also affected by malaria,
registering more than 7 million cases a year. According
to scientific studies, the negative impact of climate
change has increased the prevalence of the disease. The
increase in temperatures is leading to a longer life
cycle for the mosquitoes that carry the parasite. The
economic and social impact of malaria has been great
in my country. Consequently, we have developed a
national anti-malaria strategy and established a special

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

unit to control the spread and monitor the progress of
the disease.
Let me conclude by saying that the economic
slowdown worldwide, the increase in food prices, and
climate change are all factors that have led to slower
progress in the implementation of NEPAD and in
fighting malaria, and are hampering the attainment of
the MDGs by 2015. Our development partners must
therefore step up their efforts to honour their
commitments with a view to resolving the debt morass
in which many African countries are mired. Many
African countries, especially post-conflict countries,
continue to suffer from high indebtedness and are
consequently
experiencing
slower
sustainable
development.
Mr. Husain (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
once again welcomes the opportunity to participate in
this debate. The African continent has enormous
potential, and we note with satisfaction its recent
remarkable economic growth, higher than that of many
other regions of the world. The significant progress
Africa has made, especially in strengthening
democracy and promoting peace and security, is a sign
of a promising future. Canada is also encouraged by
the maturation of African institutions, which promotes
regional integration and security.
However, Canada also recognizes that African
countries continue to face major challenges. Much
remains to be done to work with African countries in
order to address those challenges and assist them in
meeting their development objectives.
Canada is doing its part to help Africa achieve the
Millennium Development Goals. Almost half of
Canada’s bilateral development assistance has gone to
Africa in recent years, and Canada has met its Group of
Eight (G-8) commitment to double aid to Africa from
the 2003-2004 levels to $2.1 billion. Furthermore,
Canada has reached its commitment to double
international assistance by the years 2010 to 2011 from
the 2001-2002 levels, bringing Canada’s total
international assistance to approximately $5 billion. As
part of the joint G-8 pledge on food security, Canada
will more than double its investment in food security
and sustainable agricultural development by providing
$600 million in increased funding over three years,
reaching $1.18 billion in overall funding. Canada has
untied all its food aid.

11-53871

As President of the G-8 in 2010, Canada ensured
that African issues were a key part of the agenda.
Consultations with African countries in the lead up to
the G-8 Summit helped to shape the Muskoka Initiative
on maternal, newborn and child health, which will
generate funds reaching more than $7 billion, with
most of Canada’s contribution to the Initiative being
allocated to Africa.
In addition, private-sector investment, which
plays a crucial role in Africa’s development, has added
to Canada’s traditional aid to Africa. Export
Development Canada has added its support for
businesses with over Can$1.3 billion worth of business
in sub-Saharan Africa. More precisely, it has assisted
194 Canadian companies in 38 countries in Africa in
2010. That same year, Canadian bilateral trade with
Africa reached almost $13 billion in 2010, a 72.5 per
cent increase over the past five years.
When it comes to corporate social responsibility,
Canada not only encourages Canadian companies to
abide by strict standards, it insists on it. To further
encourage Canadian investment in Africa, we need to
encourage our African partners to continue to work
toward reforming their business environments to create
more transparent rules and better governance.
(spoke in English)
Canada sees the development of key African
multilateral institutions, such as the African Union, the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and
the African Development Bank, as vehicles to help
achieve an enabling environment for stability, regional
integration, and socio-economic development.
Canada strongly supports the African Peer
Review Mechanism as a key initiative in promoting
African ownership and accountability for democratic
governance and economic management, and we have
contributed over $5 million to the United Nations
Development Programme Trust Fund.
Canada also maintains a strong commitment to
regional and multilateral initiatives to advance global
malaria prevention and control efforts. In September
2010, Prime Minister Harper announced that, with our
contribution of $540 million to the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, Canada’s
contribution to date will rise to more than $1.5 billion.
That is the single largest contribution by Canada to a
global health organization.

25

A/66/PV.32

Canada continues to engage with our African
counterparts to work towards solutions to protracted
conflicts across the continent, both through direct
bilateral contacts and through our engagement in
support for continental and regional African
institutions such as the African Union (AU). Although
challenges remain, those organizations are increasingly
demonstrating clear capacity and leadership to address
peace and security challenges on the continent.
Despite the peaceful secession of South Sudan on
9 July 2011, the security situation in both the Sudan
and South Sudan is fragile, particularly along their
shared border. The contested region of Abyei remains a
deep concern, while devastating conflict has
re-emerged in the border states of Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile, severely affecting over 300,000 people.
Humanitarian access to affected populations in those
two states remains severely constrained. International
support continues to be necessary to address
outstanding North-South issues, the fragile political
situation in both countries and the conflicts in Darfur
and along the border.
Since 2006, Canada has contributed over
$885 million in support of peace and humanitarian
objectives in the two Sudans, including support for the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the Darfur peace process, as well as for
three
Security
Council-mandated
peacekeeping
missions. Canada fully supports the considerable
engagement and contribution that the African Union
and African countries are making to enhance peace and
security in the two Sudans, most notably through the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
In the Great Lakes region, Canada continues to
support regional peace and stability through the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), which implements regional solutions to deal
with the complex challenges there. As co-chair of the
Group of Friends and Special Envoys to the ICGLR,
Canada is a strong supporter of the Lusaka Declaration
endorsed by the ICGLR heads of State in December
2010, emphasizing the current momentum in the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Canada’s contributions to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have totalled $350 million since

26

2006, including for humanitarian and long-term
development assistance, support to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and support for the 2011
elections.
Finally, Canada remains greatly concerned by the
humanitarian crisis arising from the severe drought that
is being felt throughout the Horn of Africa. So far in
2011, Canada has contributed more than $72 million to
humanitarian agencies for emergency lifesaving
assistance to those in need in the region. In addition, in
July this year, Canada established the East Africa
Drought Relief Fund, to which the Government of
Canada pledged to contribute one dollar for every
dollar an individual Canadian donated to a registered
Canadian charity responding to the drought between
6 July and 16 September 2011. The preliminary tally,
as of October 4, is estimated to be just over
$70 million, with total contribution amounts to be
verified by mid-October. Once that is completed, the
Government of Canada will contribute an equivalent
amount to the Fund.
Canada is concerned by the problems that
confront Somalia, including lawlessness, piracy and
the longstanding conflict, which have further
exacerbated the effects of the drought. Canada has
been actively involved in efforts to bring stability to
Somalia, including a contribution of $1 million to the
African Union Mission in Somalia Trust Fund.
In closing, despite the many economic and social
development challenges they face, African countries
have made great strides in recent years. Canada looks
forward to continuing to work with our African
partners and the international community towards
realizing Africa’s full potential.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sidi
Diarra, and the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa,
for organizing the 7 October panel discussion on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
and the Millennium Development Goals, and
yesterday’s briefing in advance of today’s General
Assembly consideration of those topics.
NEPAD is an important African-owned and
African-led initiative for eradicating poverty and
putting African economies on a path of sustainable
growth. The United States fully supports the common

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

vision of African States for achieving the NEPAD goals
and objectives, especially in the areas of agriculture,
infrastructure, education, health, the empowerment of
women, and the environment. We also welcome the
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union, the
African Development Bank, the African Peer Review
Mechanism (APRM) secretariat, African subregional
organizations and international partners in assisting
African States to fully implement NEPAD.
The United States welcomes the progress made in
the past year by the organizations and supporters of
NEPAD in areas critical to economic growth and
sustainable development highlighted in the report
(A/66/202). We support Africa’s efforts to enhance its
economic growth and enjoy the benefits of integration
into the global economy. Alongside an enabling
business environment, progress in developing Africa’s
infrastructure is especially important to private-sector
economic growth and development. We commend the
NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency for its
efforts, alongside those of the African Union, the
United Nations and the African Development Bank, to
drive and secure infrastructure gains across the
continent. We encourage NEPAD to continue its review
of infrastructure projects, and its work in line with its
strategic objectives.
Food security remains an urgent challenge in
Africa. The United States is committed to
strengthening agricultural development in Africa, and
has committed $3.5 billion worldwide over three years
through its global hunger and food security initiative,
Feed the Future. The United States is encouraged by
the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and
NEPAD’s efforts to increase the number of countries
creating country compacts so as to meet their
agricultural investment goals and target growth rates.
Our Feed the Future initiative draws on CAADP
principles and progress, both of which are essential to
providing security against famine and malnutrition.
The crisis in the Horn of Africa is the most severe
humanitarian emergency in the world today. Tens of
thousands, mostly children, have already died, and
750,000 more Somalis are at risk of death in coming
months, unless the international humanitarian
community can get access to those in need of critical
assistance. NEPAD’s efforts serve to mitigate the
impact of the current crisis and provide insurance
against such crises occurring in the future.

11-53871

While Africa is host to the largest number of
least-developed countries (LDCs), some African LDCs
have shown strong growth over the past decade. To
ensure that progress towards the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) is sustained, we must
support well-governed African institutions that
promote policies enabling economies to generate
broad-based, sustained economic growth and
employment.
Such
policies
should
include
accountability, transparency, investment in an
entrepreneur-friendly business climate, strengthened
indigenous capacity for innovation, investment in
women and girls, and attention to basic services,
including health and education.
With regard to meeting the MDGs in Africa by
2015 and improving food security on the continent, the
United States supports an improved, comprehensive
monitoring mechanism. Such a mechanism should
build on existing processes and add value by
leveraging the membership and contributions of the
United Nations, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral during the previous session of the General
Assembly (A/65/152). Such a mechanism should be
practical, effective and cost-neutral. It would require
the combined efforts of the United Nations system, the
African
Development
Bank,
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and other African institutions to
ensure comprehensive and authoritative results.
The United States calls on the United Nations, the
African Union and NEPAD to work together to ensure
the creation of a results-driven process. The
Organization must ensure that the more than 25 United
Nations agencies working alongside the African Union
and NEPAD are making efficient and effective use of
their resources and are responding to the priorities of
the African Union and NEPAD. We expect that the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Africa, the Economic Commission for Africa and
the United Nations Office to the African Union will
work together to strengthen the regional coordination
mechanism. It is also important that the African Peer
Review Mechanism continue to function as envisioned.
The APRM has tremendous potential for advancing
good governance and socio-economic development in
Africa, and we actively encourage continuation of the
peer review process over the coming year.
Today the Assembly is also addressing the agenda
item on the Decade to Roll Back Malaria. The United
States is committed to addressing the prevention and

27

A/66/PV.32

treatment of malaria in order to improve the health and
well-being of citizens living in malaria-endemic
settings, particularly young children and pregnant
women, who are most affected by this devastating
disease. We further recognize the negative impact of
malaria on household incomes, economic and social
development and political stability in affected
countries.
Through its Global Health Initiative, the United
States will continue to lead in the fight against this and
other diseases by focusing on strengthening health
systems and on broader health challenges, including
child and maternal health, family planning and
neglected tropical diseases. We are pleased to be a
leader in the support for malaria-control programmes
through the President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI), and
our contributions to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria. Through the PMI, which is a
core component of the President’s Global Health
Initiative, we have made a $5 billion, six-year
commitment. So far, we have spent $300 million in
2009, $500 million in 2010 and $618 million in 2011.
These significant funding increases have allowed the
PMI to expand, and it is now providing malaria
prevention or treatment measures to more than
50 million people in 19 focus countries in Africa.
We work with host Governments, international
partners, NGOs, the private sector and faith-based and
community groups to deliver indoor residual spraying,
distribute insecticide-treated bed nets, ensure
preventive malaria treatment for expectant mothers,
provide prompt and accurate diagnosis and treatment
of malarial illness, and build the capacity of national
malaria control programmes. The United States
contribution to the Global Fund supports in-country
capacity-building and strengthening of health systems,
as well as direct service delivery.
We encourage all donor and recipient nations to
support global malaria control efforts through
appropriate financial contributions and stronger
political commitments. We urge affected nations,
especially those in Africa, to increase their own
domestic spending on malaria control as part of their
overall plans to boost the share of their national
budgets devoted to health.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Only yesterday, 10 October, our island commemorated
a central event in the formation of the Cuban nation.

28

We celebrated the beginning, in 1868, of our first war
of independence. That historic event was marked by
one of the most transcendental acts of justice in our
history, when Carlos Manuel de Céspedes, known as
the father of the Cuban nation, freed his slaves.
Independence and the African heritage are thus
indissolubly linked to the Cuban national identity.
Originating in lands that today cover a large number of
African countries, there came to our island more than a
million and a half enslaved Africans of various
ethnicities: Lucumi, Carabalí, Congolese, Ganga,
Mandingo, Mina, Bibi, Yoruba. That is why the people
and Government of Cuba consider so important the
General Assembly’s declaration, through resolution
64/169, of 2011 as the International Year for People of
African Descent. Many seminars and conferences have
attested to the importance of this for Cuba. In
September, the Cuban people had the unique
opportunity to celebrate two exceptional events: a
meeting of filmmakers from Africa, the Caribbean and
the diaspora, and the programming of the First Week of
African Cinema, held in Havana. I am sure that the
works from the African continent were shown in nearly
all provinces of our country.
The Cuban people are the direct and natural heirs
to Africa’s gallantry, fearlessness and culture of
resistance. For centuries they have heroically fought
against numerous challenges and threats, which endure
to this day. The deepest internationalist convictions of
the Cuban Revolution have enabled our country to
remain always on the side of the African peoples, from
our unconditional support in the anti-colonial struggles
to cooperation projects in many spheres of economic
and social development.
More than 381,000 Cuban fighters fought for
almost three decades to defend the integrity and
sovereignty of our brother African nations, without
asking for anything in exchange. They returned from
Africa with only the bodies of their fallen comrades
and the honour of having done their duty. Today more
than 2,400 Cuban volunteers are serving in 35 African
nations to promote their development in areas as
diverse as public health, education, agriculture, sports
and construction, among others.
Our country will continue to provide its human
capital and experience to help our African brothers and
sisters. In just the Comprehensive Health Programme,
close to 1,120 Cuban doctors and technicians are

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

working in 23 African countries, providing services to
more than 48 million people.
In the context of international cooperation, Cuba
has various projects with a number of African countries
to combat malaria. Cuba is collaborating in the
production of vaccines, biological pest controls and
biofertilizers. It is developing important measures in
the plan to combat disease vectors, such as developing
entomological maps for the early warning system in
various African countries with which we maintain
cooperation. Cuba is implementing programmes to
develop biolarvicides in those countries, with advice
from Cuban specialists.
More than 2,200 young people from 45 African
countries are currently enrolled in our universities and
polytechnic institutes. To date, more than 32,000 young
people from that continent have graduated from Cuban
schools with different specializations.
Cuba has always stood with Africa, and Africa
has always stood with Cuba. The history of our
relationship in the most diverse spheres is proof of
that.
There is an intrinsic contradiction in the current
international order. It is impossible to listen to certain
bombastic speeches that attempt to tell us what our
peoples should do, while they simultaneously force
many of our countries to spend five times more
resources to pay back shameful external debt than we
spend on health and education programmes.
There must be an end to wars and military
interventions supported by interventionist doctrines
that violate international law and are intended
primarily to guarantee control of Africa’s mineral
resources to the powerful multinationals of the
developed countries. Rich countries, instead of
continuing to bomb African soil, should once and for
all meet their modest commitments for official
development aid.
Moreover, it is high time to end the unjust system
of patents and trade that is hindering the development
of African nations. Cuba will continue to support the
African Union and all regional cooperation
mechanisms as they pursue their own solutions to
African problems.
All Africa needs from the United Nations and the
international community is a comprehensive focus on a
solution to problems that relate to the peace, security

11-53871

and development of the continent. We are not calling
for paternalism towards Africa, but rather equal
opportunities as part of a fairer and more equitable
international order.
The African people have the right to peace and
sustainable development. That is what is needed for
Africa and the rest of the developing nations, so that,
in a peaceful context, we can meet the challenges that
our people face. Above all, Africa needs and deserves
solidarity and respect.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 2011 (XX), adopted on
11 October 1965, and decision 56/475 of 15 August
2002, I now call on the observer for the African Union.
Mr. Mayaki (African Union): Permit me first to
extend my congratulations to Ambassador Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser on his election as President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. I also
congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
on his reappointment. On behalf of the Agency of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), I
hope his 10 years will contribute to the promotion of
closer and more meaningful global cooperation and
move forward the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development.
I am most honoured to address this body on the
occasion of the commemoration of the tenth
anniversary of NEPAD. In July 2001, in Lusaka,
African leaders took a major step towards inspiring
change. It was a major milestone in Africa’s
transformation agenda.
As Africa’s strategic framework for development
and the flagship programme of the African Union,
NEPAD is the embodiment of Africa’s rebirth and
renaissance. For 10 years, African countries have
implemented comprehensive political and socio-economic
reforms, driven at the continental level by the African
Union. This is to achieve the overarching objective of
placing Africa on the path of sustainable growth and
development.
Africa has demonstrated remarkable resilience.
We have nurtured and produced our own development
agenda through the expression of NEPAD. We are
resolved to achieve the full implementation of that
agenda. Africa is taking full control and ownership of
that development agenda, driven by the shared values
of ownership, leadership and partnership. This is based

29

A/66/PV.32

on the African Union vision of an integrated, forwardlooking, prosperous, dynamic and peaceful Africa,
representing a dynamic force in the global arena.
Since the turn of the millennium, Africa has
recorded economic growth and made significant
progress in political governance and macroeconomic
performance. That growth, however, needs to be more
inclusive. Indeed, Africans have been emboldened by
that progress, through the wind of change that has
contributed to shaping the new Africa. Under the
platform of the African Union, the continental renewal
strategy has purposefully addressed the development
challenges of the past and is looking ahead to a new
Africa. NEPAD has served as the catalyst for
development. We have charted a new development
pathway that represents a departure from the old
development model. The reality is that Africa has
changed, and is changing.
NEPAD remains active in changing the
development paradigm on the continent. NEPAD is
now fully integrated into the structures and processes
of the African Union. The NEPAD Agency now serves
as the technical body of the African Union. This
institutionalization of NEPAD has given further
impetus to the implementation of the NEPAD agenda.
The international community must therefore step
up support for Africa’s needs and priorities. Over the
past decade, Africa adopted continental policy
frameworks to accelerate development and regional
integration. Through NEPAD, Africa is advancing good
governance in all of its ramifications under the
umbrella of the African Peer Review Mechanism,
which began in 2003. This unique voluntary instrument
of peer exchanges and review at the highest political
level among 30 participating African countries is
leading the way on governance reforms. Other top
priorities have been clearly defined, for example in the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and the Programme for Infrastructure
Development in Africa. NEPAD is spearheading
investment plans in agriculture and food security.
In the area of infrastructure, African leaders
endorsed the African Union and NEPAD Presidential
Infrastructure Champion Initiative to promote political
sponsorship in driving the implementation of national
and regional infrastructure. In addition, we support
African Governments in reinforcing development
planning as a formidable tool for ensuring the

30

sustainability of the gains made over the past decade in
Africa.
What remains to be done is for development
partners to continue to work together, and within the
United Nations, to support the implementation of
Africa’s priorities. We must renew our efforts to send a
powerful and positive message to the rest of the world
that Africa is committed to its development agenda for
transformation. The African Union and its NEPAD
programme are part of that equation.
International partners remain fundamentally
important to Africa. Promoting market access for
African products and diversification are critical to
achieving sustainable and lasting economic growth. We
must work harder to change the current multilateral
trading system towards a more equitable and fair
regime. Significantly, emerging economies in the South
have become increasingly strategic partners for Africa
and have contributed to reducing its dependence on
traditional export markets.
Specifically, trade negotiations under the Doha
Development Round should be accelerated and tailored
much more to meet the special needs of Africa. Foreign
direct investment (FDI) is an important source of
growth, and African countries have undertaken
numerous reforms to improve the investment climate.
As a result, FDI increased throughout the past decade,
peaking at $72 billion in 2008.
The international community should consider
policy measures to ensure that resource extraction is
beneficial to the host country so that resources are
transformed into productive assets and can contribute
to long-term growth. That is the core message of the
Africa Mining Vision 2050.
A critical factor in the changing development
landscape is the primacy of domestic resources for
Africa’s development. Although aid has been an
important source of development financing in the past,
Africa is moving beyond aid to achieve self-sustaining,
private sector-led growth. For instance, internally
generated revenue in Africa grew significantly, from
$129 billion in 2002 to $472 billion in 2008. Overall,
domestic revenue represented 84 per cent of total
sources of financing for Africa in 2009.
The imperative to move beyond aid will therefore
lead to reducing dependency on aid, and thereby
facilitate the implementation of NEPAD’s vision of

11-53871

A/66/PV.32

sustainable growth and development and the
continent’s desire to move towards development
effectiveness. The ongoing transformation will benefit
greatly from this exit strategy on aid and redirect focus
to the viability of FDI, public-private partnerships and
raising domestic resources for development.
Africa is the continent of the future. Over the past
decade, Africa’s development landscape has changed
for the better. A new story of steady transformation and
growth is evolving on the continent. Africa is
reaffirming its commitment to a global and balanced
partnership with the rest of the world as the continent’s
vision lends credence to the growth potential of
development. This also reflects the NEPAD vision and
its continued relevance and highlights the modest
successes in implementing NEPAD.
We are reinforcing the need to effectively use
both internal and external resources so as to attain the
much-desired development outcomes and impact. The
partnership focus of NEPAD was a clarion call to the
rest of Africa that our futures were inseparable and that
our fate was a collective one. Across the continent,
Africans declared that they would no longer allow
themselves to be conditioned by circumstances. While
the frontiers of development are being redefined by
new opportunities, emerging actors and creative
relationships, Africa itself is embracing new
orientations and innovations.
The continent is committed to serve as a
fundamental contributor to global economic recovery
and stability. We aspire to become a growth pole, and
not to be confined to perpetually managing poverty.
Development assistance should therefore be directed at
Africa’s real economy to enhance its present growth
path, while ensuring the full involvement and
participation of an empowered private sector and civil
society.

We call for the strengthening of partnership with
the international community represented here at the
United Nations. We are especially appreciative of the
sustained support of the Office of the Special Adviser
on Africa, the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa, the United Nations Development
Programme and all United Nations agencies for the
implementation of the NEPAD agenda.
(spoke in French)
This will help Africa to firmly secure its future. More
than ever before, Africans are optimistic about their
bright prospects for growth and prosperity. The African
continent is ready to play its role on the global stage so
as to achieve its agenda of development effectiveness.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in French): I would
like to make an announcement concerning the
consideration of agenda item 114, sub-items (a),
“Election of twenty members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination”; (b), “Election of the
members of the International Law Commission”; and
(c), “Election of twenty-nine members of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme”, which had been scheduled for
Wednesday, 16 November. Those elections will now
take place on Thursday, 17 November, in the morning.
In order to facilitate the election of members of
the International Law Commission, and in accordance
with the established practice, the General Assembly
will take an advance decision on the matter of
requesting the Secretariat to issue a consolidated list of
candidates reflecting all submissions and changes
received so far. It is my intention to consult the
Assembly in this regard on Monday morning,
17 October 2011.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

11-53871

31
