General A11embly-Twenty-third Seuion

64

(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia,
the return of exiles to the Territory;
h
¡
(b) To take ali the necessary step~ to ensure_it_ at on_y
the indigenous people of the Terntory parhc1pate m
the referendum;
(e) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sahara ;
(d) To provide ali the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to
participate actively in the organization and holding of
the referendum ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co~sultation
with the administering Power and the S~ecial ~o_mmittee. to appoint immediately the special m1ss1on
provided for in paragraph 5 of Gen~ral_ Ass~mbly resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite 1ts d1spatch. to
Spanish Sabara for the p;1rpose of _recommendm_g
practica! steps for the foil 1mplementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and in particular
for determining the extent of United Nations participation in the preparation and superv}sion of the ~ef~rendum and submitting a report to h1m for transm1ss1on
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of
Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the General
Assemhly at its twenty-fourth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.

2429 (XXIII).

Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of Gibraltar,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power 18 and the representative of Spain,19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December

1960,
Recalling a1sa its resolution 2353 (XXII) of 19
December 1967,
1. Regrets that the administering Power has failed
to comply with General Assembly resolution 2353
(XXII);
2. Declares that the continuation of the colonial
situation in Gibraltar is incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Requests the administering Power to terminate
the colonial situation in Gibraltar no later than 1 October 1969;
4. Calls upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to begin
without delay the negotiations with the Government
of Spain provided for in resolution 2353 (XXII) ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Governments of Spain and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland any assistance they may
require for tbe implementation of the present resolution,
:md to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
t wenty-fonrth session.
1747th plenary meeting,
18 December 1968.
18 I/,id .. paras. 98-11 \.
19 /l,id., ¡,.,ras. 47-97 ami 114-125.

2430 (XXIII). Question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice blanda,
Grenada, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebridea,
Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena, St. Kitts-NeviaAnguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turka
and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question _o_f Am':ri~an Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, Bnttsh V1rgm Isl~ds,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Domm1ca,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. _Helena, St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos
Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having exa,mined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
other relevant resolutions.
Deeply cancerned at the policy of sorne of the administering Powers in establishing and maintaining
military bases in sorne of the Territories under their
administration, in contravention of the relevant General
Assembly resolutions,
Deploring the attitude of the administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations
visiting groups to visit the Territories under their
administration,
Cansciaus that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to these Territories ;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-deterrnination and independence;
3. Calls upan the adrninistering Powers to implement without delay tlw relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases ami installations in
these Territories i, inco111patible with the purposes
ami principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
of General Assemblv resolution 1514 (XV);
20 !bid .. Twcnly-third Srssion, Anncxes, addendum to aa:enda
item 23 ( A/7200/Rev.l), chapters XII, XVIII to XXI, XXIII
and XXVI to XXIX.
