A /70/PV.72

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

72

nd plenary meeting
Thursday, 10 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Cardi (Italy),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 73 and 74 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/383)
Draft resolutions (A/70/L.25 and A/70/L.27)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/77 and
A/70/96)
Draft resolutions (A/70/L.29 and A/70/L.30)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/76)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.18)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to say that the
provision of humanitarian assistance, and assistance to

civilian populations, is one of the world’s most noble
endeavours, as long as it is based on, and motivated
by, lofty moral and humanitarian principles alone
and is not used for other ends that might be harmful
to the stability and well-being of peoples of the
world. Moreover, such humanitarian action must be
in keeping with the guidelines set forth in resolution
46/182, reaffirmed in the draft resolutions before us,
and must prioritize respect for national sovereignty
and the role of the State concerned in the distribution
of humanitarian assistance throughout its territory,
as well as the principles of neutrality, integrity and
non-politicization.
To resolve any humanitarian crisis, it is important
to recognize the roots and causes of the crisis without
politicization or bending reality or the facts in the
service of pressing political agendas that exploit
humanitarian assistance as a pretext. Resolving a crisis
also entails a joint effort by the Government concerned
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in accordance with the provisions set forth in
resolution 46/182, which help to mitigate the severity
of humanitarian crises rather than manipulating,
prolonging and exacerbating them to bring political
pressure to bear on the Government concerned and to
blackmail it so that it would make political concessions
to the strongest and most influential. The alternative
to that is creative chaos, which leads to the creation of
a moderate opposition mercenary army and opens the
borders to neighbouring countries and those who claim
to carry out jihad and gangs that traffic refugees and
bodily organs and then call all this moderate opposition.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-41818 (E)

*1541818*

A/70/PV.72

In this regard, it is important to clarify that the
suffering of the Syrian people today, like the suffering
of other peoples in other countries of the world, has the
following causes. First, there is terrorism, which is the
main reason for the outbreak of the humanitarian crisis
in my country, Syria; and its worsening is due to terrorist
acts that are perpetrated by armed terrorist groups. The
delegation of my country regrets the fact that, except
for a very passing reference to it in one paragraph, draft
resolution A/70/L.29 does not include any reference to
terrorism, as it is one of the root causes of humanitarian
crisis, and this despite our repeated requests to include
a stronger reference. It is paradoxical that some authors
of the draft resolution while claiming to fight terrorism
are the very same States that have worked to not include
in the draft resolution a clear reference to the fact that
terrorism is one of the main causes of the humanitarian
crisis. They have intentionally ignored the terrorism
used by the takfiri groups that believe in an obscure and
backward Wahhabi ideology, which does not accept any
divergence from it, legitimizes bloodshed and incites
its followers to hate others. These elements are all are
incompatible with the United Nations agenda. Ignoring
terrorism and the need to combat it over the past
few years is what has led to its hysterical expansion,
targeting innocent civilians all over the world. We have
been warning against this possibility for a long time.
Terrorism has reached a point now where it is targeting
and blowing up a civilian Russian plane over the Sinai.
It has affected Beirut, Tunisia, Paris, Baghdad, Mali,
California, Nairobi and other countries; all those
terrorists were recruited in Syria and Iraq and had come
from the four corners of the world to sow the seeds of
terror in the world.
The draft resolution on the humanitarian crisis in
Syria requires the concerted efforts of all international
actors in the region and the world in order to fight
terrorism and to hold the countries that support these
armed terrorist groups in my country accountable for
financing, arming, training and sheltering them, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 2199
(2015), 2178 (2014) and 2170 (2014). It is very important
to launch an appeal from this rostrum to countries that
participate in the bloodshed in Syria and claim to be
providing humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people
while they are really fabricating crises and supporting
and financing terrorism in my country. In that context,
it is also important to bear in mind the role played by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the Syrian Golan and
other occupied Arab territories since June 1967 in

2/14

10/12/2015

cooperating with terrorist groups, such as Al-Nusra
Front. That occupying Power rearrested the civilian
Sedqi Al-Maqet, the Nelson Mandela of Syria, who had
been imprisoned for 27 years for having documented
through sound and imagery the relationship between
Israel and the terrorist Al-Nusra Front in the occupied
Golan.
Secondly, we must look at the serious economic
consequences of unilateral coercive action. This action,
unprecedented in the history of international relations,
has exacerbated the economic and humanitarian
situation in my country. In that regard, it is important
to clarify the painful scenario, which is repeated on an
annual basis, when this draft resolution is discussed.
The Syrian Government and some friendly nations wish
to include a paragraph on the negative impact of these
measures on the civilian populations and their role in
exacerbating the suffering of children and women and
the worsening of the humanitarian situation. Yet some
authors of the draft resolution, for the fourth consecutive
year, are insisting on eliminating any reference to those
measures.
Moreover, the representatives of those countries
still take pride in the “heroic” action they are
undertaking in continuing to impose sanctions on
women and children in Syria, depriving them of the
basic elements of life after having done the same
thing to millions of innocent Iraqis. It is paradoxical
that this draft resolution refers to resolution 70/1, of
25 September 2015, concerning the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which is a balanced and
objective resolution, which we participated in creating.
The draft resolution refers to lifting coercive economic
measures that have a negative impact on the country
and that are an obstacle to implementing the 2030
Agenda. However, this “humanitarian” draft resolution
does not need a paragraph like that on the same topic.
How can we hope that Member States will be able
to implement the sustainable development agenda
when the international community is imposing unjust
sanctions and coercive measures on it? That is the very
height of hypocrisy.
My country’s Government is eagerly awaiting
the holding of the first World Humanitarian Summit,
given our belief in the importance of humanitarian
work. However, the Summit must address the root
causes of the outbreak of humanitarian crises and the
elements that worsen them. It must also address the
issue of the distribution of humanitarian assistance,

15-41818

10/12/2015

most of which is financed across the border without
any coordination with the country concerned in order
to serve the political interests and agendas of some
organizations, which are working outside the umbrella
of the United Nations and its supervision. That goes
against international humanitarian conventions and
belies the principles that guide the United Nations in
such situations. Sometimes that assistance also ends up
helping the terrorist organizations, which prolongs the
conflict.
The role of Member States should be essential and
important in drafting any outcome document of the
Summit. The non-politicized and effective participation
of all nations in the Summit will lead to a non-binding
document. We will then be compelled to negotiate a
second time through an intergovernmental process in
order to arrive at a consensus-based formulation that
reflects the different positions of different Governments.
We hope that the Summit will provide a transparent
and non-politicized space for dialogue to take place
and that it will not be used as a platform for promoting
any political agenda under the pretext of humanitarian
action. We hope that the various provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations will be upheld and that
the voices of donor countries are not the only ones
that are heard. The Summit should involve the direct
action of the United Nations, and it is important not
to change the objective of humanitarian assistance and,
especially, to observe the principles of full respect
for national sovereignty, non-interference in internal
affairs and full cooperation with national authorities in
providing humanitarian assistance.
In that connection, I would like to express our
regret with regard to the choice of Istanbul as the venue
for the Summit, since the Turkish regime is facilitating
the entry of terrorists into Syria and helps to train
them and even finance them. The Turkish regime has
also been helping to finance Daesh with archeological
artefacts and oil. How can that country be the host of
such a conference when it is the main cause of one of
the largest humanitarian crises in the world? How can
we ask the Turkish Government to carry out the task
of welcoming the first humanitarian assistance summit
when, through its management of its borders with Syria
and Iraq, it has participated in the bloodshed?
This is just one of the many paradoxes. We could
mention quite a few others, such as the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre in Saudi Arabia, a country

A/70/PV.72

that is the main centre for propagating terrorism and
extremism around the world. There is another centre in
Qatar. Saudi Arabia uses foreigners who are recruited
through the Blackwater company. Now we see the
results: 14 mercenaries working for the Blackwater
company were killed on the outskirts of the city of Taiz
in Yemen. In Qatar, there is another centre called the
Alliance of Civilizations. Qatar works day and night
to instigate war and create interfaith and interreligious
problems and crises among countries. I therefore
wonder if the United Nations is straying from its
founding vision? Should we strive to maintain legality
and the protection of the rights of all Member States, be
they strong or weak, large or small?
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
commend Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for their tireless efforts in emergency
humanitarian situations. Their activities are all the
more important as we face new and difficult challenges
in the humanitarian field.
The world is facing several unprecedented
humanitarian crises today. In many parts of the world
we are seeing protracted crises, many severe natural
disasters and a huge number of displaced people. In
addition, climate change is also expected to have an
exacerbated impact on disasters related to weather
events. As we all know, the Global Humanitarian
Overview estimates that $20.1 billion is required to
provide life-saving humanitarian assistance in 2016.
It is obvious that humanitarian funding cannot
keep up with the continued growth of humanitarian
needs. In addition, we must strengthen development
assistance in order to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1) and increase
climate-change-related financing. It is also apparent
that financial contributions from traditional donors
alone are simply not enough to match such immense
needs. New approaches, such as broadening the donor
base and mobilizing domestic resources, are important
in that context.
Furthermore, we have to address the root causes of
humanitarian crises rather than continuously providing
only reactive emergency assistance. To that end, we
must first strive to find political solutions to protracted
conflict-related crises. We need to recognize that
the Security Council, the organ that has the primary
responsibility to achieve such solutions, has been unable

15-418183/14

A/70/PV.72

to produce substantive results over the past several
years. Japan, which will be a member of the Security
Council beginning next year, stands ready to make
maximum efforts to bear its part of this responsibility.
Secondly, we should emphasize the importance
of conflict prevention. If a conflict arises, the
United Nations often sends peacekeeping troops and
humanitarian workers on the ground. But we should
remind ourselves that investment in prevention is less
expensive than the cost of the peacekeeping operations
and the humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, both humanitarian and development actors
should collaborate closely from the outset, or even before
the outbreak, of a crisis. We would like to encourage
development actors to start their work at the early stages
of a crisis. At the third World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, the importance of preparedness for
future disasters was stressed by many participants.
That concept is reflected in many paragraphs of the
draft resolutions that we will be adopting today.
The World Humanitarian Summit held in Istanbul
in May 2016 is an ideal opportunity for various
stakeholders to gather, discuss and collaborate on
common humanitarian issues. Japan is eager to
contribute to the summit process towards Istanbul
in order to find durable solutions for, among others,
protracted displacement issues, through cooperating
with development and humanitarian actors, as well
as host communities. In that regard, we note that the
process towards Istanbul and the expected outcome
of the Summit have gradually been made clearer by
the Secretariat in recent weeks. We expect them to be
further clarified. We also strongly hope that the summit
process will adequately engage Member States so that
they can feel a sense of ownership of the process and
the summit itself.
In concluding my statement, allow me to stress
that Japan, as a strong advocate of human security,
will continue to work for the further improvement of
humanitarian situations all over the world. We look
forward to working with various stakeholders, such as
Member States and United Nations agencies, for the
important upcoming events next year, especially the
Sorld Humanitarian Summit in May and the summit on
migrants and refugees in September.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Providing aid to others in their
time of need is at the core of our shared humanity,
and at the centre of the mission of this institution.

4/14

10/12/2015

As the world continues to become smaller and more
interconnected, supplying relief and resources to
where they can offer the most benefit is increasingly
the best choice for the future of our common planet.
Now more than ever, it is vital that Member States,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector
coordinate an effective humanitarian response. This
May, world leaders will gather in Istanbul for the firstever World Humanitarian Summit. Israel welcomes that
important opportunity to strengthen partnerships and
to improve collective humanitarian action to help those
most desperately in need.
Tragically, 2015 has been a year of devastating
humanitarian crises, earthquakes and epidemics,
sectarian fights and severe famines. Millions of people
around the world live in dire conditions, lacking even
the most basic of human requirements. The United
Nations is leading international efforts to eradicate
hunger, combat poverty and provide basic health care
all over the world. However, the scale of the problem is
staggering, and much more must be done. According to
estimates published by the United Nations this week, as
many as 87.6 million people in 37 different countries
are in urgent need of humanitarian aid. All of us in this
Hall know the disheartening facts on the ground. In
Somalia, a devastating drought has left 1 million people
at risk of starvation, at the same time as the country
is being terrorized by Al-Shabaab. In the Central
African Republic, a conflict that has dragged on for
three years has led to the displacement of 1 million
people. Ongoing insecurity and logistical constraints
impede humanitarian operations, especially in the more
remote areas. In South Sudan, large segments of the
population face acute food insecurity, and the country
only recently recovered from a cholera outbreak, which
affected more than 1,800 people and led to at least 47
deaths.
In the Middle East, the combustible combination
of failing States and destabilizing terrorist groups
has led to the explosion of violence, with millions of
innocents caught in the inferno. In Yemen, a sectarian
conflict has devolved into a civil war, resulting in one
of the largest humanitarian crises in the world, with
four out of five Yemenis in need of assistance. In Syria
the brutal violence rages on as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham and other groups continue their reign of
terror, and the Al-Assad regime continues to assault its
own people using conventional and non-conventional
weapons. The horrific conflict has left 250,000 dead,

15-41818

10/12/2015

nearly 7 million internally displaced and 4 million
forced to flee their home country to seek safe refuge
abroad. The lack of access to besieged areas and the
deterioration of civilian infrastructure have led to a
humanitarian catastrophe on a scale not seen since the
Second World War. The availability of safe drinking
water in Syria has declined by approximately 50 per
cent since 2011, and by as much as 80 per cent in Aleppo
and Haman. Over a quarter of all schools in Syria can
no longer be used because they have been destroyed,
damaged or are sheltering displaced families. The
impact on Syrian children is particularly devastating,
as the lack of educational opportunity threatens the
future of the next generation.
I would like to personally thank the Syrian
representative for finally clearing up for all of us the real
reason behind Syrian suffering. It is Israel. It is not the
Government he represents so eloquently, nor its gassing
of its own people. Based on the crooked conspiracy
theory that we heard a few minutes ago, Israel is the
cause of all. Any reasonable real representative of the
Syrian people, not of the Government, would have
stood up in the Hall to thank Israel for providing
humanitarian assistance to, and saving the lives of, its
people in spite of the fact that most of them have ill
intentions towards Israel.
The costs of taking action are high, but the price for
not taking action is even higher. We must not allow the
challenges to disrupt the lifesaving work of distributing
vital humanitarian aid: food, water, shelter, health
services and medicine to those who need it most. Israel
is committed to extending humanitarian aid whenever
and wherever it is needed. Earlier this year in the days
immediately following the devastating earthquake that
rocked Nepal, Israel deployed search-and-rescue teams
and set up a field hospital, treating 1,600 patients,
saving dozens of lives and even delivering babies. Israel
is a small country, but our delegation to Nepal was the
second-largest delegation on the ground.
When the Ebola outbreak struck West Africa,
Israel joined in the international effort to contain the
disease and mitigate its consequences. We sent basic
medical equipment and drugs to Sierra Leone and
protective gear to the African Union headquarters,
and dispatched doctors to Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire
to help strengthen the local capacity for emergency
preparedness. Israel was also the largest donor per capita
to the United Nations Ebola Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund, with a total donation of $8 million.

A/70/PV.72

Israel has engaged in humanitarian outreach in the
aftermath of disasters all over the world. Israel was on
the ground in Haiti after the earthquake; was one of the
first teams to arrive in Japan following the tsunami;
and established a field hospital in the Philippines in
the wake of a typhoon. Those efforts represent the
spirit of our people and the character of our nation. As
Prime Minister Netanyahu said, that is the true face of
Israel — a country that offers aid over any distance at
any moment that it is needed.
Israel’s humanitarian outreach efforts are not
limited to endeavours overseas. Israel makes continuous
efforts to improve the well-being of the Palestinian
people, both in the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip.
Despite the constant threat posed to our citizens by
rocket attacks from Hamas-controlled Gaza, Israel has
been doing its utmost to assist in the reconstruction of
the Gaza Strip. Israel has been working closely with the
United Nations to facilitate the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism. Thus far, construction is under way on
267 of the 471 approved projects, and 2,832 houses are
being rebuilt. Israel has upgraded the Kerem Shalom
and Erez crossings, resulting in an increased capacity
of 850 trucks per day. A total of 2.6 million tons of
building materials for the Reconstruction Mechanism,
the rebuilding of roads and for the numerous projects
funded by the international community have been
transferred into Gaza. Despite all of those efforts, the
full reconstruction of Gaza will be achieved only when
the Palestinian Authority assumes a more substantive
role in Gaza. That has been recognized in the draft
resolution entitled “Assistance to Palestinian People”,
which we are about to take action on today, and which
stresses,
“the importance of the effective exercise by the
Palestinian Authority of its full government
responsibilities in the Gaza Strip in all fields,
including through its presence at the Gaza crossing
points” (A/70/L.18, twenty-seventh preambular
paragraph).
Throughout the years, we have heard many in the
Hall blame Israel for the situation in Gaza, and question
its actions. We have even heard the Palestinian observer
today (see A/70/PV.71), as usual, refuse to take any
responsibility for their situation, speaking about peace
while defining the only democracy in the Middle
East and possible partner for peace as a regime. Such
rhetoric is unhelpful and does not provide an answer
as to why the Palestinian Authority continues to evade

15-418185/14

A/70/PV.72

its responsibilities and to avoid resuming governance
in Gaza.
Over the past three months, Israeli citizens have
been stabbed in the streets, shot on their way to work
and deliberately run over while waiting for the bus.
Despite those daily acts of terror, despite the incitement
by the Palestinian Authority, we will continue our
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people and
will continue to work to encourage strong Palestinian
institutions and a vibrant economy. We will not allow
the wave of terror to get in the way of our commitment
to humanitarian aid. However, humanitarian support
and efforts alone will not bring peace and prosperity
to the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples. Once again,
we call on the Palestinian Authority to resume direct
negotiations — the only path to an enduring solution to
the conflict.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to all of
the humanitarian workers from Member States around
the world, United Nations personnel and the countless
other individuals who have dedicated their lives to
the service of those in need. Their tireless efforts,
which have had a life-changing impact on the lives of
millions of people around the world, are all too often
underappreciated. Let us always be inspired by their
compassion, dedication and kindness in even the most
difficult of circumstances.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Madiwale (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): On behalf of the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC), allow me to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to make a statement during this important
debate.
As many have noted, we live in a time of
unprecedented humanitarian need. There are 60 million
forcibly displaced people around the world, seemingly
unending protracted conflicts, natural disasters of
increasing frequency and intensity, as well as those
struggling to recover from the impacts of health
emergencies. At the same time, there has never been
a greater gap between the needs on the ground and
the resources available to meet them. As a result,
the humanitarian community is finding it difficult
to keep up with an ever-growing caseload. It is clear

6/14

10/12/2015

that the current arrangements and business model of
humanitarian action are not sufficient to meet the needs
and aspirations of affected people.
The year 2015 has been a critical one for
multilateral agreements, many of which have important
implications for humanitarian action. Earlier this year,
a new framework for disaster risk reduction was agreed
upon in Sendai. A new financing for development
framework was agreed upon in Addis Ababa, and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) and the Sustainable Development Goals were
endorsed at the United Nations summit for the adoption
of the post-2015 development agenda here in New York.
As we speak, negotiators in Paris are working tirelessly
to arrive at an ambitious agreement under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
process to address climate change. Each of those
agreements has, in one way or another, recognized the
importance of bridging humanitarian and development
action. That bridge — in programmes, financing and
approaches — is critical if we are to effectively respond
to ever-growing humanitarian needs. Allow me to make
just three points in that regard.
First, the principle of leaving no one behind is
firmly entrenched in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. However, that principle cannot be
applied without addressing the needs of those caught up
in humanitarian crises. That means that people affected
must not only be provided with critical life-saving
assistance but also with basic services, such as health
and education, that make life viable in the long term.
In order to that, it is critical that humanitarian and
development actors address short- and long-term needs
simultaneously. They will have to cooperate to a much
greater degree. And development resources must be
made available on development time scales in fragile
contexts.
Secondly, this message is particularly urgent with
regard to the current displacement crisis. For some
time now, the humanitarian community has been
warning that this scale of humanitarian operations
is unsustainable and insufficient to provide for the
protection, basic needs and lifesaving assistance to
refugees, migrants and their host communities. In order
to address the present crisis in the Mediterranean, we
need both a humane response to refugees and migrants
on Europe’s shores as well as a firm commitment from
the global community to assist those that host them.
In that context, we are encouraged by the emerging

15-41818

10/12/2015

discussion on how to support refugee-hosting countries
such as Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, countries that
should be able to access development funds and financial
instruments to improve the lives of displaced people,
as well as that of their own citizens. We welcome in
that regard the recent initiatives from the international
financial institutions to provide concessional loans and
grants to those countries.
Thirdly, unless properly addressed, climate
change threatens to become the greatest driver of
humanitarian need in the next century. It is critical
that Governments arrive at an ambitious agreement
in Paris, one that supports vulnerable countries and
communities to adapt to climate change and address its
already inevitable impacts. In that regard, investing in
disaster risk reduction and harnessing co-benefits with
climate change adaptation will be extremely important.
Furthermore, adequate and predictable funding must
materialize to address risk. Despite the fact that we all
agree that prevention is better than cure, funding for
risk reduction remains woefully inadequate.
Let us build on the strong recognition of those
issues in the 2015 agreements to mobilize action on the
ground.
As we discuss these critical issues today, the
IFRC, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
190 national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
and 162 State parties to the Geneva Conventions have
gathered in Geneva for the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent. There,
discussions are under way on a number of critical issues
that will impact the humanitarian community for years
to come, including discussions around sexual and
gender-based violence, disaster laws and strengthening
respect for international humanitarian law, as well as
new pledges on resilience, climate change and disaster
risk reduction. This week, the IFRC’s Secretary General
launched the One Billion Coalition for Resilience, an
initiative that aims to engage 1 billion people to take
active steps to improve their health, safety and wellbeing. We know that such an ambitious goal requires
working with others, and we invite all those who share
our vision to join us in that work.
The IFRC and its 190 national societies have been
working to assist vulnerable people for nearly 150 years.
We will continue to mobilize the power of humanity
to provide life-saving assistance to vulnerable people,

A/70/PV.72

and we will continue to work with Governments in our
auxiliary function to deliver services to the last mile.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 45/6, of 16 October 1990, I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Spoerri (International Committee of the Red
Cross): I thank you, Sir, for the giving the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) this opportunity to
share its observations regarding some of the challenges
to humanitarian action in armed conflict.
First, in an exceptional joint press conference held on
30 October, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and ICRC
President Peter Maurer underscored the importance
recognizing that much of the humanitarian suffering
we are witnessing today is the result of a blatant lack
of compliance with international humanitarian law by
both State and non-State parties to armed conflict. It
is they, not humanitarian organizations, who bear the
primary responsibility for protecting civilians under
their control and ensuring that their basic needs are met.
It is also urgent for other States, both individually and
collectively, to impress upon the parties to a conflict
the need to abide by their legal obligations, including
those governing access by impartial humanitarian
organizations.
Secondly, further efforts must be made to improve
the impact of humanitarian action. In spite of important
initiatives taken among humanitarian actors in recent
years, notably with regard to coordination, the lack of
access and security remains an important obstacle in
the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance and
protection. That is due mainly to frequent problems
of acceptance among parties to a conflict. For that
reason, Governments should make every effort to reach
renewed consensus on apolitical humanitarian action,
including by not sponsoring or limiting humanitarian
action for ulterior motives. That will help bring about
a working environment in which humanitarian action
can reach its full potential. It is also incumbent upon
humanitarian organizations to live by humanitarian
principles in public debates as well as in their operations.
Organizations should refrain from espousing
humanitarian principles that they are not willing or able
to adhere to in practice, at the cost of fuelling distrust
towards the entire humanitarian sector.
Thirdly, greater attention and understanding
should be devoted to the question of how to improve the

15-418187/14

A/70/PV.72

10/12/2015

inclusion and promotion of local action in the overall
humanitarian response. The ICRC’s approach to this
issue includes further developing the capacities of
national societies of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement, supporting local medical
services and providing armed forces with training in
international humanitarian law. However, in highly
polarized situations such as armed conflict, local
humanitarian actors may be viewed with suspicion for a
number of reasons, including perceived or alleged ethnic,
religious or political affiliations. In such cases, they may
be prevented from providing humanitarian assistance to
victims across enemy lines and from actively engaging
in protection and assistance activities with the parties
to the conflict. In such cases, experience shows that
international humanitarian organizations may be
subject to fewer restrictions and thus more effective.
The ICRC therefore believes that in the interests of the
victims we must take full advantage of the strengths of
both local and international organizations rather than
favouring one over the other. The best approach is one
based on the prevailing circumstances and in a logic of
complementarity and responsible partnership.

There are nevertheless many ways in which cooperation
is both possible and desirable.

Fourthly, the links between humanitarian and
development planning and financing should be
closer. Because many conflicts go on for years or
even decades, the ICRC and other humanitarian
organizations increasingly engage in developmentrelated work, supporting basic services and critical
infrastructure in areas such as health care, water and
sanitation, electricity, veterinary care and agriculture.
Owing to insufficient development spending, millions
of people come to depend on such services to survive.
Although they represent long-term commitments for
humanitarian organizations, particularly when carried
out in urban areas, they are subject to the constraints
of short-term annual humanitarian budgets. Existing
financing models should therefore be adapted to enable
humanitarian organizations to plan and budget for this
type of work over a period of several years.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/70/L.25, A/70/L.27, A/70/L.29, A/70/L.30 and
A/70/L.18.

Humanitarian and development organizations must
also learn to work together in a way that better serves
the needs of their beneficiaries. For its part, the ICRC
is actively seeking to strengthen its cooperation with
development organizations and work with them more
systematically. Our commitment to independence and
neutrality, which are critical to our ability to reach
victims on all sides, may sometimes limit the situations
and areas in which such cooperation can take place.

8/14

It is the ICRC’s view that real progress will hinge on
the ability to address these various challenges. Key to
that is recognition that the international humanitarian
system is based on three distinct pillars — the United
Nations system, the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement and non-governmental organizations — all
of which possess particular strengths and weaknesses.
The approach should be geared not to fusing the three,
by encouraging them to work the same way and on
the same issues, but rather to capitalizing on their
individual strengths. The ICRC hopes that the General
Assembly’s deliberations and the upcoming World
Humanitarian Summit will help bring that about, and
result in tangible improvements in the lives of the many
millions who fall victim to armed conflict every year.
We stand ready to share our views and experience in
that regard.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 73 and its
sub-items (a) to (c) and agenda item 74.

The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.25, entitled “Safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.25: Mongolia,
the Republic of Moldova, San Marino and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.25?
Draft resolution A/70/L.25 was adopted (resolution
70/104).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.27, entitled

15-41818

10/12/2015

“Participation of volunteers, ‘White Helmets’, in
the activities of the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.27: Andorra, Brazil,
Canada, China, Georgia, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
the Netherlands, the Philippines, Portugal, San Marino,
Serbia, Spain, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.27?
Draft resolution A/70/L.27 was adopted (resolution
70/105).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.29, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.29: Mozambique,
Panama, the Republic of Moldova, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.29?
Draft resolution A/70/L.29 was adopted (resolution
70/106).
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.30,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”.

A/70/PV.72

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.30: Australia,
Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, the Russian
Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand,
Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.30?
Draft resolution A/70/L.30 was adopted (resolution
70/107).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.18, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.18: Andorra,
Australia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Iceland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Norway, the Republic of Korea, San
Marino, Serbia, Switzerland, Ukraine and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.18?
Draft resolution A/70/L.18 was adopted (resolution
70/108).
The Acting President: One delegation has asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. May I remind
delegations that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second intervention, and
should be made from their seats.

15-418189/14

A/70/PV.72

Mr. Canay (Turkey): We categorically deny the
allegations made by the representative of the Syrian
regime, which has lost all of its legitimacy. What we
do for the brotherly Syrian people, in close cooperation
with international organizations, including the United
Nations, takes place before the eyes of the international
community. I would like to emphasize that Turkey will
continue to stand by the people of Syria.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of
agenda item 73 and sub-items (a) to (c), and agenda item
74.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/70/L.21)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 16 and
adopted resolutions 70/19 and 70/20 at its 66th plenary
meeting, on 3 December.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.21.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): On behalf
of its sponsors, I have the honour to introduce, under
agenda item 16, draft resolution A/70/L.21, entitled “A
world against violence and violent extremism”. Let me
first express my sincere gratitude to all the sponsors
of the draft resolution and all other delegations for
their constructive participation and support during
the open and transparent consultations that my
delegation conducted. Their proposals, suggestions and
interventions made the draft resolution more robust and
helped to accommodate the views of different Member
States. The consensus and cross-regional sponsorship
also underscore the universal recognition of the need
to act on the pressing global challenges of violence and
violent extremism.
This draft resolution is a follow-up to and an update
of resolution 68/127, which my delegation took pride
in submitting to the Assembly in 2013 and which was
adopted by consensus. The idea behind that resolution
was presented by His Excellency Mr. Hassan Rouhani,
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in his address
to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session (see
A/68/PV.6). The idea was an offshoot of the overarching
theme of his presidential campaign platform, which

10/14

10/12/2015

called for interaction, tolerance, moderation and
prudence over violence and extremism.
Violent extremism and its side-effects, including
sectarian violence, have been on the rise since the first
resolution on this topic was adopted in 2013. In the wake
of the atrocities committed by the extremist groups
in Syria and Iraq in the past two years and the recent
cruelties in Paris, Beirut, Egypt, Ankara and recently
the United States and elsewhere, it is more significant
and relevant than ever that the General Assembly
pronounce itself once more on these challenges. In our
globalized world, where threats recognize no borders,
these challenges can be thwarted only through the joint
efforts of the entire international community. Dialogue,
moderation, tolerance and human rights are the most
effective antidotes to violent extremism, which tries to
twist religions and pervert human minds towards death
and destruction.
It is therefore important that the international
community and its individual Member States adopt
effective measures along this line and implement them
with a view to dealing with the conditions conducive
to the genesis and spread of violent extremism. In this
respect, it is important to avoid associating violent
extremism with any nationality or religion. In fact,
those who blame religions and engage in hate speech
against the followers of divine religions, fanning the
flames of discrminatory exclusion, play right into
the terrorists’ hands and help them to recruit more
members and spread heinous extremist ideologies. By
reaffirming this point, the General Assembly, as the sole
universal body, provides a solid basis for promoting and
institutionalizing the fight against violent extremism
and sectarian violence at their roots.
The draft resolution means to serve as a call to
break the endless repetition of the past, uphold the
concept of citizenship over sectarian allegiances, place
the next generation’s prosperity above the settling
of past scores, and look to the future with hope and
prudent moderation as the master key. By adopting the
draft resolution, all Member States would also concur
that, in dealing with the threat of violence and violent
extremism, we all need to cooperate and there is no
room for a zero-sum game in any field.
Apart from certain basic technical updates to the
first resolution on a world against violence and violent
extremism, this draft resolution also incorporates a few
additional elements. It recalls and reaffirms measures

15-41818

10/12/2015

taken at the national and multilateral levels and
reaffirms the emphasis placed by the latest review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
on the need to unite against violent extremism. It recalls
with appreciation the high-level General Assembly
thematic debate on countering violent extremism, held
on 21 and 22 April.
It also recognizes local, national, regional and
multilateral initiatives aimed at addressing the
grievances that drive violent extremism, and the effort
made by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, including through organizing
the conference, held in June 2015, on “Youth and the
Internet: fighting radicalization and extremism”,
and notes increasing awareness of the need for a
comprehensive approach to prevent and counter violent
extremism and to address the conditions conducive to
its spread.
In the operative part, it encourages Member States
to increase their understanding of the drivers of violent
extremism, particularly for women and youth, so as to
develop targeted and comprehensive solutions to this
threat. It takes note of the intention of the SecretaryGeneral to propose a plan of action to prevent violent
extremism, and requests him to report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-second session on the
implementation of the present draft resolution.
Finally, allow me to express my sincere hope that
the draft resolution will gain the broadest possible
support and be adopted by consensus. That will help
accelerate coordination and cooperation among States
towards addressing the growing problems emanating
from violent extremism.
Before concluding, let me make an oral correction
to paragraph 15 of A/70/L.21 to read “takes note of”,
instead of “notes”, as it is in the submitted draft.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/70/L.21, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”, as
orally corrected.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have

A/70/PV.72

become sponsors of A/70/L.21: Armenia, Azerbaijan,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Iraq,
Libya, Nigeria, the Philippines, Portugal, Switzerland
and Tunisia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.21, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/70/L.21, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 70/109).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel fully supports the noble
vision of calling for the world to unite against violence
and violent extremism. The content of resolution 70/109
is commendable and praiseworthy.
The problem with today’s vote is not with the
message, but with the messenger. For the second time,
one of the world’s most violent and extreme regimes has
promoted a resolution against violence and extremism.
Iran calling for an end to violence is like a ventriloquist
calling for the puppet to keep quiet. In reality, the
behaviour of Iran stands in complete contradiction to
the words of the resolution. There is a word for this — it
is “hypocrisy”. When the United Nations gives Iran a
platform for this pretence at international legitimacy,
there is a word for that as well — it is “complicity”. The
audacity of Iran — a regime that hangs gays, stones
women, imprisons journalists and executes political
opponents — in promoting a resolution affirming
“human rights and fundamental freedoms” is simply
staggering.
The resolution recognizes that “a primary
responsibility of each State is to ensure a peaceful
and violence-free life for its people”. The resolution
goes further and underlines the “vital importance of...
instilling respect for life”. I repeat, “instilling respect
for life”. Yet, Iran executed over 700 of its citizens in the
first few months of 2015 alone, including at least two
children. That is an average of over three executions a
day and a sharp increase from last year. So much for
respect for life.
The courts that order such executions are
completely lacking in independence and impartiality,

15-4181811/14

A/70/PV.72

and the death penalty can be imposed for crimes ranging
from blasphemy to adultery. The fourth preambular
paragraph of the resolution affirms the promotion of
“respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction... as to race,
colour, sex [or] political opinions”,
and paragraph 2 explicitly condemns all forms of
violence against women. That might sound good, but
in Iran, women are forced to wear head coverings in
public and can be arrested by the so-called morality
police, who patrol the streets with batons, for failing
to comply. The Iranian actress Sadaf Taherian was
forced to flee Iran after posting photos of herself
without a headscarf on Instagram and Facebook, and
for expressing opinions that were “unacceptable” to the
regime. The World Economic Forum has ranked Iran
141st out of 145 countries for having the worst record
on women and the gender gap with men. So much for
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all.
The resolution has much to say as well about the
“right to freedom of expression, particularly by the
media and new technologies, including the Internet”.
Yes, members heard me correctly. The Iranian-led
resolution emphasizes the right to use media and new
technologies as an avenue of free expression. Maybe
someone should tweet that part of the resolution to
Solmaz Ikdar, an Iranian journalist sentenced to three
years in jail for insulting the Supreme Leader. Iran is
second on the Freedom House list of the world’s most
censored countries. Iranian journalists, bloggers and
social media activists have been arrested and sentenced
to harsh prison sentences for their activities online, and
websites continue to be blocked, including Facebook,
Twitter and YouTube. So much for the right to freedom
of expression guaranteed by the resolution.
The shamelessness of Iran in advancing this
resolution cannot mask its shameful record of human
rights abuses, of exporting terror and of destabilizing
the Middle East. Iran embodies the very opposite of
the principles it claims to affirm in the resolution,
“to develop friendly relations among nations... and to
strengthen universal peace.” Sponsoring the resolution
does not change the reality. Iran is the world’s leading
State sponsor of terrorism. Terror groups such as Hamas
and Hizbullah and other regional proxies operate with
Iranian funds and at Iranian instruction. It is a safe bet

12/14

10/12/2015

to say that across the Middle East, where there is terror,
there is Iranian involvement.
In a region of the world already threatened by an
explosion of violent extremism, Iran continues to ignite
conflicts and inflame sectarian divides. The subversive
and destabilizing hand of Iran can be found in every
corner of the region, and Iran plans to make things even
worse. Just last month, Hossein Salami, the Deputy
Commander of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps said:
“We ourselves are dictating the new literature
and language of Muslims’ struggle against the
West. Therefore, we should be ready to manage
multiple direct and proxy wars.”
The Iran that promoted the resolution before us
today is the same Iran that is reported to have tested
a mid-range ballistic missile last week, in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions. And let us
never forget that as we speak, Iranian riches, resources
and Revolutionary Guards are actively sustaining the
Al-Assad regime.
Iran is cynically taking advantage of the prestige of
the United Nations to portray itself as a State seeking
peace and moderation. Iran’s brazen hypocrisy in
supporting this resolution with one hand, while it sows
the seeds of terror and instability with the other, is
intended to draw attention from its aggression against
States of the region and its oppression of its own people.
Israel joined the consensus to demonstrate its
support for the ideals set out in the resolution and for the
rights of the Iranian people. However, the international
community must not allow Iran to use the United
Nations as a platform for whitewashing its crimes and,
by so doing, besmirch the integrity of this institution.
We must not let Iran succeed in evading responsibility
for its actions.
Mr. Norman (Canada): Canada joined the consensus
on resolution 70/109, entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism”. Canada is a strong supporter of
human rights and condemns the targeting of civilians,
which violates international humanitarian law. All
citizens have the right to live free from violence and
discrimination. In order to achieve a world without
violence, the rights of all people must be respected.
Recognizing the role of each State in ensuring a
peaceful society, and mindful of the objectives outlined
within the resolution, we urge all States, in particular

15-41818

10/12/2015

the sponsor of the resolution, to comply with their
human rights obligations, including for women, ethnic
minorities, and all religious communities.
Ms. Connelly (United States of America): The
United States joined the consensus today on resolution
70/109, entitled “A world against violence and violent
extremism”, because we continue to support initiatives
at the United Nations to advance the international
community’s efforts to counter violent extremism. The
United States sees preventing and countering violent
extremism as a core element of our comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism. Countering violent
extremism is critically important to our efforts to
combat terrorism and, as President Obama has said,
“our military and intelligence efforts are not
going to succeed alone; they have to be matched
by political and economic progress to address the
conditions that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant has exploited in order to take root.”
Whether non-State actors or Governments, those
who kill innocent people, disenfranchise large segments
of the population or foment sectarian conflict are acting
in a way that is contrary to the values of tolerance,
reconciliation, mutual understanding, non-violence
and inclusive societies called for in the resolution. The
United States is taking important steps to address the
underlying social, political and economic trends that
terrorists exploit, using whole-of-society approaches
that respect human rights and the rule of law.
Both at home and abroad, our efforts to counter
violent extremism encompass preventive aspects of
counter-terrorism, as well as interventions to counter
the attraction of extremist movements and ideologies
promoting violence. But we remain concerned that
some Governments use efforts to counter terrorism
and violent extremism as a means to stifle the exercise
of the freedoms of expression and peaceful assembly,
and other civil and political rights. Such actions may
run counter to their human rights commitments, may
be inconsistent with international legal obligations, are
counterproductive because they reduce citizens’ trust
in their Governments, and may even lead to increased
support for violent extremists. Ultimately, citizens who
are able to express their views and pursue political
change through democratic means are less likely to
resort to violence.
Finally, we look forward to working with Member
States to do our part to support the growing movement

A/70/PV.72

to counter violent extremism. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s action plan on preventing violent
extremism, which we expect to advance the movement
to counter violent extremism and to support the many
regional and local initiatives under way that seek to save
our youth and communities from violent extremists.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
Several delegations have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. May I remind Member States
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
express my appreciation and thanks to you, Sir, the
Secretariat and all delegations for their widespread
support for resolution 70/109, which has just been
adopted.
Allow me to say a few words about the statement
made by the representative of the Israeli regime. As
usual, he levelled accusations and allegations against
my country that are all baseless and nothing but a
bunch of lies. The anger and fury of that regime
against the resolution, which is aimed at combating
extremism and violence, is quite understandable and
was reflected in the hate speech that he read out today.
It is quite understandable that a regime that has created
an apartheid system in the territories it controls cannot
tolerate efforts to promote moderation, tolerance and
respect for the rights of peoples and human rights.
In that sense, the Israeli delegation has deemed the
resolution to be against itself.
The speaker represents a regime that has occupied
the lands of other nations for many decades and places
people in the occupied lands under harsh policies and
practices, and under siege — practices which have
been condemned time and again by the international
community. That regime practices one of the most
extremist policies ever contemplated and put in place by
a ruling entity in the contemporary world, shamelessly
flouting and violating every norm and principle of
international law and the civilized world. We are — and,
it is safe to say, all of humankind is — against the policy
of putting peoples under occupation and siege and of
denying them their basic rights and necessities, as the
Israelis do to the people living in the occupied territory,
including Gaza.

15-4181813/14

A/70/PV.72

In that respect, there is no doubt that the occupation,
suffering and humiliation that the Palestinian people
have endured for so long, and the atrocities that the
Israelis have committed against them in so many cases,
including the latest against Gaza, are a major source of
anger and bitterness that extremists have always tried
to exploit in order to advance their evil agenda. And
yes, we are against occupation because we consider it to
be, inter alia, one of the main sources that feed violent
extremism. The Islamic Republic of Iran has done all in
its power to fight and support the fight against violent
extremism, and encourage moderation in the region
surrounding Iran.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to respond to the remarks made by
the representative of the Israeli regime with regard to
Iran’s cooperation with Syria.
It was surprising to hear the representative of Israel,
in his first statement today, speak about humanity
and his country’s obligation to help people in Nepal
and Haiti, and weep in sympathy for our brothers in
Somalia and South Sudan. We saw the representative
saddened and chagrined by the lack of drinking water
and schools in Syria, and yet we all know of Israel’s

14/14

10/12/2015

practices against our Palestinian and Syrian brothers in
the occupied Syrian Golan.
The Israeli occupation is the main reason for human
suffering in the region and for extremism and terrorism
in the world. We have heard all delegations talk about
helping to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people caused by the practices of the Israeli regime. The
representative of Israel should implement the legitimate
recommendations of the Security Council and the
General Assembly urging it to end its occupation of the
occupied Arab territories, including the Golan.
As we mentioned in our statement earlier, Israel’s
cooperation with terrorist groups in Syria is an absolute
fact that has been confirmed by United Nations
commissions of inquiry. We simply transmitted the
information set out in United Nations reports to the
effect that there has been cooperation between the
Israeli regime and terrorist groups. As a consequence,
we are seeing the Israeli regime opposing our proposal
and that of our allies.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 16.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

15-41818
