S/2005/768

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 8 December 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union adopted at its 40th meeting held in Addis Ababa on 6 October
2005, and to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, under
which an International Working Group was created to assist the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire in the implementation of its programme and to consolidate and
strengthen existing follow-up mechanisms.
Please find attached the communiqué issued by the International Working
Group following its second meeting, held in Abidjan on 6 December 2005 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-63323 (E) 081205

*0563323*

S/2005/768

Annex
[Original: French]

International Working Group — second meeting,
6 December 2005
Final communiqué
1.
The ministerial International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire held its second
meeting on 6 December 2005 in Abidjan.
2.
It should be recalled that following the first meeting of the Group, held on
8 November 2005, the United Nations Security Council, in a presidential statement
dated 30 November 2005, expressed its full support to the Group and its work.
3.
This second meeting was co-chaired by H.E. Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, Foreign
Minister of Nigeria, and H.E. Mr. Pierre Schori, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, in the presence of ministers from the Niger,
South Africa and France, the High Representative of the United Nations for the
elections and representatives of Benin, Ghana, Guinea, the United Kingdom, the
United States, the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the International organization
of the Francophonie and the World Bank.
4.
The Group expresses its gratitude to the current chairman of the African
Union, the President of the Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union Mediator for the designation of H.E. Mr. Charles Konan Banny as
Prime Minister of the transitional period. The new Prime Minister took part in the
opening of this meeting of the Group.
5.
While congratulating Mr. Konan Banny on his nomination, the Group assured
him of its full support. In this regard, the Working Group invites the Mediation
Group to verify and report to the Working Group that the Prime Minister holds all
powers and all resources described in paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution
1633 (2005) and reaffirmed in the Security Council’s presidential statement of
30 November 2005.
6.
The mandate of the National Assembly will expire on 16 December 2005.
Pending the result of the consultations of the Ivorian parties foreseen in paragraph
11 of resolution 1633 (2005), should it become necessary to enact legislation in
order to ensure the efficient and expeditious implementation of the programme of
the Government during the transitional period arising from resolution 1633 (2005),
the Government, in Council of Ministers, will rapidly adopt decisions, which the
Prime Minister will then present within two days to the Head of State, who must
sign them within a maximum of five days.
7.
Considering that the Independent Electoral Commission is not yet operational,
the Group deplores the delay in the electoral process and underlines the consequent
risk that elections will not be organized within the stipulated time frame. The Group
gives its full support to the High Representative on the consultations he initiated to
allow the Commission to function without delay as well as, if necessary, to use
arbitration powers with regard to the constitution of the bureau, in accordance with

2

S/2005/768

resolutions 1603 (2005) and 1633 (2005) and the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 30 November 2005. The Group reiterates the availability of the
Mediation Group to provide all the necessary support to the High Representative for
the elections.
8.
The Group notes that the Security Council has, on 30 November, reiterated its
readiness, in close consultation with the Mediation of the African Union, to impose
individual measures as foreseen by paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004)
and by resolution 1633 (2005). It recalls that those measures target individuals
(a) blocking the implementation of the peace process, (b) held to be responsible for
serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in Côte
d’Ivoire, (c) inciting publicly hatred and violence, or any person or entity who is
(d) determined to be in violation of the arms embargo. Charged, by virtue of its
mandate, to evaluate, monitor and follow up closely the progress made, the Group is
particularly resolved to help rapidly overcome any hindrance or slowdown affecting
the process. It is ready to consider any attack or obstruction to the action of the
United Nations, the impartial forces, the Security Council or the Group itself as
demonstrating that those concerned oppose the process. The Group urges the Ivorian
media to abstain from any publication, radio or television broadcasting which may
undermine the peace and reconciliation process. It encourages the Prime Minister to
take steps to improve the media environment as a matter of urgency. For all
violations considered criminal offences, the possible implementation of targeted
individual measures is without prejudice to the recourse to appropriate legal
proceedings — Ivorian, foreign or international.
9.
The Group notes that the day-to-day Mediation Group, co-chaired by South
Africa and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and comprising the
High Representative of the United Nations for the elections as well as the
representatives of the African Union and ECOWAS, has been meeting regularly and
has been following up effectively the evolution of the peace process. It has noted
with concern the manoeuvres and practices contrary to that process as well as the
violations of human rights registered by the Mediation Group in its first report and
invites it again to bring to the attention of the Group any obstacle to the peace
process.
10. The Group has updated the road map towards organizing free, fair, open and
transparent elections as soon as possible and no later than 31 October 2006. That
road map is articulated around the following components: governance and political
process, disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion of ex-combatants, disarming
and dismantling militias, redeployment of the administration, identification and
citizenship, electoral process, restoration of security with the support of the
impartial forces, respect for human rights, sanctions and hindrances to freedom of
movement, media follow-up and humanitarian action.
11. The Group has agreed to hold its next meeting in Côte d’Ivoire on 15 January
2006.

3
