United Nations

S/PV.5293

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5293

rd meeting
Wednesday, 26 October 2005, 10.00 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Motoc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Romania)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Idohou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Wang Guangya
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Baja
Mr. Denisov
Sir. Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-57113 (E)

*0557113*

S/PV.5293

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

concerning counter-terrorism; and the representative of
Romania in his capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
It is so decided.

Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Fiji, India, Israel, Liechtenstein, Samoa, Switzerland
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to hear briefings under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure by Ambassador César Mayoral,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Løj, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2005/663, which contains the
text of a letter dated 21 October 2005 from the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the Committee’s seventeenth 90-day work
programme.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, the Chairman of the
1373 Committee and the Chairman of the 1540
Committee.
I now give the floor to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): This is my first
report pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 1617
(2005). Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
11 individuals and one entity have been added to the
list, and one individual has been removed from the list.
The Committee considered in great detail the
third report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, published as document S/2005/572.
The Committee agreed with a number of its
recommendations. Some recommendations will be
referred to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, as we
see them as valuable but outside the scope of our
mandate. Also, there are some recommendations which
will require further consideration by the Committee,
including on important matters such as listing and
delisting. Pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1617
(2005), I can inform the Council that consideration of
the revised draft guidelines has begun and that the
agreed work programme contains a clear outline for
our discussions.

S/PV.5293

Pursuant to paragraph 8 of the same resolution,
the Committee has substantively increased cooperation
with Interpol. A resolution adopted at the Interpol
General Assembly in September will enable us to
initiate a number of practical steps, including the
issuance by Interpol of a new notice indicating that an
individual has been placed on the Consolidated List. It
is our expectation that this will significantly improve
the implementation by Member States of the sanctions,
in particular the travel ban. Here, I would like to
express the Committee’s appreciation for the efforts
made by the Monitoring Team and by the Interpol
Special Representative in New York, Mr. Klaus Ulrich
Kersten, in advancing cooperation between the
Committee and Interpol.
The Committee also considered a request from
the Principality of Liechtenstein to make available the
Consolidated List maintained by the Committee
pursuant to paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1452 (2002)
to interested Member States. After extensive
consultations, the Committee did not grant that request.
Nonetheless, at the Principality’s request, the letter has
been forwarded to the Council for issuance as an
official document.
The Committee took note of the participation of
four listed individuals in the Afghan parliamentary
elections held on 18 September 2005. The Committee
decided to contact Afghan representatives in New York
to remind them of their country’s obligations regarding
resolution 1617 (2005), and requested the Monitoring
Team to clarify with the Afghan Government how this
issue will be dealt with.
I turn now to the activities of the Monitoring
Team. Since the appointment of its members in
September the Team has attended and held various
meetings in New York and abroad, including the
already mentioned Interpol General Assembly; a
conference of East African intelligence and security
heads, where it was able to explain and promote the
work of the Committee; and a conference on terrorist
use of the Internet. In addition, the Team has visited
three countries in Southern Africa, and a Team member
accompanied me on my recent travels. In New York the
Team has met various visiting counter-terrorism
experts and has held discussions with the Action
against Terrorism Unit of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe as a result of my trip to
Vienna, and with the European Commission Legal
Service.

The Committee continues to greatly appreciate
the work of the Monitoring Team and looks forward to
the consideration of its next report, to be submitted at
the end of January 2006.
Let me now speak of my visit to selected States.
Between 8 and 19 October I undertook a visit to
selected countries pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 1617 (2005). I visited Nigeria, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Permanent Council in Vienna and Chad.
As discussed in the Committee, we have found an
increasing need to focus on visits to Member States
where there may be concerns about capacity, the need
for technical assistance and the requirement for the
submission of reports pursuant to resolution 1455
(2003). I found the trip useful in terms of better
understanding views of the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime and the possible improvements that
can be made to it, including as a result of regional
threat assessments.
In both Nigeria and Chad we were honoured to
meet a number of ministers and other authorities
dealing with the implementation of the sanctions
measures, and I had an opportunity to convey the
Committee’s strong interest in receiving reports
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003). I should, at this
point, note that 48 Member States have yet to report to
the Committee; we continue to urge all non-reporting
countries to submit their reports as soon as possible.
Chad and Nigeria are among those countries, and their
authorities assured me that the reports would soon be
forthcoming.
Again, the visits to Nigeria and, in particular, to
Chad were most useful as they gave me an insight into
the effects of a lack of technical capacity to implement
the sanctions regime. I have no doubt that the political
will is present in both countries; this was clearly
displayed by the authorities at all levels. But the
Committee and the Security Council need to consider
what can be done to further assist countries with a need
for technical assistance.
In response to an invitation from the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, I briefed the Permanent
Council in Vienna and met with relevant officials. I
also briefed Permanent Representatives there and met
with the Director General of the United Nations Office
at Vienna and Executive Director of the United Nations

3

S/PV.5293

Office on Drugs and Crime. The discussions I had at
the OSCE were very useful, and I hope they will be a
first step in what should be a very fruitful process of
enhancing our cooperation with regional organizations.
I turn now to the future work of the Committee
and the Monitoring Team. Security Council resolution
1617 (2005) provides the very clear guidance to the
Committee with regard to its future activities. First of
all, its work should be focused on the adoption of the
Committee’s revised guidelines, including listing and
delisting procedures and the implementation of
resolution 1452 (2002).
Secondly, it reiterates the need for regular
dialogue with Member States through oral or written
communications regarding effective implementation of
the sanctions measures, including through involvement
in the improvement of the Committee’s list.
Thirdly, the resolution urges the Committee to
maximize its performance by benefiting from the work
of the relevant specialized agencies and international
organizations.
Fourthly, the resolution reiterates the need for
close cooperation and continuous information-sharing
among all three counter-terrorism bodies. It is my firm
intention to intensify the work of the Committee in
forthcoming months to achieve those objectives.
Members of the Committee and I will continue to rely
on the professional assistance of the coordinator and
members of the Monitoring Team.
In conclusion, the sanctions targeting Al-Qaida
and Taliban members and their associates are an
effective, although not yet perfect tool in the fight
against terrorism. It is the responsibility of the Council
to constantly sharpen and improve that tool. In order to
render sanctions as effective as possible all States must
contribute to their implementation. Only then will
United Nations sanctions play their intended role and
function as a significant preventive measure that will
assist, working together with other counter-terrorist
measures, in combating terrorist activities rather than
merely reacting to their tragic consequences.
The President: I thank Ambassador Mayoral for
his briefing. I now give the floor to Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

4

Ms. Løj (Denmark): In my capacity as Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) I would
like to review the Committee’s activities over the past
three months, and to submit to the Security Council the
Committee’s seventeenth work programme for the
current three months period, lasting until 31 December
2005.
I want to thank the Head of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
Mr. Javier Rupérez, and his team, as well as the
Secretariat staff, for the valuable support they give to
the CTC.
Before I elaborate on the work of the Committee,
I would like to point out that we now have a fully
staffed Executive Directorate. The Committee will
therefore benefit fully from the assistance envisaged in
the revitalization documents. More significantly, the
Committee hopes Member States will begin to profit
from the fact that we now have the resources to give
them the guidance and advice they might want in
fulfilling the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). I
sincerely hope that States will take advantage of that
valuable resource and ask for whatever assistance they
need to further their counter-terrorism efforts.
Over the past three months, the Committee has
focused on the following priority areas: we are
engaging with regional organizations, which have more
recently developed a counter-terrorism agenda; we are
catching up on the backlog of reports from States; we
are continuing to look at ways to do our job better as
facilitators of technical assistance; we continue to visit
States, always with their consent; we are enhancing our
dialogue and cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, inter alia, through their
involvement in the CTC visits to States and by
engaging them to help us strengthen our capacity to
promote implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We
are also taking steps to ensure follow-up to Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement of
terrorism adopted at the summit meeting in September;
and finally, we are engaging in policy discussions
aimed at giving CTED the guidance foreseen in the
revitalization documents.
Let me brief you in greater detail on each of those
areas and explain to you what we hope to accomplish
by the end of the year.
First, the Committee regularly stresses the
importance of regional organizations in the fight

S/PV.5293

against terrorism. Regional groups are increasingly
vital as we move towards facilitating technical
assistance to States that are unable to do everything
they would like in the fight against terrorism. The
importance of regional organizations in this regard was
also reflected in resolution 1631 (2005) passed in
connection with the Security Council debate on 17
October 2005 on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.
I am, therefore, pleased to note that an increasing
number of regional organizations continue to develop
their counter-terrorism agendas and include efforts to
help their members implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). The CTC and its CTED stand
ready to provide guidance and assistance to such
organizations in those endeavours, and I urge
organizations to come forward as they realize they can
benefit from closer contact with the Committee and its
CTED. For its part, the Committee too will take
advantage of CTED’s improved resources to do more
to reach out to regional groups.
In that light, I am pleased to note the
strengthening of the Committee’s dialogue with several
regional organizations over the past three months. For
example, the Committee welcomed a briefing on
21 July 2005, by the Director of the Peace and Security
Division of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). Several IGAD members are
behind in reporting to the Committee and are asking
for help in building their capacity to fight terrorism. I
hope the CTC will be able to provide IGAD with the
necessary guidance and assistance for it to succeed in
its endeavour to develop its counter-terrorism agenda
and to help its members.
I also welcome the initiative taken by the Pacific
Islands Forum to enhance its dialogue with the CTC
about timely reporting and the possible facilitation of
assistance to its needy member States. Similarly, CTC
welcomes that the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
has decided to establish a crime and security taskforce,
which includes counter-terrorism in its mandate. The
Committee is looking forward to cooperate with it.
At the same time, CTC and its CTED are
continuing cooperation with organizations such as the
European Union, the African Union, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Council of Europe, the

Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Organization of American States, to
name a few.
In that regard we also note the essential
contribution made by such international organizations
as the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), the International Maritime Organization
(IMO), the World Customs Organization (WCO), the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
(FATF), the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) to CTC visits to Member States
and the finalization of reports from such visits. We
continue our interaction with those organizations in the
preparation of new visits. The Committee encourages
the
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations to consider ways to enhance their
bilateral cooperation in order to assist each other in
developing their counter-terrorism agenda.
In that connection, it is time for the Committee to
consider how to follow-up on the latest special meeting
with international, regional, and subregional groups.
Previous gatherings have done a lot to enhance the
common effort. The Committee will be considering
how to approach future meetings in order to ensure that
they will be equally useful for everyone concerned.
A second priority for the Committee is reflected
in its determination to eliminate the backlog of reports
from States on their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by the end of the year. Moreover, as indicated in
the seventeenth work programme, we will examine
ways of updating the reporting regime. This includes
looking at how to ensure that all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) are included in future dialogues with
States. Also, in cooperation with the 1540 and 1267
Committees, we will discuss ways of jointly addressing
the so-called reporting fatigue referred to by several
States at public meetings such as this. We are
conscious of the recent summit’s call for the Council to
consider streamlining the reporting procedure.
Thirdly, it is already well established that the
CTC assesses assistance needs when discussing how
far States have come in implementing resolution 1373
(2001). In the most recent reporting period, the
Committee has assessed assistance needs and obtained
agreement to share needs with potential donors for 25
States. We started sharing the needs assessments with

5

S/PV.5293

the Counter-Terrorism Action Group, and we are in
touch with a number of potential donors.
Over the next months, the Committee intends to
strengthen its dialogue with States to determine what
each one needs in order to reach agreement on such
needs and to stress the importance of meeting those
needs. In this process, the CTC will also enhance its
cooperation
with
the
relevant
international
organizations, which often have the required
experience in specific areas of resolution 1373 (2001).
The CTC will also look at how its dialogue with
potential donors can become more result-oriented. As
part of the Committee’s consideration and dialogue, the
technical assistance providers and recipients will
include issues of prioritization and focus, in order to be
able to make the greatest impact on the global counterterrorism effort. The Committee is well aware that
much has been said about facilitation and that the time
has come to produce concrete results.
Fourthly, visits to States continue to be an
important part of monitoring implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and of gaining a better
understanding of assistance needs. Since I last reported
to the Council, the Committee has finalized reports
from its first four visits, in cooperation with the visited
States and the involved international and regional
organizations. The Committee must now ensure the
appropriate follow-up to such visits, while the States,
for their part, work to meet their commitments to
further their implementation of 1373 (2001), as agreed
in the respective visit reports. Moreover, the
Committee has decided to visit four more States, with
their consent.
Fifthly, resolution 1624 (2005), adopted during
the September summit, calls upon States to report to
the CTC on implementation of this resolution. The
Committee was directed to include Member States’
efforts to implement 1624 (2005) in its dialogue with
those States. To launch this dialogue, the Committee
has decided that its letters to States on implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) will also contain questions
on resolution 1624 (2005). I encourage States to
provide the Committee with detailed information about
their efforts in this regard to enable the Committee to
report back to the Council on their implementation.
Before I conclude, I should like to stress that the
CTC puts great emphasis on its responsibility to
provide policy guidance to the CTED. The Committee

6

will continue its discussions about how to provide
transparent guidance on implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) through the development of best practices.
Also, the Committee will discuss how a human rights
perspective might be appropriately incorporated into
the Committee’s policy and substantive work while, at
the same time, respecting the various aspects of its
Security Council mandate.
In this connection, I should mention that before
the end of the year, the CTC will take steps to provide
for the Council’s comprehensive review of the CTED,
in line with resolution 1535 (2004).
The CTC remains a crucial instrument in the
international community’s fight against terrorism.
Developments during the last three months have again
proven that its task remains vital and urgent. The
support from and cooperation with Member States
remains invaluable. On behalf of the CTC, I should
like to thank Member States and again encourage them
to look on the fully staffed CTED as an opportunity to
obtain the guidance and assistance they need in their
efforts to fulfil the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).
The President: I shall now give a briefing in my
capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
I have the honour to brief the Security Council on
the activities of the 1540 Committee since 21 July this
year and to introduce the Committee’s third programme
of work, for the period 1 October through the end of
2005.
The main task of the Committee for the last three
months has been the examination of national reports
submitted by States. I am very pleased to announce that
this objective, which is an important part of monitoring
States’ efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004),
has been carried out successfully.
Since June 2005, the Committee, with the
valuable support of its group of experts, has examined
124 national reports. On the basis of this process and
with a view to better understanding the measures
undertaken or planned by States to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee decided to
solicit additional information and/or clarification in
areas covered by their first reports. As a result, letters
have been forwarded to the submitting States through

S/PV.5293

their Missions in New York, together with the
individual matrices used for processing the first
reports. The Committee has requested States to address
the information gaps identified in their reports and to
inform the Committee accordingly within two months
from the date of the letter. We stand ready to develop a
constructive and transparent dialogue with all States in
addressing the issue of additional information.
The Committee will continue to examine further
first reports that are received from States, as well as
additional information being provided in response to
the letters. In that regard, I would like to inform the
Council that 21 States have already provided additional
information with respect to their first reports. All of
this data will be processed accordingly by the
Committee.
In order to broaden its knowledge about States’
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee decided to build a legislative database that
will be used as a supplementary information tool for
the further examination of the reports. This database
will contain links to relevant public sources of
information about States’ national legislative and other
regulatory measures. The final product of the work
under way will be shared with the reporting States at a
later stage.
Turning to the question of reporting and outreach,
on previous occasions I stated that by April 2006, the
Committee would have to provide necessary
information to enable the Security Council to assess
the progress States have made in implementing the
resolution and to decide what should be done
subsequently.
The Committee can properly fulfil its remaining
mandate only if all States submit their reports on time,
as the Council has called upon them to do. Given the
provision of sufficient information, the Committee can
present to the Security Council a report on what has
been achieved so far by States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), and on which
implementation gaps need to be further addressed.
As of today, 67 Member States have yet to report.
I would like to call again on those that have not yet
done so to submit their first reports without further
delay. Reporting is the best tool to allow the
Committee to account for States’ implementation
efforts and to promote assistance for those which
encounter reporting or implementation difficulties.

All States should be aware that, unless they meet
their obligations in full, such as by enacting and
enforcing effective national legal and regulatory
measures, their territories may be used for the transit
shipping of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
related materials, or for the financing of illegal
activities or as a safe haven to broker the sale of
WMD-related materials in other countries. However,
we recognize that fully implementing the resolution
will be a long-term undertaking that will require
additional dialogue and coordination.
The Committee has continued to raise the issue of
further reporting and has promoted the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) through outreach activities.
On 8 September 2005, together with the Chairpersons
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, I had the
opportunity to address the second World Conference of
Speakers of Parliaments. This was the first occasion to
reach out to leaders of national legislatures to inform
them of our achievements as well as of the challenges
ahead, and, more important, to seek their support in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through the
incorporation of its provisions into national legislation.
I would like to express my gratitude to Argentina
and the United Kingdom for contributing to the
organization of the first regional seminar, entitled
“Advancing in the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004)”, for countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean. The interactive format of
the discussions that took place in Buenos Aires from
26 to 28 September has contributed to a better
comprehension of the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004) as well as of the steps to be pursued by States in
the implementation process.
The Committee also had the opportunity to
promote its outreach programme in Africa and Eurasia
and was represented by its experts at the Uganda
workshop on the global bargain for biosecurity and
health and at the Seventh International Conference on
Export Controls, held in Sweden. We will continue to
approach all countries that have yet to report. I have
expressed my readiness to reach out again to members
of all regional groups in New York. We have already
met Member States from Latin America and the
Caribbean. Informal interaction with other regional
groups will follow soon.

7

S/PV.5293

The Committee, with the support of Member
States and the United Nations Department for
Disarmament Affairs and its regional centres, will
continue its outreach activities. Seminars and
workshops aimed at raising the awareness of the
proliferation problem worldwide, facilitating further
reporting and advancing the implementation process,
are useful tools for our work. In this context, I would
like to welcome the statement made by China in the
First Committee of the General Assembly on
10 October indicating that China is giving positive
consideration to hosting a regional seminar on issues
related to resolution 1540 (2004) and is discussing this
matter with relevant United Nations bodies.
The issues of improving reporting performance
and late submission are considered in a coordinated
manner by the three Committees. We are making use of
country visits by the CTC and the 1267 Committee in
order to raise the issue of reporting.
On the subject of assistance, in considering first
national reports, the Committee has identified offers of
and requests for assistance. Information on offers of
assistance is available on the website of the 1540
Committee and includes, in some instances, areas in
which a specific country has indicated that it is able to
provide assistance, as well as initial contact
information. The Committee will seek to expand this
information, as appropriate. The Committee will
continue to act as a clearing house on the issue of
assistance. In further examining the first reports and
additional information from States, the Committee will
keep up-to-date information on the issue of assistance
in order to contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In order to effectively perform
its role as a clearing house on assistance, the
Committee will continue to request States, as
appropriate, to designate contact points on assistance.
As I mentioned before, full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) by all States is a long-term
objective that goes beyond the current mandate of the
Committee. It will require continuous efforts at the
national, regional and international levels on capacitybuilding and assistance, as well as monitoring and
measuring progress made by States in implementing
the resolution.
I am confident that the Security Council will
consider how best to ensure that the work of the

8

Committee makes
non-proliferation.

an

enduring

contribution

to

As the process of examining national reports
continues, the Committee will interact and cooperate,
as appropriate, with the relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Working
relationships with those organizations are being
developed, as appropriate.
In the same vein, the 1540 Committee will
maintain close cooperation with the CTC and the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, as
envisaged in resolution 1566 (2004) and in statements
by the President of the Security Council of 25 April
2005
(S/PRST/2005/16)
and
20
July
2005
(S/PRST/2005/34). The Committee’s experts will work
closely with the experts of the other Committees,
making every effort to maximize synergies between
and among the experts of the Committees.
Transparency will remain a priority of our work.
The Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen will reach out on
a regular basis to Member States. This will include
work with the United Nations media, including through
joint briefings with the Chairpersons of the CTC and
the Committee on Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions. The
Committee will keep updating its dedicated website as
an additional source of information on issues related to
resolution 1540 (2004). A separate entry on assistance
was added to the website. The Committee will also
continue its practice of informing organizations outside
the United Nations about our work through attendance
at international, regional and subregional meetings and
conferences. I will make full use of these opportunities
to address, in particular, the issues of further reporting
and implementation.
On behalf of the Committee, I look forward to the
cooperation of all States as the Committee carries its
work forward in the months ahead.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to

S/PV.5293

deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to associate myself with the statement to be made
later in the debate by the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
The recent terrorist attacks in Bali have shown
once more that terrorism knows no boundaries and
constitutes one of the most serious global threats to
peace, freedom and human dignity. Acts of terrorism
are under no circumstances justifiable on any grounds,
be they political, religious or philosophical. Those who
commit such horrific acts must be brought to justice.
The international community must once more
show its resolve and determination to collectively fight
this scourge. Appropriate action, at the national and
international levels, is an obligation for all Member
States, pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001), 1540 (2004) and related resolutions.
We would like to express our thanks to the
Chairman of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee, Ambassador César Mayoral, for briefing us
today on the recent activities of the Committee. The
addition of 11 new individuals and one entity to the
Consolidated List is a welcome development. Listing
of individuals and groups has an important political
and psychological impact and can function as a
deterrent to the commission of terrorist acts. However,
there is a growing international concern about existing
listing and delisting procedures and the lack of due
process requirements. We believe that the Security
Council should address those concerns as soon as
possible, if sanctions are to be a credible and effective
tool in the fight against terrorism.
In that connection, during our open debates many
Member States have repeatedly proposed the
establishment of a review mechanism that would allow
access by individuals requesting delisting. That would
be an adequate response to such concerns. The
probable need to revise the existing guidelines was
foreseen by resolution 1617 (2005). Indeed, revision of
the guidelines so as to develop more precise and
detailed provisions regarding delisting procedures,
based on due process requirements and humanitarian
exemptions, should be a high priority for the
Committee, since that can considerably enhance the
sanctions regime.

We would like to extend our many thanks and our
appreciation to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Løj.
She gave us useful insight into the Committee’s
activities over the past three months, as well as
updating us on its programme of work for the
upcoming 90-day period.
We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) is now fully
operational. It will contribute to the better provision of
assistance and guidance to States so as more effectively
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We would like to
thank the head of the CTED, Ambassador Javier
Rupérez, and his team, for their ongoing efforts to
support the CTC.
We note with interest that the Committee has
enhanced its cooperation and dialogue with some
regional organizations, which may help them to build
their capacity to combat terrorism. We also welcome
the Committee’s efforts to eliminate the backlog of
reports from States concerning their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Likewise, we commend the
efforts of the Committee to explore ways to strengthen
the facilitation of technical assistance to States, with a
view to better implementing the provisions of the
resolution.
We are pleased to hear today that the CTC has
taken steps to ensure follow-up to resolution 1624
(2005), regarding incitement to commit terrorist acts,
which was adopted in September 2005 at the Security
Council summit meeting. The resolution requires States
to report to the CTC, as part of their ongoing dialogue,
on the steps they have taken to implement the
resolution. We would like to stress, however, that, in
implementing the resolution, States must ensure that
they comply with their obligations under international
law, refugee law, and international humanitarian law.
Finally, we fully support the decision of the
Committee to engage in a policy discussion on how to
incorporate a human rights perspective into its work. In
that regard, we warmly welcome the appointment of a
human rights expert to the CTED. We believe that the
close cooperation of the expert with the Commission
on Human Rights and the recently appointed Special
Rapporteur on human rights and terrorism will help
States to implement counter-terrorism measures in
conformity with human rights law.

9

S/PV.5293

We must thank you, Sir, in your other capacity, as
the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for
your briefing on recent activities and future work. We
are pleased to learn that the Committee has completed
the examination of all the first reports that were
submitted by 1 October. We believe that the
examination of State reports is an essential part of
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004) and
reinforce the global counter-proliferation regime. We
encourage States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports to the Committee so that it may assess
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and consider
further measures.
We note with interest the steps taken by the
Committee to facilitate the provision of technical
assistance to States to implement the resolution. We
support the Committee’s ongoing efforts to establish
closer interaction and cooperation with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
with the aim of reinforcing implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Lastly, we fully support an increased cooperation
and coordination between the three Committees — the
1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees. We believe that
those Committees should continue to function in a
transparent and open way, particularly through the
holding of joint briefings and by providing information
on a regular basis to Member States on their respective
activities.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The delegation of
Brazil is grateful to Ambassador César Mayoral, Ellen
Løj and Mihnea Motoc for their valuable briefings on
the activities of the Committees they chair.
Concerning the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, my delegation finds that the
period since our previous joint public meeting has been
very productive. Among other activities, the
Committee has been working successfully on
cooperation with Interpol and has been considering the
recommendations of the third report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2005/572),
which contains valuable contributions on how to
further many aspects of the Committee’s work. The
Chairman has undertaken a second trip to selected
countries to improve dialogue with Member States.

10

Some urgent tasks remain before us, however. In
our view the most important among them is the
revision of the draft guidelines of the 1267 Committee,
as mandated by resolution 1617 (2005). Work on the
guidelines is urgently needed in order to update them
and better adapt them to the new needs of our task.
Special attention should be paid to the issues of listing,
delisting
and
associated
procedures.
Present
mechanisms for both listing and delisting leave
significant room for improvement in transparency,
effectiveness and fairness. The Monitoring Team has
formulated some noteworthy suggestions to that effect
in its proposed revisions to Committee guidelines. We
hope to be able to start working soon on those
suggestions, as well as on other ideas.
As regards the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and taking into account that this is the first
public meeting on terrorism since the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
has become fully operational, I would like to make a
few comments on important issues currently under
discussion that are likely to influence the work of that
body in years to come.
First and foremost, our delegation believes that
from now on the CTED will be in a better position to
carry out its ambitious programme of work under the
policy guidance of the plenary of the CTC.
In our view, CTED’s primary role is to identify
States’ technical assistance needs and facilitate the
provision of that assistance. Unfortunately, many
Member States still lack the institutions and qualified
personnel necessary to deal with the terrorist threat.
Therefore, we emphasize that providing assistance to
States in areas related to institution-building and
training is one of the best ways to counter terrorism
and also a very efficient way to persuade Member
States, which may be under the false impression that
international terrorism poses only a remote threat to
their countries, to be more involved in this issue.
Brazil strongly encourages States that might
benefit from such assistance to request it. We also
stress the need for the United Nations to reach mutual
agreement on the potential technical needs of States
through increased dialogue and to handle with utmost
care any sensitive information that may expose State’s
vulnerabilities to terrorism.
In accordance with resolution 1535 (2004), Brazil
hopes that visits to States with their consent will

S/PV.5293

provide the CTC with a more thorough understanding
of the situation in those countries, including further
insight into the difficulties States may face in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). It is also
essential that a proper follow-up mechanism to those
visits be put in place, so as to ensure that technical
assistance and other needs identified during the visits
are duly taken into account. We believe that the
CTED’s work will contribute to the identification of
possible best practices in various areas related to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), such as
those involving the financing of terrorism. We recall
that best practices are, by definition, non-binding
instruments that should be in conformity with existing
international law.

In the coming weeks, the Committee will begin to
devote itself to considering the responses to requests it
has made for additional information. That exercise, we
believe, will allow the Committee to have a full and
comprehensive picture of the state of worldwide
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It will also
serve as the basis for the final report to be submitted by
the Committee to the Council by April 2006. It seems
appropriate to mention that that reporting exercise has
also proved to be very positive for Brazil at the
domestic level, as it has stimulated Brazilian
authorities to proceed with a broad assessment of our
legal system and to identify redundant provisions with
a view to facilitating the modernization of the national
legal framework.

Another important issue on the CTC’s agenda is
the incorporation of the human rights perspective while
countering terrorism — that is, the idea that all United
Nations bodies should always act in conformity with
international human rights law. Despite the fact that the
CTED’s mandate does not include a monitoring role in
that field, it is important that its work actually
contribute to strengthening the observance of human
rights standards. We believe that General Assembly
resolution 59/191, entitled “Protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism”,
which was adopted by consensus, should be a primary
reference for the CTED’s work in that area. While
respecting the Committee’s own mandate, the CTED is
expected to liaise with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, and with other human rights
organs in matters related to counter-terrorism.
Furthermore, we expect to engage in a fruitful Security
Council discussion in December, involving a
comprehensive review of the CTED’s work, as
mandated by resolution 1535 (2004).

Concerning technical assistance, I wish to stress
that the Brazilian Government is ready to provide
assistance, as appropriate, to States in the Latin
American and Caribbean region and to other
developing countries possibly lacking the legal or
regulatory
infrastructure
and
implementation
experience required to implement the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).

As regards the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), my
delegation is pleased to note that, with the valuable
support of the group of experts, the Committee has
been able to conclude the examination of the first
round of national reports submitted by Member States.
That is a most welcome achievement. At the same
time, we continue to encourage those States that have
not yet done so to present their first reports as soon as
possible.

Finally, I should recall that for Brazil, the very
existence of weapons of mass destruction, either in the
hands of non-State actors or in the possession of States
themselves, is a matter of grave concern. Our
Government continues to call for complete, verifiable
and irreversible disarmament.
This is probably the last opportunity in 2005 for a
regular briefing from the Security Council Committees
regarding terrorism. We are all aware of the urgency of
dealing forcefully and decisively with the menace of
international terrorism. Yet we must not let a
heightened sense of vulnerability — given that
terrorism can now threaten anyone, anywhere — lead
us to forgo fundamental principles and rights. Our
delegation will continue to cooperate constructively on
this issue, which has considerable impact on the type
of society we want to build in the years to come.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I have
the honour also to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and those countries that have aligned
themselves with this statement.
I should like to start by thanking the three
Committee Chairmen for their comprehensive
briefings.

11

S/PV.5293

Once again, recent events have shown us that the
threat of terrorist attack is ever present. It seems that
every time we gather for a meeting of this type, we
must face the harsh reality of recent terrorist action.
The European Union extends its deepest condolences
to the people and the Government of Indonesia and to
the victims in Bali. The terrible events that they and
others around the world have suffered have served only
to renew our determination to fight this battle and to
maximize our efforts to counter this global menace.
The European Union welcomes the steps that the
United Nations is taking in that direction. In particular,
we strongly support the measures outlined in the
summit outcome document (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) and in Security Council resolution
1624 (2005). We fully expect and look forward to the
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism during the present session of the
General Assembly.
We are also highly appreciative of the
appointment of the new Commission on Human Rights
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism. The European Union firmly
believes that any strategy to counter terrorism must of
necessity be coupled with a concern for the rights and
freedoms of individuals.
The European Union welcomes the adoption of
the new Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions resolution —
resolution 1617 (2005) — in particular the clarification
it provides on the definition of association with
Al-Qaida, and its encouragement of Member States to
endorse the internationally recognized Financial Action
Task Force standards. We hope that, following that
endorsement, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
now intends to adopt the standards as an example of
best practice for States.
We are also pleased to note that resolution 1617
(2005) tasks the Committee with furthering work on its
guidelines, including on procedures for delisting and
providing humanitarian exemptions. The European
Union strongly favours the creation of clearer and more
detailed guidance on those issues, and we urge the
Committee to begin its work in that area as soon as
possible.
The European Union also welcomes the adoption
of resolution 1624 (2005) and looks forward to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee’s working to ensure that

12

States are doing all that they can to implement the
resolution. We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) is now at full strength,
and we are glad to note that the resulting increase in
CTC and CTED capacity has led to the production of a
full and forward-looking programme of work.
In particular, the European Union places great
emphasis on the importance of the coordination and
facilitation of technical assistance, and we keenly
anticipate the expansion of the CTED’s role in those
areas. We look forward to its increased engagement
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations and with the donors in order to produce
tangible results. The EU has participated in CTED
visits to countries with which it has a close
relationship, and it looks forward to doing so again.
The European Union welcomes the ongoing work
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We are pleased to
learn that the Committee has now completed its
examination of the first reports submitted by States.
We welcome the beginning of more work on technical
assistance for States to implement the resolution, and
the EU stands ready to play its part. Our member States
are working hard to identify key areas of
implementation to address, from both national and
international perspectives, and we would be glad to
consider any requests for assistance or advice to such
States as might be required.
The European Union supports increased
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees and their experts. Issues such as
information-sharing, visits and technical assistance are
relevant to the Council’s work overall, and the work of
the Committees should reinforce one another as much
as possible in those areas. As a regional organization,
the European Union welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005) and stands ready to
work with the Council to take forward close
cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism.
Implementing our regional strategy to counter
terrorist financing remains a high priority for the
European Union. Notable achievements include
progress towards adopting and implementing new
regulatory measures to tackle terrorist financing and
regulate wire transfers, alternative remittance systems
and cash couriers. We continue to work towards an EU
code of conduct for regulating the charitable sector by

S/PV.5293

improving financial information exchange and
investigation, as well as by improving asset-freezing
measures at both the EU and national level. We are
also working on a programme of assistance to priority
third countries and are actively considering to which
other countries the EU could usefully contribute. We
are in the process of drafting a Europe-wide strategy on
recruitment and radicalization, and as always stand
ready to play our part in the global response to
terrorism.
Mr. Idohou (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Ambassador of Denmark, the
Ambassador of Argentina and the Ambassador of
Romania for their briefings to the Council on the
activities of the Committees that they chair. It is clear
that the fight against terrorism remains a high priority
for the international community. Acts of terrorism are
crimes against humanity, especially when they target
innocent civilians. They constitute a grave violation of
the basic values of today’s world, in particular human
dignity. Terrorism’s poisonous effect is further
intensifying the divisions among civilizations and
religions. In that regard, terrorism constitutes a grave
threat to international peace and security.
The fight against terrorism can be effective only
if we aim at preventing terrorist activities through
appropriate policies aimed at strengthening States’
national legislations through effective structures that
seek to enhance cooperation, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, through information exchange and
assistance to countries that need it in order to bring
their capacities up to the level of other countries.
We welcome the progress achieved by the three
Committees in guiding such cooperation, which should
be further intensified by concerted efforts on the part
of States, national and regional organizations and civil
society. In that connection, we are happy to see the
reduction in the delays in the submission of national
reports and in the analysis of those reports. Over and
above the reports, efforts should be further directed
towards the effective implementation of the measures
that States are obligated to introduce into their own
domestic legislation, as stipulated by the Council.
The efforts on the part of the three Committee
Chairmen to raise the awareness of parliamentarians
during the consultations held in New York in the
context United Nations reform efforts was a step in the
right direction, because action by national parliaments

will be decisive in the implementation of appropriate
legislation and in the creation of an operational
framework to monitor terrorist movements, to cut off
their sources of finance and to prevent them from
gaining access to weapons.
That issue is of particular relevance in the light of
the need to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. The success of that effort
will depend essentially on the adoption of national
legislation and regulations — and their effective
implementation — aimed at accounting for and
managing, on a daily basis, the production and
circulation of dual-use substances.
That is a matter of concern for all countries. We
call on all States that have not yet presented their first
national reports to do so and to indicate the degree of
assistance that they need in order to update their
national mechanisms for combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), like the two other Committees, has begun
a direct dialogue with Member States as part of the
consideration of its report. That dialogue will also
enable them to become acquainted with and gain an
understanding of the internal workings of the
Committees and the mechanisms set up to monitor the
various sanctions regimes directed against terrorist
movements.
The holding of such a dialogue will help to
eliminate any doubts and ambiguities that might
otherwise lead to reluctance on the part of certain
States. Visits to States by the Chairmen of the
Committees are a valuable instrument for maintaining
such dialogues.
We welcome the considerable efforts made by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to move its
work forward. At the same time, the Committees must
continue to improve their working methods on the
basis of clearly defined and well-known principles.
The initiatives undertaken in that area are to be
welcomed. We invite the Committees to spare no effort
to make their activities as transparent as possible. We
express full support for the CTC work programme for
the last quarter of 2005.
Furthermore, in the context of the implementation
of counter-terrorism measures, the need to protect the
international community’s achievements in terms of

13

S/PV.5293

human rights and fundamental freedoms cannot be
overemphasized. The appointment of Mr. Martin
Scheinin as Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism is clear proof of the
commitment of the Secretary-General in that regard.
In order to mobilize all States in the fight against
terrorism, we must also pay further attention to the
difficulties faced by some countries resulting from the
application of counter-terrorism sanctions. We need to
consider to what extent a State whose economy or
social fabric has suffered a result of sanctions against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other associated
individuals and entities should benefit from fair
compensation. We should establish mechanisms to that
end.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
emphasize the need for the international community to
resolve conflicts throughout the world and tackle
inequality, injustice and poverty, which provide a
fertile breeding ground for the development of violence
and extremism. Terrorism will be eliminated only if we
make constant efforts and take concrete actions to
promote peace and sustainable development to make
our world better for all through a dialogue of cultures
and an alliance of civilizations.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
The Council has shown that it is capable of responding
firmly to terrorist acts aimed at destabilizing States and
jeopardizing international peace and security. It has
done so by unequivocally condemning such acts, as
well as by demanding that those responsible and their
supporters be tracked down and brought to justice.
Furthermore, for some years now the Council has
been committed to patient work aimed at strengthening
the capacity of all the members of international
community to combat terrorism. Indeed, that is the
raison d’être of the three Committees that have just
submitted their reports.
The Council is making an invaluable contribution
to the international struggle to combat terrorism, which
is now an important item on its agenda. In the months
to come, as we consider the Secretary-General’s
strategy in this area, we must ensure that the Council’s
place in that common effort is fully recognized. The
adoption by the General Assembly of a universal
definition of terrorism would provide a solid
foundation for that strategy.

14

In the meantime, we must regularly assess the
progress achieved. In the near future, the Council will
be focusing on the comprehensive examination of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate provided for
in resolution 1535 (2004). Although the Directorate
now has all the human resources that it needs, we must
commit ourselves to undertaking a genuine debate on
action in support the Committee so that we can
determine its priorities.
Under the chairmanship of Ambassador Løj, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) has caught up, to a significant extent, with its
backlog in considering State reports. We are also
pleased that it now includes the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement to terrorism in its
discussions with States. We now hope that it will be
able to devote more time and resources to visits on site.
The visits that have already taken place have
enabled us to make a much better assessment of the
efforts of States to implement their obligations
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) than would have
been possible working from written reports alone.
Those visits have also enabled us better to determine
what assistance States may need in future. We therefore
hope to see an increase in CTC visits.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities is also making considerable efforts to
improve its working methods.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1617
(2005), which has provided useful clarifications. The
resolution calls on the Committee to review its
guidelines in order to enhance its effectiveness. We
believe that such a review is necessary. It is
particularly important to enhance transparency in the
context of the Committee’s procedures for listing and
delisting and in those relating to humanitarian
exemptions. Such transparency, which justice demands,
will improve Member States’ understanding of the
work of the Committee and therefore contribute to
enhancing their cooperation.
The visits made by the Committee and the group
of experts to Member States represent an important
part of their work. It is important that such visits focus
on States requiring the greatest assistance for the full
implementation of the sanctions determined by the
Council.

S/PV.5293

I wish to devote particular attention to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) at a time when, under your
chairmanship, Sir, it is presenting an assessment that
France believes to be very positive. This battle was not
easily won, but now the Committee is working quickly,
and the group of experts has carried out an exceptional
in-depth analysis of the national reports.
We believe that the position of States vis-à-vis
resolution 1540 (2004) is shifting, as seen at the recent
seminar organized by Argentina in Buenos Aires.
Many States had felt that, by resolution 1540 (2004),
the Security Council was legislating in their place, but
they now seem to better understand the objectives of
the resolution and are passing laws to ensure
compliance with its provisions.
France is convinced that the threat of weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery or related
materials falling into the wrong hands poses a very
serious threat for all States. We draw attention to that
problem in all forums in which we participate — in the
G-8, the European Union, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), and today in the General
Assembly, to which we have submitted a draft
resolution on radiological terrorism that we hope will
be adopted by consensus.
The renewal of the 1540 Committee’s mandate
will have to be discussed a few months hence. Today
we wish to say that the Committee is very useful. It is
now gaining a full understanding of the control
systems for sensitive installations and materials
worldwide — an understanding that really has no
equivalent in disarmament forums. We should use that
understanding to better direct our own efforts. Of
course, we can continue to request reports, but it might
be more effective to make better use of the existing
database in order to identify priorities; match up
requests for and offers of assistance; and identify
intelligent responses to resolution 1540 (2004) of
which note could be taken, such as the information we
have culled from reading the reports submitted by
India and South Africa.
As I said earlier, to be effective, the fight against
proliferation requires that all States shoulder their
responsibilities in the area and recognize the benefits
they can derive. I believe that the Committee can
provide assistance in that respect by identifying
regions, requirements, partnerships and models and

drawing conclusions in order to make concrete
progress.
The establishment of zones free of weapons of
mass destruction has played a major role in the
elaboration of the regional security policies of the
countries of the South, and the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones could in future also
strengthen international security. Resolution 1540
(2004), which encourages cooperation among States,
provides an opportunity in that direction.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Ambassadors
Mayoral, Løj and Motoc for their respective briefings
on the work of the three Committees and on their work
programme for the next stage. We note with
satisfaction that, since the last meeting at which
briefings were made, the three Committees have made
progress in their work.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities has conducted a preliminary review of the
third report of the Monitoring Team, and the Team
made another round of visits to the countries
concerned.
The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) is now fully operational, with all its staff on
board, and has further improved the efficiency and
quality of its work.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has further
strengthened its cooperation with international
organizations.
I should like to take this opportunity to commend
the three chairpersons for their work. I should like also
to make the following comments on the focus of the
work of the three Committees in the next phase.
The 1267 Committee should step up its efforts to
conclude the revision of its guidelines and enhance its
sanctions measures and working procedures.
The
CTC
should
focus
on
providing
comprehensive policy guidance to the CTED and step
up its efforts to carry out the new tasks set out by
resolution 1624 (2005).
The 1540 Committee should continue to urge
those Member States that have not yet submitted their

15

S/PV.5293

reports to do so as soon as possible. China is actively
considering hosting a regional seminar on issues
relating to resolution 1540 (2004) and would welcome
the participation and support of interested countries.

by all possible means. A hyperlink to that video blog
remains on the website of the East Turkistan
Information Centre, which is another terrorist
organization listed by the Chinese Government.

I wish to stress once again that the three
Committees and their expert groups should maintain
and enhance their synergy and coordination and further
develop a complementary relationship.

That flagrant incitement to terrorism shows once
again that the Eastern Turkistan Liberation
Organization and other East Turkistan groups are
extremely violent terrorist organizations. As the eastern
Turkistan groups are flagrantly threatening terrorist
violence, China urges all countries, especially those
countries where eastern Turkistan terrorists are found
and are active, to be more vigilant and strictly fulfil
their obligations under Security Council resolution
1624 (2005) by taking the necessary measures against
the East Turkistan Liberation Organization and its
members and other East Turkistan terrorists, firmly
suppressing their terrorist activities and bringing the
perpetrators to justice.

The resolute fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations continues to present a major
challenge to the international community. Acts of
violence such as the bombings in Bali, Indonesia, and
the terrorist attack in Nalchik, Russia, have sounded
yet another serious warning that terrorists continue to
run rampant and to blatantly challenge us.
We express out deepest condolences to the
families of the victims of such attacks. The Security
Council, as the organ bearing primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
must intensify its efforts to take concrete measures to
assist Member States in eliminating that scourge.
We warmly welcome resolution 1624 (2005)
condemning the incitement of terrorist acts, adopted by
the Council summit meeting held on 14 September
2005. That resolution testifies once again to the
determination of the members of the Security Council
to strengthen international cooperation to combat
terrorism.
As set out in the summit outcome document and
in Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), terrorism,
in all its forms and manifestations, irrespective of its
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed,
poses serious threats to international and regional
peace and security and should be condemned in the
strongest terms.
The eastern Turkistan terrorists have been
rampantly carrying out activities in Xinjiang, China,
committing numerous crimes and colluding with other
international terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. Thus, they not only pose a terrorist
threat to China but also seriously jeopardize peace and
stability in the region.
It must be pointed out in particular that the
Eastern Turkistan Liberation Organization is one of the
terrorist organizations listed by China. Recently, the
organization openly declared, through an online video
blog, that it will take up armed struggle against China

16

I wish to reiterate that, in accordance with the
purposes and the principles of the United Nations
Charter and the relevant Council resolutions, China
will continue to enhance its cooperation with the
international community and spare no effort to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, in order to
make its contribution to world peace and security.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): Once more, we welcome
the opportunity of a joint briefing by the Chairmen of
the three Security Council Committees on counterterrorism. I congratulate Ambassador Løj, Ambassador
Mayoral and Ambassador Motoc and commend the
respective teams of independent experts assisting their
Committees in the implementation of their mandates.
As Chairman of the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), and in working
towards the Group’s objectives, I draw considerably on
the experience of the three Committees.
Continuing terrorist attacks worldwide are grim
reminders of the need for the international community
to remain vigilant and further enhance the global
efforts against terrorism. The unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) by our heads
of State or Government at last month’s Security
Council summit meeting is testament to the strong
collective commitment of our Governments to counter
terrorism.
The increasing cooperation and informationsharing among the three Committees at the formal,
informal and expert levels have proven to be very

S/PV.5293

useful and effective. Their increased interaction and
cooperation with relevant international and regional
organizations further benefit global counter-terrorism
efforts. The synergy resulting from such interaction
and cooperation will maximize the results of global
counter-terrorism efforts and, at the same time,
streamline efforts by avoiding duplication. Thus, my
delegation wishes to encourage the ongoing efforts by
the three Committees to that end.
The Secretary-General has identified elements of
a
counter-terrorism
strategy
to
promote
a
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent response to
counter-terrorism at the national, regional and
international levels. Coordinated and cooperative
fulfilment of their mandates by the three committees
will greatly contribute to the achievement of a
comprehensive international counter-terrorism strategy.
And we look forward to the conclusion this year of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
My delegation endorses the new activities being
undertaken by the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee under the leadership of Ambassador
Mayoral to improve implementation of the sanctions
measures mandated by resolution 1617 (2005). We
welcome the increased cooperation with Interpol and
encourage the Committee to benefit from the work of
relevant specialized agencies and international
organizations such as the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. We look forward to continuing
enhanced cooperation with regional organizations,
particularly in the Asian region.
We fully support the Chairman’s visits to Member
States, particularly where there are concerns about
capacity and the need for technical assistance. We
believe that the visits by the Chair provide the political
impetus for those countries to address the difficulties
they face in the implementation of the sanctions
measures and to identify their needs for assistance.
Since the 1267 Committee has no mandate to directly
handle technical assistance needs of States in the
implementation of the sanctions regime, cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
1540 Committee is vital and should be further
strengthened.
Now that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) is fully staffed and

operational, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, led by
Ambassador Løj, will now have a fully functional
CTED to support the Committee’s activities, especially
the full examination of Member States’ responses to
the letters of the CTC Chairman. We expect a more
vigorous identification of areas for technical assistance
so that actual assistance can be rendered by the
appropriate countries and institutions.
We welcome the appointment of the CTED’s
human rights expert. In our view, that will enable the
CTC — as well as the other counter-terrorism
Committees, given the enhanced cooperation among
the three Committees — to better fulfil its additional
function, mandated under resolution 1624 (2005), of
monitoring that States’ efforts against terrorism are in
accordance with international human rights and
humanitarian standards.
We also welcome the CTC’s efforts to pursue
contacts and coordination with regional and
subregional organizations. This month’s thematic
debate of the Security Council, chaired by Romania’s
Foreign Minister, demonstrated that regional
organizations are an invaluable resource in the global
fight against terrorism, as a source of both best
practices and technical assistance.
My delegation congratulates the 1540 Committee,
under the stewardship of Ambassador Motoc, for
completing the examination of the 121 first national
reports submitted so far by Member States. We wish to
commend the invaluable contribution of the
Committee’s team of independent experts in the
examination of the reports.
We consider the Committee’s outreach activities
to be vital to implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), as they provide information on how States can
implement obligations under that resolution. We also
encourage remaining States that have not yet submitted
their first national reports to participate in the
Committee’s outreach activities for useful guidance on
how to complete their reports. As Ambassador Motoc
indicated, while the reports are not an end in
themselves, they are the best tool the Committee has to
assess the status of States’ implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and to identify capacity gaps.
That information is the basis for sharing experiences
and expertise among countries in order to increase
worldwide capacity to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from being used for terrorism purposes.

17

S/PV.5293

The holding of regional seminars to support the
implementation process is a useful outreach activity. In
that regard, the successful regional seminar for the
Latin American and Caribbean region, held in Buenos
Aires, has shown the value of such regional sharing of
experiences in the implementation of the resolution and
the preparation of national reports. My delegation
supports China’s plan to host a similar seminar in the
Asian region, as its delegation announced in the
General Assembly’s First Committee. All those
initiatives contribute to the global efforts to combat
terrorism.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the three Chairs and express my
appreciation for their briefings.
Since our last public meeting on 20 July
(S/PV.5229), we have had no respite from acts of
terror, which have been committed one after another, in
Egypt, Iraq, Turkey, Sri Lanka and Bali, Indonesia. My
delegation would like to express its sincere
condolences to the victims and their families and its
hopes for early recovery for those who suffered injuries
in those attacks. Terrorism must never be condoned,
and my Government strongly condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations.
In adopting the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), Member States
debated for long hours over the counter-terrorism
measures to be pursued by the United Nations.
Although those negotiations were difficult, they are
now being followed up by negotiations on the draft
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
in hopes of reaching an agreement. We believe it is
essential that the Security Council also continue to
develop an effective counter-terrorism policy by
deepening the cooperation among the counterterrorism-related committees.
There are three points I would like to focus on
today that may help to ensure further effectiveness in
the work of the three Committees.
First, as I emphasized on the occasion of the last
briefings, there can be no question about the
importance
of
establishing
counter-terrorism
prevention measures. From that perspective, it is worth
mentioning that Council resolution 1617 (2005),
adopted on 29 July, strongly urges all Member States to
implement the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF)
Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering and the

18

FATF Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorist
Financing. On the basis of resolution 1617 (2005), we
also have seen progress in cooperation between
Interpol and the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, with the General Assembly of Interpol
recently approving this matter. We expect that
information accumulated by Interpol can thus be
further utilized in order to prevent terrorist activities.
In addition, resolution 1617 (2005) encourages further
improvement in the Consolidated List of the Sanctions
Committee. It is therefore vital to ensure that the List
be utilized effectively within each Member State. We
also find it of great significance that Council resolution
1624 (2005), aiming at the prevention of incitement to
terrorist acts — an area not covered previously — was
adopted by the leaders at the Security Council summit
last month.
Secondly, in order to build the counter-terrorism
capacity of Member States, it is crucial to accelerate
the efforts to strengthen the role of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). We need to devise ways
to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
requested by Member States through the CTC to build
their counter-terrorism capacity. At present, with the
assessment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the CTC is working to
identify the technical assistance needs of Member
States, and we expect that the information on those
needs will be relayed to the donor community in a
systematic manner so as to ensure that technical
assistance is actually provided to the States requiring
it.
Specifically, we believe assistance could be
provided more efficiently if the CTC, with its
information-gathering and analytical capacity, could
provide additional information on what kinds of
assistance donors should focus on in those cases in
which donor States and organizations are currently
identifying needs through individual efforts. Japan
would like the CTC to devise ways and means to make
the CTC analysis clearer to the donor community so
that coordination between donors and recipients can be
closer and thus strengthen the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States. In this
connection, establishing a structure for closer contact
with the Counter-Terrorism Action Group and
international, regional and sub-regional organizations
would be an effective step. We also expect that during
the visits to States, contacts with regional organizations

S/PV.5293

and others in addition to the Governments will be
enhanced.
Thirdly, in the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
examination of national reports is in the final stage,
and we welcome the fact that second reports are being
submitted by some Member States. It is our view that
from this point forward the Committee should focus
more on the issue of technical assistance. The mandate
of the Committee is expected to expire at the end of
April next year, but many tasks still remain to be
accomplished by the Committee. It is critical that we
have an efficient work programme, bearing in mind the
limited time remaining.
We need to enrich the activities of the three
Committees, and from that standpoint, in addition to
the experts working for the 1540 Committee, we
welcome that the experts and new members of both the
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee and the CTED are now operating
in full force, and we look forward to their active role.
My Government will continue to extend its full
cooperation for the work of the three Committees so
that the Security Council will be able to further
strengthen its activities in the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to
hear joint briefings on the activities of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee. We
commend the three Committees for providing us with
updates every three months in a coordinated manner.
This approach enables us to keep pace with the
changing nature of the threat of terrorism while
promoting transparency in the work of the Security
Council.
As stated earlier by the Chairman of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Committee, Ambassador César Mayoral,
the Security Council adopted a new resolution — 1617
(2005) — in which the due process concerns of
Member States have been addressed. In our view, the
Council has introduced very pertinent elements in the
resolution, such as the checklist, which to a great
extent will assist Member States in the preparations of
their reports to the Committee.
It was gratifying to receive the Chairman’s report
on his recent visit to Nigeria and Chad — two

strategically significant States in the subregion of West
Africa. Contacts with Member States are crucial for the
Committee to understand the operational field
constraints in the implementation of resolutions by
States, rather than perceiving and interpreting delays as
reporting fatigue.
We recognize the commendable work by the
Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Madam Ellen Margrethe Løj, during the past three
months. We thank her for her leadership in facilitating
the full staffing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). This will enhance the
Committee’s capacity to review and respond
expeditiously to reports received from Member States.
With the adoption of resolution 1624 (2005), the
Security Council has placed additional responsibilities
on the Committee. Some Member States are still
struggling to fulfil their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001). It is nonetheless an important undertaking
that should be implemented with appropriate assistance
for those States requiring such assistance. In view of
that, the ongoing efforts by the Committee and CTED
to facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States should be stepped up and augmented
through increased cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations.
Mr. President, I wish to commend your
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee and your report,
which touched on the Committee’s task of examining
national reports and the steps taken to address the
problem of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. Tanzania commends
the Committee’s achievements during the past three
months, particularly in successfully implementing the
examination of first reports submitted by Member
States; we hope that the remaining 67 Member States
will submit their reports in due course.
Tanzania attaches great importance to the
activities of the Committee and finds merit in its
outreach efforts, including encouraging Member States,
both individually and through regional seminars, to
prepare and submit their reports on time.
Tanzania also commends the Committee for
facilitating extensive cooperation with international
organizations that are ready to offer relevant technical
assistance to Member States. We wish to congratulate
Argentina and the United Kingdom for organizing the
first regional outreach seminar for countries of Latin

19

S/PV.5293

America, and we look forward to a seminar of a similar
nature next year in China for Asian countries.
Before I conclude, let me make one general
remark. Persistent terrorist attacks worldwide and the
changing nature of terrorist threats make it imperative
for the three Committees to increase cooperation
among themselves in information-sharing and dialogue
with Member States, in particular concerning late
submission or non-submission of reports and
implementation of all Security Council resolutions.
It is also important to situate our coordinated
counter-terrorism strategies in the wider context of our
respective national, regional and overall international
efforts to combat terrorism, led by the Security
Council. The seminal Madrid statement made by the
Secretary-General last year on combating international
terrorism is, and should be, a useful reference in this
endeavour.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): May I express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s meeting. I also
sincerely thank Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador Løj
and you, Ambassador Motoc, for your comprehensive
briefings on the activities of their respective
Committees, whose work is part of our campaign
against terrorism. This is the third Security Council
meeting in this format. We support this approach,
which is in keeping with enhancing coordination and
cooperation among subsidiary bodies of the Council
and enabling the Council to more effectively carry out
its tasks in the key sphere of counter-terrorism.
The 2005 General Assembly summit once again
reaffirmed that the international community is counting
on the United Nations to formulate a reliable system to
counter terrorism, including preventive measures
against that global threat. This was reflected in the
active participation of Member States in the event
marking the opening for signature of the new
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism, which was an initiative of the
Russian Federation.
Another important step in that context was the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1624 (2005),
which, for the first time, contains provisions pertaining
to the criminalization of the incitement of terrorism
and the enhancement of dialogue among civilizations
and religions in the context of ensuring international
security.

20

We welcomed the painstaking work towards
agreeing upon the counter-terrorism provisions of the
2005 summit Outcome Document, although we were
not able to achieve unanimity during the discussion
that took place. However, the debate helped to narrow
the gap between the positions of States on key aspects
of counter-terrorism activities and strengthened mutual
understanding with respect to finding solutions to the
problems remaining on the United Nations counterterrorism agenda.
We hope that States will heed and support the
2005 summit appeal that they do their utmost to
coordinate and agree upon a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism during the sixtieth session of
the General Assembly. The overall positive momentum
achieved in recent months concerning counterterrorism gives us hope that that task will be completed
successfully.
The Russian Federation advocates building on the
activities agreed upon by the Security Council in all
key areas of the struggle against terrorism and
strengthening its capacity through the relevant
subsidiary bodies.
Concerning the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we shall continue to pay close
attention to its activities, bearing in mind the massive
threat to peace and security posed by the terrorist
network of Al-Qaida, the Taliban and their
accomplices. In that connection, we support the efforts
of the 1267 Committee to intensify dialogue with
Member States and international organizations with a
view to strengthening the sanctions regime, consistent
with the provisions of resolution 1617 (2005).
We welcome the Committee’s efforts to improve
the Consolidated List and adapt it to existing
conditions. We also acknowledge the effective work of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, which has been acting in ever-closer contact
with the expert groups of the other Committees.
In connection with the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), we note with special
satisfaction the completion of the organization and
staffing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which enables us to intensify the
activities of the Committee in all the basic areas of its
mandate.

S/PV.5293

We welcome the goal set in CTC’s programme of
work to address the issue of States late in submitting
their reports, and to ensure the expert review of
reports. We support the effort to further develop the
practice of conducting visits to Member States,
including through dialogue between the CTC and
States on the outcome of these field missions. The
Russian Federation supports the Committee’s
consistent efforts to intensify cooperation with regional
organizations, first and foremost in facilitating
assistance to States in complying with their obligations
stemming from the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), and in order to strengthen the counter-terrorism
capacity of those organizations. That should be an
important element of the overall coordinated strategy
of enhancing the Committee’s cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Today, as the CTED begins addressing the full range of
its tasks, we see new opportunities for developing such
a dialogue. In that connection, we agree that
preparations for a new coordinated regional meeting of
the CTC should be undertaken.
We would especially like to point out the
importance of the work begun by the CTC, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1624
(2005), to combat incitement to terrorism. We believe
that the Committee, as part of the tasks set out in that
resolution, must use all its capacity, means and
resources in working with States — including letters,
visits, contacts with international and regional
organizations — to erect the obstacles necessary to
stem the spread of the ideology of terrorism. In that
connection, we must take into account not just the
letter, but also the spirit of resolution 1624 (2005).
The Russian Federation shares the positive
evaluation of the momentum of the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). We believe that the major task
now is to conclude the careful analysis of national
reports and responses to additional questions of the
Committee, to process the data received and to identify
the weak links in the national systems of measures, in
order to prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, and in that connection, develop the
procedures needed to provide relevant assistance to
those who may need it.
We are convinced that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) should not just be a one-time
action, or be reduced to a mere exercise in

accountability. The main task is to use that Security
Council decision to enhance the effectiveness of the
process of improving the non-proliferation efforts of
Member States, including in connection with the fight
against terrorism. This work will require significant
time and effort. Bearing in mind the scope of the tasks
pertaining to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the limited time remaining before that
Committee’s mandate ends, we believe that resolving
the issue of whether to extend the Committee’s powers
for two years beyond April 2006 is a pressing matter.
We could have taken a decision on the matter in
the Security Council before the end of the current
period of the Committee’s work.
Ms. Willson (United States): Our thanks go to
you, Mr. President and to the other Committee Chairs
for your reports this morning, as well as for your
tireless efforts in leading the work of the Committees
reporting today.
The United States is pleased that all three
Committees are considering critical issues, including
such issues as improving reporting performance. Our
counter-terrorism efforts in the Committees will
succeed only by maximizing joint accomplishment of
shared goals and minimizing duplication, a point that
has been underscored by other speakers in this debate
this morning.
The experts that advise the three Committees
have an important role to play in coordinating efforts,
and we urge them to cooperate more closely as well.
As you stressed in your own report as Committee
Chairman, Mr. President, reporting is an important
aspect of counter-terrorism efforts. We note that many
States have not yet fulfilled their obligation under
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
to make such reports, and we urge them to do so
without delay. The objectives of those resolutions can
only be achieved with the full and transparent
participation all Member States.
The United States notes with satisfaction that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) is fully operational and we expect it to help
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) significantly
to improve its performance. The CTC’s emphasis on
working with regional organizations is important. Such
organizations can play a role in helping States to
implement the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). In
the area of technical assistance, the CTC must

21

S/PV.5293

complement the efforts of international and other
organizations, as well as donor States, and the CTC
should continue to work to develop best practices in
the areas covered by the resolution. Among other
things, the CTC should endorse the work of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in the field of
terrorist financing.
We are also pleased that the CTC expects to
eliminate the backlog of States’ reports by the end of
the year. Reporting must not become a selfperpetuating exercise and we hope that the CTC will
examine carefully how to use effectively the
information gleaned from States’ reports.
Concerning the 1267 Committee, the United
States notes that resolution 1617 (2005) greatly assists
us in the fight against Al-Qaida, the Taliban and Osama
Ben-Laden, by defining the term “associated with,”
and thus further clarifying who is subject to the
sanctions. With the clarifications to resolution 1617
(2005), the Committee should continue to urge
Member States to submit names for listing. We are
encouraged by the Committee’s proactive and
comprehensive dialogue with Member States, and we
hope that this engagement will lead to better sanctions
implementation. Another step towards that end is the
Committee’s work with relevant specialized agencies
and international organizations such as the
International Civil Aviation Organization and Interpol.
We applaud those outreach efforts. The United States
strongly supports the call in resolution 1617 (2005) to
Member States to implement the Financial Action Task
Force recommendations on money-laundering and the
nine special recommendations on terrorist financing.
With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee,
we are pleased that the Committee and its group of
experts have completed review of 121 national reports.
This is an important first step in monitoring Member
States’ implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
However, we are concerned that nearly 70 Member
States have yet to report to the Committee, and we
reiterate our call to those States to submit their reports
as soon as possible.
The 1540 Committee has a key role to play in
educating Member States about effective and efficient
ways to implement the resolution, and the United
States stands ready to work with the Committee,
potential donors and interested recipients to address, on
a bilateral basis, States’ needs for technical assistance

22

in implementing the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). The United States looks forward to upcoming
discussions on the possible renewal of the 1540
Committee’s mandate.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): It has
become a tradition for Ambassadors Mayoral, Løj and
Motoc to address the Security Council at the same
meeting in order to inform it of the activities and the
efforts they are making as the heads of their respective
committees. I should like to thank them and
congratulate them upon their excellent briefings. I
would agree with Ambassador Mayoral that resolution
1617 (2005) has provided some clarity, especially
regarding the idea “associated with Al-Qaida and the
Taliban”, and the recognition of the role to be played
by the International Civil Aviation Organization and
Interpol in the implementation of sanctions,
particularly with regard to travel documents.
We welcome this resolution, which has renewed
the mandate of the Monitoring Team. This is
acknowledgement of its efforts and of the
professionalism of the members of the Team. We
congratulate Mr. Richard Barrett and the Monitoring
Team, as well as the members of the Secretariat, for the
assistance they have been providing the Committee.
We also welcome the fact that the Committee has
considered in depth the third report submitted by the
Monitoring Team and that it has approved certain of
the recommendations within its mandate. We
encourage the Committee and the Monitoring Team to
continue to use visits to verify the implementation of
sanctions, thus meeting the concerns of States in this
regard and strengthening dialogue with Member States
at the political level. The recent visit of the Chairman
of the Committee to certain African countries was
productive, and we encourage him to continue the
follow-up to such visits, especially regarding
strengthening the capacity of developing countries and
African countries.
We support the future activities of the Committee,
especially the need for an intensive dialogue with
Member States and for close cooperation among the
Committees involved in the campaign against
terrorism.
My delegation supports the seventeenth work
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and also welcomes the fact that its Executive
Directorate (CTED) has now become operational. We

S/PV.5293

are convinced that this achievement will greatly benefit
Member States. The fact that the Directorate has
become operational has already been reflected in a
speeding-up of the processing of reports submitted by
Member States.
Regarding visits, I note with satisfaction that the
appeal I made a few months ago is beginning to be
heeded. Thus, CTED will soon visit three member
States of the Security Council, including Algeria. I
should like to see other members of the Council
volunteer to host visits of CTED, especially in light of
resolution 1624 (2005) on incitement to terrorism. The
CTC was mandated to ensure follow-up on the
implementation of that resolution.
We agree with the views of Ambassador Løj on
the priority areas of CTC activity, be it the involvement
of regional organizations in the fight against terrorism,
action-oriented and result-oriented dialogue with
potential donors, visits to countries for their agreement
or the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).
Finally, I would like to state once again that my
country condemns all acts of terrorism, and we would
like to thank Ambassador Javier Rupérez and the
members of the Executive Directorate, as well as
members of the Secretariat, for their valuable
assistance in the work of the Committee.
Regarding the 1540 Committee, I would like to
thank you, Sir, as Chairman of that Committee, for the
excellent report and, through you, commend the
Committee and the group of experts for the
praiseworthy efforts they have been making. Since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) in April 2004, the
international community has made important progress
in coping with the threat inherent in the acquisition of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. This
progress is shown in the substantial number of national
reports submitted by Member States pursuant to
obligations mandated under paragraph 4 of resolution
1540 (2004), which is undeniably a collective response
aimed at protecting us against the proliferation of such
weapons.
In this connection, my delegation welcomes the
fact that 124 States have submitted their national
report, or even two reports, often in difficult conditions
because of time constraints imposed by the provisions
of the resolution and the diversity and complexity of
the topics with which it deals. We should bear those
limitations in mind when we consider the delay shown

by a certain number of States, especially in Africa, in
the drafting of their national reports.
In this regard, the 1540 Committee should set
aside a substantial portion of its work programme to
considering the possibility of lending assistance to
States that might request it. With this in view, we
believe that States should find their difficulties
significantly alleviated through the direct contact that
the Committee intends to carry out with them, as well
as in the holding of regional and similar meetings. In
that connection, we would like to commend the recent
holding of two seminars, one in Argentina and one in
Uganda.
The President: In order to optimize the use of
our time, I will not invite speakers individually to take
their seats at the table and invite them to resume their
seats at the side. When a speaker takes the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.
I also wish to repeat my earlier call for oral
interventions to be kept within the five-minute limit.
I thank you in advance for your understanding
and cooperation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Samoa, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum member States with Permanent Missions
in New York — namely, Australia, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Palau, New
Zealand, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, Samoa.
I would like, at the outset, to express our
unequivocal condemnation of the recent terrorist
bombings in Bali and convey our condolences and
sincere sympathy to the Government of Indonesia and
the families and friends of all those killed or injured in
the attacks.
The Bali bombings present a further stark
reminder that international terrorism remains a
fundamental threat to the safety and stability of the
international community, a threat that must be
overcome by a collective international response.
I would like to take the opportunity to thank the
Ambassadors of Argentina, Denmark and you, Mr.

23

S/PV.5293

President, for the briefings today. We welcome the fact
that the Committees have chosen to coordinate their
briefings and hope this trend will continue.
Pacific leaders made a commitment to meet
international counter-terrorism obligations in their
Nasonini Declaration of 2002, and our region remains
fully committed to the international campaign against
terrorism.
Our members are working together with regional
organizations and donors on a range of initiatives to
enhance our individual and joint counter-terrorism
capabilities and to strengthen our trade, transport and
border security infrastructures against possible attack
or exploitation by terrorist groups. We have made some
encouraging progress.
That said, it is important that we remind Council
members of some of the challenges the Pacific region
faces in complying with the multitude of new
requirements that have been introduced by the Security
Council, particularly since 11 September 2001.
First, I would like to emphasize that the majority
of Pacific Islands Forum group members are small
island developing States with limited resources and
many pressing priorities. Fulfilling counter-terrorism
commitments results in the diversion of scarce
financial and other resources that would otherwise be
used for development and challenges, such as poverty
eradication efforts and the fight against HIV/AIDS,
among other things.
A further challenge has been the sheer volume of
new international counter-terrorism and nonproliferation standards introduced since 9/11. Keeping
informed of new standards is difficult enough. It is
even more difficult for many of us to meet often
onerous reporting requirements. More often than not,
new standards are introduced with very little
consultation or opportunities for us to provide input.
As a result, they seldom reflect, or make allowances
for, the challenges many of us face in implementing
them. To be frank, this is a source of frustration for
many Pacific Island Forum countries.
Our Governments are strongly of the view that it
is important that Pacific Island Forum member
countries should be able to engage at the senior level
on international counter-terrorism standards and the
standard-setting process with the bodies that set and
administer those standards. This message was clearly

24

conveyed once again at a Pacific Forum-wide Working
Group on Counter-Terrorism held this past June. In
particular, the obligations established by Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) are proving to be a
considerable challenge to our region.
To this end, the Pacific Islands Forum member
countries have extended an invitation to the Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) to attend next
year’s meeting of our Working Group on CounterTerrorism. This Working Group represents the one
occasion annually that senior officials from all Pacific
Islands Forum member and observer countries, as well
as the relevant regional organizations, come together
specifically to discuss international counter-terrorism
issues. As such, acceptance of the invitation to next
year’s Working Group Meeting would provide an
excellent and timely opportunity for Pacific Island
officials to engage directly with the CTC Chair to
discuss the region’s security challenges and its role in
international counter-terrorism efforts, including
meeting the obligations of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). We also hope that experts from the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the 1267 and 1540 Committee expert groups could
attend. We strongly encourage the CTC Chair to give
positive consideration to this invitation.
On the specific challenge of reporting obligations
under the three resolutions, I would like to note that, in
the past, we have suggested that a collective Pacific
regional report to each Committee, submitted by the
Pacific Islands Forum secretariat, would alleviate some
of the pressures faced by member countries in meeting
the reporting requirements. While we understand the
importance of dialogue between the Security Council
and individual Member States, we would urge the
Council to be constructive in its approach and to
establish a two-way dialogue with us to work out a
practical and sustainable solution to this challenge.
Countries of our region are doing what we can to meet
reporting requirements. For example, a number of
Forum member countries have accepted New Zealand’s
offer to work with individual Pacific island
Governments to assist them in preparing outstanding
Security Council reports.
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
underscore once again that the Pacific Islands Forum
group remains fully committed to the collective fight
against international terrorism. In that regard, the work
of all three Committees is critically important, and we

S/PV.5293

look forward to deepening our relationship with the
Security Council on these issues over the coming
months.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland is grateful for this opportunity to address
the Council. We have distributed a complete text of our
statement and I shall limit my remarks to an
abbreviated version.
Switzerland welcomes the counter-terrorism
measures set out in the outcome document adopted at
the 2005 world summit on 16 September 2005 (General
Assembly resolution 60/1). Those measures stem from
an awareness that the effectiveness of the Security
Council counter-terrorism sanctions regime would be
affected if the legality of measures enacted by the
Council were contested before national or international
courts. In my country, the legality of those measures
was recently the subject of a parliamentary question
addressed to the Federal Council. Similar steps are
being taken in the rest of Europe and elsewhere in the
world.
It is in the light of those developments that we are
weighing the accounts presented here today. They
complement the analyses and recommendations set out
in the third report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2005/572), as well as
the provisions of resolution 1617 (2005), adopted by
the Security Council on 29 July 2005. My delegation
would just like to make a few additional observations.
Resolution 1617 (2005) contains important
provisions to facilitate the indispensable collaboration
of States with the sanctions Committees, and thus to
ensure the effectiveness of the fight against terrorism
while
respecting
fundamental
human
rights.
Switzerland particularly welcomes the provisions
which enable the list established in accordance with
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000) to be a
functional tool and to provide a solid working basis for
the fair application of sanctions.
The requirement that States proposing to add a
name to the Consolidated List must henceforth provide
a statement of their case describing the basis of the
proposal is a step in the right direction. Such
documents could be used by the Committee to reply to
the questions of Member States whose nationals,

residents or entities have been entered on the
Consolidated List.
However, we would like to point out that the
Monitoring Team recommended that an additional step
be taken towards the greater transparency which is
desirable. Diligent action by States with regard to the
parties concerned is possible only if their investigative
services or police have been duly informed of the
nature of the illicit activities that justify the inclusion
of those parties on the Consolidated List.
Paragraph 5 of resolution 1617 (2005) — which
requests States to inform individuals and entities
included in the Consolidated List of the measures
imposed on them, the Committee’s guidelines and the
provisions of the applicable resolutions — is a further
step in the right direction. As the Monitoring Team
mentioned in its report, not only is the provision of
such information essential from a legal standpoint, but
it is also more conducive to the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime.
Switzerland, together with other States — in
particular, Germany and Sweden — is actively
involved in promoting the drafting and implementation
of more satisfactory provisions for listing and
delisting. The aim of this initiative is to improve the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism sanctions.
I assure members that Switzerland is prepared to
continue the dialogue with the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs on measures to strengthen the fight
against terrorism within the framework of effective
sanctions regimes that respect basic human rights.
The Chairman: I appreciate the heed paid by the
representative of Switzerland to the call for brevity.
I now call on the representative of India.
Mr. Sen (India): As this is the first statement I
am making in the Security Council this month, I wish
to take this opportunity to warmly felicitate you,
Mr. President, on your dedicated and talented
stewardship of the Council. I would also like to
sincerely congratulate you and the members of your
team on your effective guidance of the work of the
Council. Let me also thank the Chairmen of the three
Security Council Committees established pursuant,
respectively, to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004).

25

S/PV.5293

Earlier this month, terrorists struck for a second
time in Bali, Indonesia, exacting a terrible toll on
innocent civilians. The victims were unconnected with
any ideology, policy or programme directed against
terrorists, but nonetheless fell to those very forces. Our
thoughts go out to them and to their families. Such
incidents reinforce awareness of the absolute necessity
for countries to work together to root out the scourge
of terrorism. India is determined to continue to
effectively contribute to that effort.
Terrorism has become a global phenomenon to
which no country or society can remain totally immune
or indifferent. The Prime Minister of India recently
stated that
“The end of the cold war, increasing global
interdependence and the trans-border nature of
many threats have made strategic concepts
developed in a bipolar world somewhat
irrelevant. ...
“While the international community has
made some progress in evolving a rule-based
order for managing the economic and commercial
dimensions of globalization, the absence of an
effective, rule-based order is acutely felt in
addressing contemporary security threats, such as
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.”
The United Nations is uniquely placed to provide
the multilateral platform necessary for real global
cooperation and coordination in our common fight
against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. For the same reason, the actions of
the Security Council, alone — no matter how
effective — cannot provide a sufficient response to the
global security threats we face today.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) contained a clear and
unqualified condemnation by all Governments of
terrorism. Inter alia, it reiterated its call to States to
refrain from organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training for or otherwise supporting terrorist
activities and to take appropriate measures to ensure
that their territories are not used for such activities. It
also stressed the need to make every effort to reach an
agreement on and conclude a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly.

26

India initiated a draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism at the fifty-first General
Assembly session. We believe that draft supplements
the 13 sectoral conventions on terrorism and provides a
comprehensive legal framework upon which States can
base their cooperation for extradition and mutual
judicial assistance in connection with terrorist crimes.
However, it has thus far been almost a decade in the
making. Every effort has been made to narrow the
existing differences and to address the issue of
reconciling the legal regime under the draft convention
with international humanitarian law. In situations
where international humanitarian law applies, it is
important that the legal balance not be altered. In the
current climate, with increasing acts of terrorism, we
believe that all States should work expeditiously
towards the adoption of the draft convention early in
the sixtieth session, as proposed by the President of the
General Assembly. We remain convinced that such a
convention would also greatly facilitate the work of the
Security Council in the area of counter-terrorism.
The people of India have faced the scourge of
cross-border terrorism for well over two decades. We
have suffered its consequences but have also, over
time, accumulated the expertise and experience to deal
with this menace through prevention, interdiction and
deterrence. Our experience has addressed the unique
forms and techniques utilized by terrorists in our
region to attain their objectives. Unfortunately, we
have also seen the increasing use of such methods in
other parts of the world. These include the use of
informal banking channels and the movement of people
and arms, facilitated by the unholy nexus of drug and
human traffickers and terrorists.
The relevant Indian departments and specialized
agencies have developed considerable expertise in
tackling such problems as terrorist financing,
alternative currency transfer systems, money
laundering and illegal arms trafficking. They have also
acquired a sound knowledge of customs law,
extradition law, immigration law, financial law, the
drafting of legislation, and border patrol, police and
law enforcement issues. We have bilaterally shared our
experience, even with some permanent members of the
Council, on tackling the ramifications of Hawala. We
would be happy to share our expertise with countries
that require capacity-building in such areas.
We note that the third report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established

S/PV.5293

pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) (S/2005/572),
issued last month, warned that with Al-Qaida’s
continuing evolution, the threat of significant attack
remains real. It also acknowledged that the various
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban have not
achieved their full potential. It is clear that the Council
will need to continually adapt its existing measures to
match the ability of those organizations and of their
associates to find a way around the efforts of the
international community to tackle them. Containment
measures have to keep abreast of methods that mutate.
We would also like to caution against any casual
moves towards reconciliation with elements of the
Taliban. We continue to maintain that individuals on
the Taliban list must remain there with their assets
frozen, unable to rejoin Afghan society. They must not
be delisted unless they give up their former affiliations
and are made accountable, through due process, for
past actions against their countrymen.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) must continue its
work to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Such an effort must remain equally
vigilant against the proliferation of such weapons by
both States and non-State actors. At the same time, it
should act against both the recipients and the sources
of proliferation. Nor can non-proliferation be selective.
Turning a blind eye to supposed allies and targeting
supposed adversaries can only undermine resolution
1540 (2004). Here, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of France for his reference to India’s
report to the 1540 Committee.
In conclusion, the working group established
under resolution 1566 (2004) has the unique
opportunity to shape the future direction of the United
Nations effort against terrorism. We wish to commend
the Philippines for chairing the working group and for
its contribution to the work of the Council. My
delegation has made certain suggestions to the Chair of
the working group on the implementation of resolution
1566 (2004). We are hopeful that the working group
will expeditiously move forward and advance the
cooperation on counter-terrorism identified in that
resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Chairmen of the

Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information that they provided us today.
However, as at similar public Security Council
meetings held in April and July 2005, my delegation
feels obliged to focus its statement on an issue of deep
concern. While we are meeting here today to discuss
effective measures to prevent and eliminate terrorism,
the notorious international terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles remains on United States territory without the
Government of that country complying with its
obligation to prosecute or extradite him for the
horrendous crimes he has committed.
The Government that has unleashed wars in the
name of the fight against terrorism is the same one that
now, in blatant violation of its international
obligations, protects and provides refuge to the
Western Hemisphere’s main terrorist, the perpetrator of
the mid-air explosion of a Cuban airliner with 73
passengers on board, who is responsible for many other
killings of Cuban citizens and citizens of other nations.
On 27 September 2005, a spokeswoman of the
United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement announced in El Paso, Texas, the swift
decision of Judge William L. Abbott not to deport the
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles to either Venezuela or
Cuba, using the cynical and false argument that there
was a danger of torture if he were to be detained in
either country and resorting in a manipulative manner
to the exemptions provided for in the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Are not
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1566 (2004), adopted by
the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, applicable to the Government of the
United States? How long will the Council tolerate the
super-Power’s double moral standard in the fight
against terrorism?
On 9 August 2005, the three judges of the Court
of Appeals for the Eleventh Judicial Circuit, in Atlanta,
who were presiding over the case of five Cuban citizen
anti-terrorist fighters — Gerardo Hernández, Ramón
Labañino, Fernando González, René González and
Antonio Guerrero — being held in United States
prisons, announced their unanimous decision to revoke
the sentences and to order a new trial. The court
recognized their right to be tried fairly and impartially

27

S/PV.5293

in a non-hostile atmosphere, as provided for in the
Constitution of the United States.

and to the
Terrorism.

Despite the fact that there is now no conviction
against those Cuban citizens, the Government of the
United States holds them hostage in its prisons.
Allowing confessed terrorists such as Posada Carriles
to enjoy absolute impunity while subjecting the five
Cuban anti-terrorist fighters to arbitrary imprisonment
is an immoral act of great irresponsibility and an
affront to all victims of terrorism and their families
throughout the world.

With the same conviction and consistency with
which we are fighting that scourge, we condemn and
reject the use of terrorism as a political tool to kill at
close range and to intimidate weak, helpless, innocent
victims in any part of the world, including through
actions that are justified as collateral effects of a
foreign invasion.

As it has done in the past, my Government
reiterates its request to the Security Council’s CounterTerrorism Committee to review the information
presented by my country, inter alia in documents
S/2002/15, S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, in the hope
that its work can lead to an ending of the impunity
enjoyed on United States territory by those who have
carried out terrorist acts against Cuba.
Cuba reaffirms its principled position against all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, wherever, by whomsoever and
against whomsoever they are committed, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly
involved.
The President: I call next on the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Toro Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we wish to express
once again our categorical condemnation of all acts of
terrorism, whatever their form or manifestation,
whether committed by States or by non-State actors.
We also want to make clear our position that the
legitimate resistance of peoples against foreign
invasion or occupation does not constitute an act of
terrorism. That is recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations.
In our resolve to fight terrorism, we have ratified
many international conventions. At the domestic level,
we have developed broad legislation to combat
terrorism and have created a national authority in that
area. Our Government is diligent, responsible and
consistent in its approach to this matter.
We have also submitted, in a timely manner,
reports to the Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee

28

Inter-American

Committee

Against

Equally condemnable are the lies, distortions,
misinformation and manipulation promoted and
disseminated on a daily basis by the national and
international communications media that, working in
the service of the dominant imperial Powers, conceal
and alter information and prevent the general public
from knowing the truth about those who are working
collectively, in exercise of their right to selfdetermination, to build their future and to make
possible a different world.
We recall once again that resolution 1624 (2005)
states, in its fifteenth preambular paragraph, that
“all States must cooperate fully in the fight
against terrorism, in accordance with ...
international law, in order to ... deny safe haven
and bring to justice, on the basis of the principle
of extradite or prosecute, any person who
supports, facilitates, participates or attempts to
participate in the financing, planning, preparation
or commission of terrorist acts or provides safe
havens”.
Today, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
would like to set out two cases before the Council.
The first is the case of the Venezuelan terrorist
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles, who is currently in the
territory of the United States of America, apparently as
a refugee. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
already requested his extradition by the Government of
the United States of America, on the basis of existing
international agreements. Despite that request, to date
there has been no response from the authorities of that
Government. There has been only a long,
compromising silence. Neither has Posada Carriles
been tried in the United States.
In this regard, we recall documents S/2005/394 of
16 June and S/2005/624 of 3 October 2005, which set
out our position in that respect. In our opinion, not
only those who carry out terrorist acts, but also those

S/PV.5293

who protect such individuals, are terrorists. We cannot
ignore the inconsistent attitude of the Government of
the United States of America, which has often repeated
those same words, yet offers protection to the terrorist
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles. The double standard of
the United States Government with regard to terrorism
is clear. It applies its national anti-terrorist laws only
when it is convenient, and the same is true of its
international obligations.
The second case we would like to bring before
the Council is also incomprehensible to anyone of good
judgement. It relates to the Reverend Pat Robertson,
who has high-level connections within the Republican
Party and who, on United States television, publicly
called for the assassination of our President, Hugo
Rafael Chávez Frías. We can assure the Council that
that constitutes a crime under United States law.
Furthermore, that crime is an act of terrorism,
according to existing international law, including the
most recent Security Council doctrine as expressed in
resolution 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005. Against
that backdrop, we do not understand how that terrorist
can continue, with impunity, to make absurd, insane
and disrespectful comments directed at the President of
a democratic republic who has been confirmed in
office on a number of occasions by the Venezuelan
people in accordance with his constitutional mandate.
We reaffirm that it is inadmissible from the
standpoint of international law to harbour those two
terrorists. That would be to ignore resolution 1373
(2001), of 13 September 2001, subparagraphs (c) of
paragraph 2 and (g) of paragraph 3 of which prevent
States from providing refuge to those who carry out
terrorist acts and ensure that political motivation is not
recognized as grounds for refusing requests for the
extradition of terrorists.
With regard to the second case, the Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has already
taken steps, in accordance with the extradition treaties
in force between the United States of America and the
Republic, with a view to extraditing Mr. Pat Robertson
for the crimes committed, under the terms of the
Venezuelan penal code and international law, against
the President of the Republic. We hope that, once those
steps have been completed and a formal extradition
request has been made, the competent authorities of the
Government of the United States of America will give
due and diligent attention to the matter, in accordance
with the treaty in force and with international practice.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Savua (Fiji): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Samoa on behalf
of the Pacific Islands Forum.
The recent terrorist attacks in Madrid, London
and Bali illustrate the ease with which terrorists move
around, acquire weapons and equipment, form
alliances and execute their missions. Human lives do
not matter to them, rules and laws mean nothing and
national borders are mere nuisances. They even believe
that they will go to paradise for their beliefs and
twisted sense of fair play. We, however, have to respect
all laws, recognize all borders and ensure that our
actions are not so draconian that they verge on the
denial of individual human rights.
The perception by the public that our efforts are
too little and come too late is, perhaps, correct, but it
may never be appreciated how much has been achieved
and how many terrorists’ plans have been thwarted
because of the vigilance of the security officers at our
borders and of the thousands who work overtly or
covertly in the war on terror.
Most of the successes are due to the commitment
and willingness of States to cooperate with one
another. The Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee guides such cooperation on terrorism.
However, while adherence to such guidance is not
obligatory, it is the decisions of States to conform that
have enabled some restraint to be imposed. There is
room for improvement, particularly in areas of work
identified by countries and regions. There are currently
13 anti-terrorism instruments and, although an omnibus
convention is being drafted, we do not believe that it
will lessen the number of obligatory returns and reports
that we will have to prepare. In this regard, we fully
endorse the proposal submitted by Samoa that our
region invite a representative of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to attend the 2006 meeting of the South
Pacific Working Group on Counter-Terrorism, and we
request that a collective Pacific regional report to each
Committee be submitted by the Pacific Islands Forum
secretariat to alleviate the pressure faced by Forum
member countries in meeting the individual reporting
requirements and deadlines.

29

S/PV.5293

Sometimes the South Pacific region feels isolated
because of the lack of attention it receives. While it
may be true that because of our insularity we offer no
worthwhile targets to terrorists, the hardening of major
targets could make our countries’ security
arrangements soft by comparison. As we have
mentioned regularly, while the tyranny of distance has
an adverse effect on our trade and development, it is
not a credible defence against terrorism. Indeed, the
very 747 airliner that feeds our tourism industry is also
the engine that takes away the security cushion of
distance.
The importance of the exchange of information
and intelligence in counter-terrorism strategies must be
emphasized. However, unprocessed information and
intelligence are not worth much and can prove very
expensive. Every time a country responds to received
intelligence, money has to be spent on the resulting
mobilization. We also stand to lose the support of the
people if we consistently cry wolf. We therefore appeal
to nations with the ability to cast a wide net and to
collect and collate intelligence to ensure that the raw
data is diligently and properly analysed, and to spare a
thought for those who may not have the funds to
respond on an ongoing basis.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support for the statement made by the representative of
Samoa and to respectfully ask that it receive favourable
consideration.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Liechtenstein, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I
should like, on behalf of my Government, to express
our condemnation of the suicide bombing that took
place earlier today in Hadera, Israel. I should like also
to take this opportunity to express our deep
condolences to the representative of Israel as well as to
the families of the victims of this horrific act of
terrorism.
We appreciate the regular updates given by the
Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), who
briefed us this morning. We appreciate also the

30

opportunity to contribute to the discussion in the
Council.
At the most recent open briefing, we referred to a
request made by Liechtenstein to the Taliban and
Al-Qaida sanctions Committee that the list of States
having made notifications regarding humanitarian
exemptions in accordance with resolution 1452 (2002)
be made accessible to all Member States. That
exemption regime is a very important feature of the
sanctions mechanism which facilitates national
implementation of sanctions measures in accordance
with applicable constitutional and international human
rights standards.
Since the Committee must be involved in every
single case of humanitarian exemption under resolution
1452 (2002), the ability of States to apply that regime
would greatly benefit from increased transparency in
its handling by the Committee. We would thus find it
desirable for the Security Council to grant interested
States access to all Committee decisions on that matter
in order to better understand the Committee’s practice.
This would help them to assess the chances of success
of potential applications from listed persons or entities
residing in their territories.
Far from full disclosure of Committee practice,
however, we simply requested that the list of States
whose notifications under the humanitarian exemption
regime were received favourably by the Committee be
made accessible to interested States. That would have
enabled us to contact those States bilaterally and to
discuss their experience with them directly. We noted
with regret — and reference was also made to this fact
by the Chairperson of the sanctions Committee this
morning — that the Committee, after deliberating the
topic for many weeks, decided not to make the list
available, and also that no explanation was offered for
that decision. We have sent a written reply to the
Committee and understand that the letter will be
circulated as an official document of the Security
Council.
Since the last briefing, the third report of the
Monitoring Team supporting the 1267 Committee has
been released to States that are not members of the
Council. We would like to thank Mr. Richard Barrett
and his experts for their thorough analysis and
recommendations, some of which have already been
taken into account by the Council in resolution 1617
(2005). We appreciate the progress made in the

S/PV.5293

strengthening of the sanctions regime but remain
concerned that the strengthening of procedural
safeguards for individuals and entities affected by
sanctions is not yet keeping pace. Both the Monitoring
Team’s report and the resolution point to the need to
continue to work on improving listing and delisting
procedures. That was also confirmed by the world
summit, which mandated the Council to ensure that fair
and clear procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them, as
well as for granting humanitarian exemptions. It is our
understanding that the term “fair” entails ensuring that
those affected by sanctions enjoy real rights and have
access to appeals procedures which come close to
standards of criminal justice. This is required by the
severity of the sanctions measures, which include
restrictions on freedom of movement and the
quasi-permanent and uncapped freezing of funds.
Such
procedural
improvements
have,
furthermore, become more relevant since the Council,
in its resolution 1617 (2005), adopted a broad
understanding of the term “associated with” Al-Qaida,
Usama bin Laden or the Taliban which does not require
knowledge on the part of the person or entity
concerned. We are confident that Council members will
continue to work hard on these matters, and we stand
ready to make our contribution.
Efforts to strengthen the sanctions regime and its
procedures must be seen in the context of the bigger
picture of global cooperation to fight terrorism. We
must place equal emphasis on the different aspects of
that endeavour, as reflected in the various elements of
the Secretary-General’s proposal for a global counterterrorist strategy. We are confident that such a strategy
will be helpful in promoting a holistic and coordinated
approach to the fight against terrorism.
In that respect, we welcome in particular the
initiative to streamline the work of the Security
Council and its respective Committees and are
encouraged by positive developments in the work
undertaken in the General Assembly to conclude
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
terrorism. We will continue to do our utmost to
contribute to the success of those efforts.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
representative of Israel, I wish to ask him to accept my
deep condolences to the families of those killed in the
Hadera explosion.

Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you very much for your condolences, which I
know are heartfelt and sincere, as are, I know, the
condolences expressed by my colleague from
Liechtenstein.
Mr. President, allow me to thank you for your
leadership of the Council during this rather busy month
of October and for having convened this extremely
important meeting.
The statement I had prepared for this meeting is
before the Council. However, even as we speak, five
Israelis lie dead and 33 others, badly wounded, are
being rushed to the hospital after terrorists struck
again, this time in the market of the city of Hadera in
central Israel, in a suicide bombing by a 20-year-old
Palestinian.
I will therefore — with your permission, Mr.
President — forsake my statement and not read it out
at this time of great grief and stark reality. Indeed, the
bloody scene in Hadera, the body parts and the
bloodstained streets speak far louder than any words or
statement could. Indeed, anyone who expects Israel to
re-embark on the road map must realize that so far,
unfortunately, the road in Hadera is the real map — a
map of blood, terror and pain.
Terror for Israel — as is the case, unfortunately,
for so many others around this table — is not a
technical matter. It is far too real, far too ominous, far
too deadly and far too daily an occurrence. In fact,
Israel has experienced more than 25,400 terrorist
attacks in the past five years alone. I repeat: 25,400
terrorist attacks in five years. That exceptionally high
number, however, reflects only attacks that have
actually been carried out. The number of attempted
attacks is exponentially greater. We cannot overlook
the attacks that are attempted but which, for some
reason, fail. Those that are carried out overwhelm the
headlines by nature of their imagery and the sheer
horror they represent, as witnessed today in Hadera.
Nevertheless, for every terrorist attack carried out,
there are nearly five attempted attacks. Just think of it:
if we did not manage to thwart them, we would have
not 25,400 but 125,000 terror attacks in five years.
There is such a miniscule distance between those that
are successful and those that, for a technical reason,
fail. Life and death depend on the smallest of fractions:
a second, an inch, a glance.

31

S/PV.5293

Responsibility for that heinous crime has been
claimed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, whose
headquarters, like those of a dozen other terror
organizations, is in Damascus, Syria, and Syria is a
country that has been harbouring, financing and
initiating terror throughout the region and the world.
We have not yet heard any condemnation from the
Palestinian Authority. But even if we do, words are not
enough. We expect deeds, not words, and resolute
action against terror now.
Talking of words, the words of the President of
Iran, voiced so loudly only yesterday, as he called for
Israel to be wiped off the map, are being implemented
in Hadera today with such grim immediacy. It is words
like Iran’s, terror-harbouring and terror-abetting like
Syria’s and inaction like that of the Palestinians that
the Committees must address.
Terror is the first world war of the twenty-first
century and, today more than ever, we must all
mobilize our forces to fight that pandemic. We must do
so to save not only lives but also the very foundations
of our civilization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Just over
a month ago, our heads of State or Government stated
that one of the fundamental pillars of United Nations
reform is security, specifically, terrorism, which is one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security, as we saw this morning with the terrorist
attack that took place in Israel and from the attack in
Bali just a few weeks ago. Such events signal that we
are facing a concrete, long-term threat.
Given the nature of that threat, no State can
protect its national security on its own. Stopping
terrorism requires international cooperation in the areas
of security, intelligence, operations and justice. In
other words, we must make resolute progress in the
multilateral arena. In that context, the work of the
Committees in combating terrorism is fundamental.
I once again express my gratitude for the
initiative of jointly introducing the reports of the 1267
Committee, the 1373 Committee and the 1540
Committee. I am grateful for the valuable information
on the efforts the Committees are conducting. These
joint briefings are a positive sign of coordination and
complementarity.

32

We believe that these open meetings of the
Security Council contribute to a better understanding
of the work of the Committees and create an
atmosphere of greater participation, transparency and
openness to the perspectives and comments of the
broader United Nations membership. I should mention
that on the issue of terrorism, there is still a gap that
has to be bridged between the work carried out by
Security Council on the one hand, and that of the
General Assembly on the other. We therefore feel that
promoting initiatives for greater dissemination,
collaboration and State visits must contribute to a
comprehensive strategy to combat terrorism.
As stated by our heads of State or Government in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), the General Assembly should develop
those elements and formulate a strategy to promote
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses
at all levels to counter terrorism, taking into account
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
I would also like to highlight the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1624 (2005) in
September, concerning the prevention of the incitement
of terrorist acts. The adoption of that resolution sends a
strong signal in the fight against terrorism.
I would like to refer briefly to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee. First, I congratulate
Ambassador Mayoral and his team on their outstanding
work. We believe that one of the most important
elements in recent months was the adoption of
resolution 1617 (2005), which added new elements to
the Committee’s already demanding mandate and
which extended the sanctions regime for a further 17
months. Paragraph 2 of the resolution specifies with
greater clarity the criteria for deciding what constitutes
association with Al-Qaida. We consider the checklist
contained in annex II of the resolution, which States
should use to report to the Committee by 1 March
2006, to be another highly valuable element that will
improve the quality of the Consolidated List.
And I am pleased to note the tenth preambular
paragraph of that resolution, concerning cooperation
with Interpol — which I had the honour of initiating
during my chairmanship. That cooperation will provide
the Committee with better tools to fulfil its mandate, in
particular through the use of the Interpol database of
lost and stolen passports.

S/PV.5293

Visits to States by the Chairman and the
Committee are a productive way to continue keeping
abreast of the situation on the ground, increase
dialogue, clarify doubts and establish ties of trust with
States. I am pleased to see that at least four meetings
have been held with Member States this year. The
dialogue process can clearly be improved through the
participation of a growing number of countries.
Similarly, we believe it important to appeal to
States to recall international codes and norms to
combat the financing of terrorism, in particular those
of regional and institutional financial organizations
such as the Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering.
We consider it a positive step that individuals and
entities have been added to the Consolidated List and
that one individual has recently been removed from the
List. Of course, we must take measures to increase the
number of individuals and entities on the Consolidated
List, but I must also affirm the need to improve the
procedure of due process without diminishing that
instrument’s effectiveness.
I would also like to underline the excellent
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
by Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Løj and note the
efforts made to complete the Committee’s
revitalization process, in particular by making the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) fully operational. We also appreciate the work
carried out by Ambassador Javier Rupérez in that
regard.
The great amount of work accomplished by the
Committee is clear to all, as is the valuable new
methodology being used to identify and tackle the
problems that States face in implementing resolution
1373 (2001), improve the capacities of those States and
increase the number of States having acceded to and
ratified international conventions. We believe that the
work of the CTC in the area of technical assistance to
States is also very important. I was often witness to
that need for cooperation. This Committee has also
been an example to be imitated by others in using and
incorporating international, regional and subregional
organizations, contributing in this way to a
comprehensive understanding of the struggle against
terrorism.
With regard to difficulties, referred to in some
statements this morning, arising from a lack of

compliance on the part of States, I believe it advisable
to underscore the fact that we should have selective
and targeted reports in order to ensure greater
effectiveness and to avoid creating fatigue among
States as a result of excessive demands for reports.
I wish to congratulate Ambassador Motoc for his
active leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We believe the
Council’s decision to make obligatory national controls
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction has been particularly important. This
Committee has responded to the demands of its
mandate. Its nature is complex and sensitive, because it
is making progress in a rather new area, but we
congratulate the Chairman on both the number of
reports received and the exhaustive review carried out.
We also believe the Committee’s communications to
States, including my own, requesting further
clarification are constructive. The initiative to build a
legal database could provide a very useful source of
information for the work of the experts. Finally,
initiatives such as the seminar in Buenos Aires in
September on progress in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) are activities we must continue. We also
feel that we must pursue the efforts already begun to
identify offers of and requirements for technical
assistance.
I will conclude by mentioning the positive work
of the three Committees and the fact that success
depends on the level of cooperation of Member States
and on the level of compliance with sanctions and
mandates established by the Security Council. While
this is a certainly lengthy struggle, through collective
action and cooperation we can make progress and
defeat terrorism.
The President: I next give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mrs. Holguín (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your
presidency and to thank you for convening this meeting
and allowing participation in the open debate.
We are grateful for the briefings on the activities
of the three Committees, chaired by the representatives
of Denmark, Argentina and Romania, and for their
work, activities and commitment. In this regard, as
stated in our report on compliance with resolution 1267
(1999), my Government has passed on to all competent
authorities the lists requested by the Committee, and

33

S/PV.5293

the updated lists as well, so that the corresponding
action can be taken.

done in compliance with international standards and
must be unrelenting.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Colombia is committed to the decisions
adopted in resolution 1373 (2001) and has submitted
four reports. We have complied with resolution 1540
(2004), and we welcome resolution 1624 (2005),
adopted on 14 September.

We are still surprised at terrorist acts. We
continue to reject any act of that nature. The people of
Colombia have suffered from terrorism for a number of
years. What is mere theory or news for many is a
reality for us. Thousands of individuals have been
affected. Recently there was a second terrorist attempt
on the life of the former President of the Senate, in
Bogota. The State and the Government are determined
to combat terrorism and protect the Colombian people
from this threat.

Colombia has always condemned, and continues
to condemn, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its motivation or authors.
We believe that States must agree to a strategy to
combat terrorism, which will have immediate results
for peoples who suffer from and are victims of this
threat. We hope that the report of the Secretary-General
expected in 2006 will offer proposals to be considered
by the General Assembly and the Security Council to
strengthen the system to better support States in their
struggle against terrorism. Similarly, we hope that
States will begin to work together, which will enable
them to strengthen their consensus on ways to combat
terrorism in all its forms.
To be successful, cooperation to eliminate this
scourge must be unequivocal and universal. For the
United Nations to be effective in supporting States in
the global struggle against terrorism, it must work
closely with them, improve internal cooperation and
avoid duplication of functions and tasks. It must seek
clarity for ensuring implementation of a counterterrorism strategy that will include all countries and
organizations. States cannot combat this scourge in an
isolated fashion; joint and concerted action is required
to ensure success. Confidence-building is essential for
making progress in the exchange of information and
judicial cooperation. These are essential elements in
any counter-terrorism strategy.
More than analysis and general statements, what
the system and the States require is concrete initiatives
that establish commitments and possible and
achievable actions. In some cases, countries cannot
afford to exhaust themselves in trying to prove to the
world that terrorists who carry out terrorist actions in
their territories are, in fact, terrorists. While the
international community deliberates and persuades
itself, terrorist actions against the civilian population
continue. We therefore need to strengthen the
mechanisms that build confidence among States, with
the understanding that combating terrorism must be

34

In a democratic system, with a guarantee of open
and free political participation, there is no justification
for committing acts of violence or terrorism. Idealism
of former times is not an argument for maintaining
struggles based on terrorism.
In the past, a Danish non-governmental
organization sent funds to an illegal armed group that
carried out terrorist acts. Colombia began a process of
dialogue with Danish authorities, and I take this
opportunity to publicly thank the Government and
Danish justice for their cooperation in shedding light
on this matter and putting an end to this sort of
practice.
We must now recognize and apply the principle
of shared responsibility in preventing and eliminating
terrorism. It is time to take concrete and decisive
actions to criminalize any act to facilitate and finance
terrorism, because there is no doubt that terrorist
groups are increasingly participating in various forms
of organized crime to finance their activities through
trafficking of illicit drugs, money-laundering and arms
trafficking, inter alia.
The President: I thank the representative of
Colombia for her kind words to the Chair.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
just received letters from the representatives of
Pakistan and the Syrian Arab Republic, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objective, it is so decided.

S/PV.5293

I now give the floor to the representative of
Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me first express our
felicitations to you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
present month. We are confident that for the Council
this month will be not only eventful, but fruitful as
well. We also wish to express our admiration to
Ambassador Baja and the Philippines delegation on
their very successful presidency last month.
I wish to join other delegations in thanking the
Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
1267 Sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee.
We appreciate the practice of these briefings. We have
noted the reports of the three Chairmen and wish to
offer some comments on this issue.
The threat of terrorism knows no boundaries. It
poses a challenge to entire humanity. Terrorism has no
faith and is abhorrent to all religions and beliefs.
Pakistan has been a victim of terrorism for over
two decades, including cross-border and Statesponsored terrorism. We remain in the forefront of
counter-terrorism efforts. We have strengthened our
legal, administrative and financial controls. We have
signed, or are a party to, 11 out of the 13 United
Nations conventions and protocols on terrorism. Our
armed forces, moreover, continue their search and
interdiction operations against terrorists in the border
regions with Afghanistan, and we have captured more
than 700 Al-Qaida operatives.
With regard to the work of the three Committees,
we have noted the efforts of the 1267 Sanctions
Committee to bring clarity to its working methods and
that the Committee is engaged in the process of
improving its guidelines. We believe a more credible
process for listing and delisting needs to be evolved.
We hope that the Committee will continue to bring
greater transparency to its work to ensure full
cooperation from all States.
We also welcome the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
finally has become operational and is assisting the
Committee in its work. We hope that Committee will
become an instrument to promote a more
comprehensive counter-terrorism approach in the
future.

We welcome the increased level of reporting by
Member States on the steps they have taken or plan to
take to implement the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004), whose scope is clear and is unambiguously
focussed on preventing non-State actors from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.
A significant number of reports have been
examined by the 1540 Committee, yet as you yourself,
Mr. President, have noted, 67 Member States have not
been able to report. That underlines some of the
challenges with regard to capacity and the need for
assistance. We hope the Committee will draw
appropriate attention to those aspects in its outreach
activities.
Consistent with our strong commitment to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, we have provided to the Committee
perhaps the most extensive information on a range of
measures that we have in place to implement resolution
1540 (2004). We hope that other States will also be
able to share with the Committee the steps they have
taken or envisage taking to implement that resolution.
Pakistan has consistently urged the Security
Council to evolve a mechanism to associate the larger
membership of the United Nations with the Council’s
work, especially in the field of terrorism, since global
cooperation is so essential in that field. It could be
done, for example, by opening the membership of the
counter-terrorism Committees to other United Nations
Member States through elections. The ultimate
decision-making would of course remain with the
Security Council. That would promote inclusiveness,
provide alternative perspectives and views and enhance
transparency and accountability in the work of the
three Committees.
The 2005 summit has unequivocally condemned
terrorism “in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes”. (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para.
81) The Summit sought the adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive strategy; it agreed
to consider convening a high-level United Nations
conference; it recognized the important role of the
United Nations in combating terrorism, and it stressed
the need to make efforts to reach agreement on and
conclude a comprehensive convention during the
present session of the General Assembly.

35

S/PV.5293

The conclusion of the convention is held up
because of the unjustified effort to exclude from its
purview the activities of armed forces in situations of
armed conflict. Granting such a blanket exemption
could imply that armed or military forces of a State
enjoy impunity for acts that are terrorist in nature.
Indeed, armed forces, especially those engaged in
foreign occupation and suppression of selfdetermination, have often been involved in acts that are
terrorist in nature. Various proposals are under
consideration to resolve that important issue.
The September outcome document also called on
the General Assembly to develop and adopt such a
comprehensive strategy. We believe that such a
strategy should include both short-term and long-term
measures at the national, regional and international
levels. The short-term measures should be aimed at
providing support for, and enhancing the effectiveness
of, ongoing efforts to counter terrorism, including by
the three Committees of the Security Council. The
long-term measures should aim at addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism. Let me reiterate that
root causes do not justify terrorism, but they do explain
it. In that regard, the need to win the hearts and minds
of potential terrorists cannot be overemphasized.
Domestically, religious bigotry, hate campaigns
and confrontational tendencies have to be curbed. That
must be done through bold, determined, well-thoughtout and indigenously applicable strategies. The misuse
of religion to spread militancy, hatred and violence has
to be suppressed, and an international discourse, as
well as a national debate in affected societies, must be
conducted on religious harmony.
President Musharraf of Pakistan has outlined such
a strategy and what he terms the strategy of
enlightened moderation at the global and international
levels.
Besides developing a comprehensive strategy, we
also need to focus our attention on developing an
institutional mechanism to implement it. One proposal
in that regard could be the development of an
international counter-terrorism centre, which has
already been proposed by His Majesty King Abdullah
of Saudi Arabia.
We trust the General Assembly will take decisive
and early action to develop a comprehensive approach
to ensure sustained success against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. The work of the Council’s

36

three Committees will remain an integral and essential
part of that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to thank
Ambassadors César Mayoral, Ellen Margrethe Løj and
Ioan Motoc for their briefings on the work of the
Committees. We would welcome the continuing
opportunity for the Council to hold open meetings to
discuss such an important question.
Syria condemns international terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. Syria itself has been a victim
of terrible terrorist acts and was among the first to
draw attention to the danger and to call for a national
and global strategy to combat terrorism.
Syria is committed to cooperating with the
various Security Council committees fighting
terrorism. We proved this when we were members of
the Council, where we participated effectively in the
work of the counter-terrorism committees.
Syria also makes sincere efforts to develop its
own legislation and to take effective measures to carry
out its commitments in that respect. We are proud to
submit our reports early. As part of its work, the Syrian
parliament has also placed top priority on the
implementation of our anti-terrorism commitments.
Laws have been enacted and complete instructions on
the laws have been issued. For example, about two
months ago, a law was enacted to combat moneylaundering. In addition, the executive authorities are
making all necessary and sincere efforts in that respect.
During its latest visit to Syria, the 1267
Committee saw for itself the great efforts my country is
making in this respect. The United Nations is a unique
forum for our collective work, which allows full
coordination and cooperation among all countries in
fighting terrorism and working against the spread of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
In this respect, the Arab region suffers from
terrorism in general and State terrorism in particular,
namely the terrorism practised by Israel through its
continued occupation of Arab land and its continuous
killing of Palestinian citizens, the destruction of their
property and the building of the separation wall on
their land. My country was among the first to sign the
Convention against Nuclear Terrorism and worked

S/PV.5293

towards the acceptance of that Convention. We will
participate effectively in the forthcoming discussions
to conclude a comprehensive treaty on global terrorism
by finding solutions that meet the needs for combating
that scourge.

States without inspection, and he remains in custody
while his case is being processed within the United
States legal system. The Venezuelan extradition request
is under review in accordance with a bilateral
extradition treaty and United States extradition law.

We have submitted all the required reports within
the framework of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004)
and 1267 (1999). The Syrian authorities are following
up work with other regional and international
organizations in this area.

In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
in 2001 the individuals in question were convicted in a
United States federal court of conspiracy to commit
espionage, among other charges that include
conspiracy by one of the individuals to commit murder,
having supported and implemented a plan to shoot
down civilian aircraft, both inside and outside the
United States.

In the coming days, we will submit our third
report pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We believe
that the 1540 Committee should continue its work to
fight WMDs, especially in the Middle East, and to
prevent such weapons from falling into the hands of
terrorists.
All Arab countries have acceded to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty. Israel is the only country in
the Middle East which has not done so. This is a threat
to regional and international peace and security,
because Israel has hundreds of nuclear weapons and
other WMDs. The protection of Israel by certain
parties, and especially the fact that certain parties have
covered up Israel’s terrorist acts, should not be
accepted because of serious and dangerous
consequences.
Allow me to conclude by saying that the work of
these three Committees is very important for the
international community and we are hopeful that they
will enrich our multilateral international cooperation in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Ms. Willson (United States of America): I
apologize to members who are being detained at this
late hour, but I will try to be as brief as possible. It is
necessary for us to add to our previous statement.

The United States Department of Justice has
asked for a full hearing by the Court of Appeals,
Eleventh Circuit, of a panel decision reversing the trial
court’s decision. The five accused remain detained
while the case is being processed in the United States
judicial system.
The United States has always provided the five
accused with all the guarantees of due process inherent
in the independent and impartial United States judicial
system. Despite the frustration expressed by the two
speakers who raised these cases, we assure them that
United States courts and administrative proceedings are
independent and that they fairly and impartially
interpret and apply the law.
The President: I am wondering whether, in the
light of the remarks that we have just heard and due to
the rather late hour, we can consider the debate closed.
Then I have to inform members of the Council
that the representatives of Cuba and Venezuela have
asked for the floor to make further statements. If I have
the consent of the members of the Council, I will
proceed accordingly. If there is no objection, I would
like, without further ado, to invite the representative of
Cuba to make an additional statement.

The Council, of course, is here this morning to
review the work of the three Committees that strive to
counter terrorism. Most speakers have engaged
constructively in discussing ways to increase
cooperation and advance the work of the Committees,
and we appreciate that. It is disappointing, therefore,
that two representatives departed from the focus of the
debate to introduce allegations that detract from the
positive tone of the discussion and distort the facts of
two cases being adjudicated in the United States.

Mr. Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, first, allow me to thank you and the
members of the Council for allowing us to make a
second statement. We felt duty-bound to do so, given
the comments by the representative of the United
States delegation. We believe that this is a typical
response from someone who makes unfounded
statements.

In the case of Mr. Posada, the facts are that he
was detained on 17 May after entering the United

In this regard, my delegation calls upon the
representative of the United States to demonstrate the

37

S/PV.5293

supposed commitment of her country to anti-terrorism
and to respond unambiguously to the following
questions. One, is it true or not that the Government of
President George Bush protects in his country the wellknown international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
without complying with his obligation to try or to
extradite him? Secondly, is it true or not that for more
than 40 years, the Government of the United States has
provided active support to terrorist and mafia
organizations in Florida, which have planned,
organized and carried out countless terrorist acts
resulting in the deaths of thousands of Cubans?
Thirdly, can the American representative deny that, in
an odious, vengeful act, Washington has kept five
Cuban anti-terrorist fighters imprisoned without any
sentencing — anti-terrorist fighters who remain in
United States prisons?
As we have said, it is impossible to eliminate
international terrorism if, on the one hand, some
terrorist acts are condemned, while others are passed
over in silence or are tolerated, justified, or even
encouraged. We have said more than once in this
chamber that in Miami, funds are collected, with
complete impunity and with the complicity of the
United States authorities in order to carry out terrorist
acts against Cuba. The bank accounts financing that
terrorism operate openly in the United States.
Terrorists are recruited, stocks of weapons are gathered
and a safe haven is provided in this country to people
who finance, plan and carry out acts of terrorism
against the people of Cuba.
In the case of the terrorist Posada Carriles it is
clear that Washington is defending one of its pawns in
the criminal war against our people, in supporting
Latin American dictatorships in recent decades; in the
sinister operations of their dirty war in Central
America and in assassination attempts against political
leaders and heads of State whose views run counter to
the hegemonic interests of imperialism.
My country has struggled in an exemplary way
and has adopted effective measures against
international terrorism. Detailed information on these
efforts has been presented in our four extensive reports
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
The idea of destroying Cuba and its revolution is
an obsession that has lasted for more than 45 years. It
has guided and continues to guide United States policy
along a twisted path, full of lies, mistakes, failures and

38

bad choices. What the Government of the United States
proclaims to the world and what it does in relation to
Cuba is the most profound and most demoralizing
contradiction of its foreign policy.
I wish to add that neither terrorist acts, nor
genocidal blockades, nor military aggression could put
an end to the Cuban revolution, nor to our altruistic
efforts to attain social justice. We will not tire in our
struggle, and we will never give in. The cause of the
five Cuban individuals who are being unjustly held in
United States territory must be properly dealt with by
the United States authorities. We have offered
sufficient information in this regard as to the violations
that have been committed in this trial, in particular the
contradictions that we have found and denounced.
Therefore, we reiterate our rejection of the
explanations we have heard, and we maintain our
position of denouncing these inconsistencies in United
States policy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Ms. Taj El Dine (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, above all, we would like to thank you
for having given us the floor once again.
Like the delegate from the Republic of Cuba, we
wish to reiterate our firm position with regard to the
question of terrorism. When the representative from
the United States Mission took the floor, she said that
the main objective of this meeting was to evaluate
measures to eliminate international terrorism and to
assess the work of the Committees. We want to say the
following: if we are evaluating measures and if the
Committees are assessing their work, then how can we
allow members, in a body such as this one, to have a
double standard when dealing with the question of
terrorism?
We wish to reaffirm our position — all States
must abstain from providing shelter to terrorists. The
United States must refuse to protect any terrorists on
its territory, and it must apply the principle of either
extraditing them or bringing them to trial.
We have a number of doubts with regard to the
comments made in this Chamber that there is an
independent justice system in the United States, when
we see that a court can arrive at a decision that the
terrorist Luis Clemente Posada Carriles should not be

S/PV.5293

deported to Venezuela because, supposedly, he would
be tortured in our Republic.

Clemente Posada Carriles or to try him on this territory
for what he is — a terrorist, an assassin and a torturer.

There is absolutely no foundation for that
assertion. Moreover, up to now we have complied with
all international norms, and we are party to all
conventions against torture. To date, Venezuela has not
been called to task by any international organization in
connection with cases of torture.

We would like to be shown that we are mistaken,
and that the United States at present, and in the future,
can show us that all of those terrorist practices and
policies it uses with regard to other States and peoples
will no longer be applied. We also request that the
United States shows us that its actions, including the
financing of groups to destabilize a State, are not trying
to force socio-political changes, destabilize or
overthrow Governments under the pretext that they are
terrorists or that they protect terrorists.

Now, my question would be the following: is a
court independent when a decision is being taken with
regard to a person who has served as an agent of the
Central Intelligence Agency of the United States —
could there be a link with the fact that individual needs
to be protected and is being protected, by the United
States Government?
In Venezuela, we take a diligent, responsible and
consistent approach to such matters, and we would
request that, in the Committees, each State be studied
with the same diligence. We must avoid terrorism
being used by some States. We must make sure that
States stop supporting terrorists, as we have seen
repeatedly throughout the world. For this reason, we
are asking the United States Government here, before
the three Committees and their Chairmen present here,
to show us if we are wrong, if we are not right in what
we are saying, and then to extradite the terrorist Luis

We reaffirm that we want each and every Member
of the United Nations to be consistent in this area, in
condemning terrorism, without distinction. Terrorists
can be either State or non-State actors. We would like
the United States to abandon its terrorist practice and
policies in its relationship with other States.
The President: The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
say a special word of thanks to the Secretariat and to
the interpreters for having borne with us for so long
today.
The meeting rose at 2 p.m.

39
