Re1olution1 adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Suggests that the international conference should
be held no later than August 1955 at a place to be
determined by the Secretary-General and by the Advisory Committee provided for in paragraph 5 below ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, acting upon the
advice of a small committee composed of representatives of Brazil, Canada, France, India, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America, to issue invitations to this conference, to prepare and circulate to all invitees a detailed
agenda, and to provide the necessary staff and services ;
6. Suggests to the Secretary-General and the abovementioned Advisory Committee that, in making plans
for the international conference, they consult with
competent specialized agencies, in particular the Food
and Agriculture Organization, the World Health Organization, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
7. Invites the interested specialized agencies to designate persons to represent them at the conference;
8. Requests that the Secretary-General circulate for
information a report on the conference to all Memhers
of the United Nations, and to other Governments and
specialized agencies participating in the conference.
503rd plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.
811 (IX). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report 7 of the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea signed at Seoul, Korea, on 17 August 1954,
Having received the report 8 on the Korean Political
Conference held in Geneva from 26 April to 15 June
1954, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
711 (VII) of 28 August 1953,
Noting that the negotiations in Geneva have not
resulted in agreement on a final settlement of the
Korean question in accordance with the United Nations
objectives in Korea,
Recognizing that these objectives should be achieved
by peaceful methods and by constructive efforts on
the part of the Governments concerned,
Noting that paragraph 62 of the Armistice Agreement9 of 27 July 1953 provides that the Agreement
"shall remain in effect until expressly superseded either
by mutually acceptable amendments and additions or
by provision in an appropriate agreement for a peaceful settlement at a political level between both sides",
1. Approves the report on the Korean Political Conference ;10
Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplement No. 15.
Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 17, document A/2786.
See Official Records of the Security Council, Eighth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document
S/3079.
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 17, document A/2786.
7
8
9

5

2. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United Nations
remain the achievement by peaceful means of a unified,
independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government and the full restoration of
international peace and security in the area ;
3. Expresses the hope that it will soon prove possible
to make progress towards these objectives;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to place the item
on the provisional agenda of its tenth session.
510th plenary meeting,
11 December 1954.
812 (IX). The Morocco question

The General Assembly,
Having examined the Moroccan question,
Noting that some delegations declared that negotiations between France and Morocco would be initiated
regarding this question,
Expressing confidence that a satisfactory solution
will be achieved,
Decides to postpone for the time being further consideration of this item.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
813 (IX). The Tunisia question

The General Assembly,
Having considered the Tunisian question,
Noting with satisfaction that the parties concerned
hav:e entered into negotiations and that these negotiations are still in progress,
Expressing confidence that the said negotiations will
bring about a satisfactory solution,
Decides to postpone for the time being further consideration of this item.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954
814 (IX). Application, under the auspices of the
United Nations, of the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples in
the case of the population of the Island of
Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Considering that, for the time being, it does not
appear appropriate to adopt a resolution on the question of Cyprus,
Decides not to consider further the item entitled
"Application, under the auspices of the United Nations, of the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples in the case of the population
of the Island of Cyprus''.
514th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
