a December 1946

1040

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

is, No. Failing to accept the resolution would
deny justice to India, justice to Asia, justice to
coloured people. We would be sacrificing a clear
political issue to a doubtful, with all respect,
doubtful juridical interpretati'on. I say this
with .all respect to some of the previous dis.
tinguished speakers, who try to interpret legal
provisions, but who forget that legal fommlae
will be of no hdp for the discriminated-against
Indians. Those legal formulae will not improve
relations between Asia and the Union of South
Africa.

I hope this Assembly will adopt the MexicanFrench resolution. No peace-loving State will
ignore the appeal of this Assembly. I hope that
the Union of South Africa will also respect our
decision, and I hope that the voice of this Assembly has an authority equal to the authority of the
International Court at The Hague.
Let us, therefore, accept what should be accepted and approved by all who subscribed to
our Charter. Let us pass the resolution, stating,
I repeat, that this Assembly "is of the opinion
that the treatment of Indians in the Union
should be in conformity with the international
obligations and the relevant provisions of the
Charter."
The continuation of the discussion was adjourned to the next meeting.

tion est: Non. Ne pas accepter la resolution,
cela constituerait un deni de justice a I'egard de
l'Inde, de l'Asie, des populations de couleur. Ce
serait sacrifier une cause de nature nettement
politique a une interpretation juridique que
VOllS me pardonnerez de qualifier de douteuse.
Je fais cette declaration avec toute la deferellce
que je dois a certains des orateurs distingues
qui se sont appliques a interpreter des dispositions
juridiques, mais qui oublient que les fm'mules
juridiqiues ne seront d'aucune assistance aux
Hhldous victimes des l11csures de discrimination.
Ces formules juridiques n'amelioreront pas les
rapports entre l'Asie et l'Union Sud-Africaine.
J'exprime l'espoir que l'Assemblee adoptera la
resolution franco-mcxicaine. Aucun Etat ami de
la paix ne restera sourd a l'appel de l'Assemblee,
Je veux croire que l'Union Sud-Mricaine, elle
aussi, respectera notre decision, et je veux· croire
que la voix de cette Assemblee a une autorite
egale a celle de la Cour internationale de justice de La Haye.
.
Soumettons-nous done aux obligations qui
devraient etre acceptees et· approuvees par tous
ceux qui ont adhere a la Charte. Adoptons la
resolution, laquellc declare, j'y insiste, que l'Assemblee generale "estime que le traitement des
Hlndous etablis dans I'Union doit etre conforme
aux engagements internationaux resultant des
accords conclus entre les deux Etats, compte
tenu des dispositions de la Charte".
La suite de la discussion est ajournee
prochaine seance.
La seance est levee

T he meeting rose at 6.55 i).m.

a la

a 18 h. 55.

I

FIFTY·SECOND PLENARY MEETING

CINQUAN'fE-DEUXIEME SEAIIJCE

PLENIERE
Held on Sunday) 8 December 1946, at 8.15 p.m.

Tenue le dimanche'8 decembre 1946,

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

a 20 h. 15.

Page

138. Treatment of Indians in the Union of

South Africa: report of the Joint First
and Sixth Committee: resolution (continuation of the discussion)
1040
139. Presence of armed forces of Members of

, the United Nations on non-enemy terri. tories: report of the First Committee:
1062
resolution
President: Mr. P.~H. SPAAK (Belgium).

.

~

! '.

,

:!I....

\

Pages

138. Traitemcnt des Hindous etablis dan~
l'Union Sud-Africaine. Rapport de la
Commission mixte des Premiere et
Sixieme Commissions. Resolution (suite
de la discussion)
1040
139. Presence de forces armees des Etats Membres des Nations Unies sur des territoires
non ennemis. Rapport de la Premiere
1062
Commission. Resolution
President:

M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

138. Treatment of Indians in the Union
of South Africa: report of the Joint
First and Sixth Committee: resolution
(continuation of the discussion) (documenb A/205 and A/205 / Add.1)

138. Traitement des Hindous etablis dans
I'Union Sud-Africaine. Rapport de
la C~mmission mixte des Premiere
et Sixieme Commissions. Resolution
(suite de la discussion) (documents
A/205, A/20S/Add. 11

The PRESIDENT (translated from. French):
We will continue the discussion on the question
of the treatment of Indians in the Union of
South Africa.

Le PRESIDENT: Naus allons paursuivre la discussion Sur le traitement des Hindous etablis
dans l'Union Sud-Africaine.

8 decembre 1946

1041

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

I call upon Mr: Vyshinsky, representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Je donne la parole a M. Vychinsky, representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): It seems
to me that the General Assembly has given
sufficiently detailed and careful consideration to
the question on our agenda dealing with the
treatment of Indians in the Union of South
Africa. This question has its history. Over a
period of many decades, in South Africa as well
as in the South African Union, and in the
separate South African Republics even before
the creation of the Union, discrimination was
systematically fostered and continues to be
fostered; furthermore, it is increasing year by
year, becoming more and more acute and assuming a more and more provocative and acute
character.
'
Representatives of other delegations have already spoken here on this subject, and I, of
course, must not repeat all that has already been
said, and am compelled to limit my remarks on
this particular question. I must, however,. draw
attention to such laws as the notorious Gold Law
of 1904; the Act of 1908, in particular, which
deprived Indians of freedom of residence and
limited their residence in certain districts to
bazaars and special areas, thereby creating real
ghettoes; such laws as the Act of 1913 regulating
immigration to South Africa; the prohibition
of marriage between whites and Indians; the
famous Asiatic Law, called the Interim Law,
1939; finally, such measures as the Asiatic Land
Tenure Act of 1946, providing for the limitation
of the right to occupy land and even, it can be
said, depriving Indians of the right to occupy
land; the denial of franchise rights to Indian
women, although white women enjoy this right;
the fixing of a special comparatively high propertyqualification of eighty-four pounds sterli~g;
the denial of active franchise rights to the IndIan
population with the result that Indians cannot
be elected,' and can only elect. As I hav~ said,
the Indian population is deprived of the nght to
elect Indians in these elections, which are rather
nominations and in which non-Indians must be
elected.
All this is unquestionably a stigma on those
who apply such discriJ?inat~on, o? tho~e who
establish, approve or mtensIfy thIS regIme of
racial discrimination; equally, it is a stigma on
those who tolerate such a situation. Indeed, how
can one tolerate a situation under which Indians.
are forbidden by law to walk on the pavement;
this is provided under Article 18 of the 1924
Law. All these are facts. They are not disputed;
they are incontrovertible, and' no one here denies
them. ,It would, moreover, be difficult to deny
these facts because they are undeniable and
beyond all dispute.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republique~
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): n
me semble que l'Assemblee generale a examine
avec une atterition et un soin suffisants la question qui figure maintenant a notre ordre du
jour, a savoir le traitement des Hindous dans
l'Union Sud-Africaine. Cette question a son
histoire. Depuis plusieurs dizaines d'annees
en Afrique du Sud, aussi bien dans l'Union
Sud-Africaine que dans les differentes republiques qui existaient desavant la creation de
l'Union, on a pratique systematiquement et on
pratique encore la discrimination raciale; d'an·
nee en annee, cette discrimination se renforce.
devient plus aigue et prend un caractece de plus
en plus provocant.
D'autres representants ont deja parle ici de
cette question; je suis done tenude ne pas
repeter tout ce qui a deja ete dit, et de limiter
mes remarques a. ce sujet. Cependant, je dois
attirer votre attention sur certaines lois: notamment la fameuse "loi d' or" de 1904; notamment
l'ordonnance de 1908 qui supprimait la liberte
de residence des Hindous en les releguant dans
certains districts, dans les bazars et dans les
quartiers speciaux, et creait ainsi de veritables
ghettos; notamment l'ordonnance de 1913 regIe..
mentant l'immigration en Afrique du Sud;
not~mment la loi interdisant les mariages entre
blancs et Hindous; notamment la celebre loi
asiatique connue sous le nom de Interim Law
de 1939; notamment l'or,donnance de 1946 sur
les droits a la propriete fondere des personne~
d'origine asiatique, loi quilimite et qui supprime
meme, peut-on dire, le droit'des Hindous de posseder des terres; la loi qui refuse aux femmes
hindoues le droit de vote accorde aux femmes
blanches; l'etablissement d'un cens electoral
special et comparativement Cleve, egal a q uatrevingt-quatre livres sterling; le refus d'accorder
aU:l{ Hindou le droit d'etre clus, de sorte que les
Hindousont seulement le droit de vote et ne
peuvent clire des Hindous dans ces elections qui
sont plut6t des nominations.

There is nothing surprising, therefore, if, to
use a legal expression, the accused, under the
weight of the evidence,does not venture simply

Ces faits marquent d'une tache noire tous
ceux qui pratiquent de pareilles inegalites de
traitemerit, tous ceux qui etablissent, qui soutiennent, qui renforcent un tel regime de discrimination raciale, de meme que tous ceux qui
tolerent une pareille situation. Comment, en
effet, peut~on tolerer une situation dans laqueIle
nous trouvons une disposition legislative pour
interdire aux Hindous de marcher sur les trottoirs, or ced se trouve a l'article 18 de la loi de
1924. Ce sont la des faits, des faits incontestables et incontestes, des faits que personne ici
ne pense a nier. n serait difficile d'ailleurs de
discuter ces faits, car ce sont des faits indiscutables, et qui ne peuvent appeler aucune discussion.
n n'y a done rien d~etonnant a ce que-pour
employer un langage juridique-l'accuse, sous
le poids des charges, decide de ne pas mer

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

" r'

~.

~

1042

8 December 1946

to deny an the accusations levelled against him; purement et simplement les faits qui lui sont
he can only find a way out by resorting to a reproches. 11 Iui reste d'voir recours a la
method of defence-usual in such cases-which defense habituellement employee en pareil cas
consists in trying to shift the question from one et qui consiste a tenter de placer la question
plane to another. We sce how this is being done sur un autre terrain. C'est ainsi qu'apres avoir
here. Having been defeated on the political, the subi une defaite sur le terrain politique et moral,
moral-political plane, the delegation of the la delegation de l'Union Sud-Africaine, agissant
Union of South Africa, obviously following the evidemment seIon les instructions re~ues de son
instructions of its Government, is trying to trans- Gouvernement, tente de placer toute la question
fer the dispute, the whole question, to the sur le terrain juridique. Je ne pense pas que la
juridical plane. I do not think that the South deh~gation sud-africaine ait reussi a le faire, bien
.African delegation "rill succeed in this, even qu'eIle ait bCneficie id de l'appui d'un juriste
though it has received here the support of Cl eminent, Sir Hartley Shawcross. Ce1ui-ci a
ycry able jurist, Sir Hardey Shawcross. who, pris a son compte eette tentative de transformer
applying his llnqllest iCIIH\ble talents anfl abilities. une question politique en question juridique; il
which are worthy of a more deserving cause, s'est mantre un excellent avocat du Gouvernebacked up this attclnpt to turn a political ques- ment sud-africain, eonsacrant a cette cause un
tion into a juridical O1lC and spoke <IS a good talent et des quaIites incantestables mais dignes
advocate 0f the SOllth African Government in d'un meiUeur emploi.
tlli,.: matter.
I consider it ncces::;ary. therefore, to dwell on
Je crois neeessaire de m'arreter a cet aspect
this aspect of the qucsti~n, and will confine my de la question et mon intervention se limitera a
speech to it. The South African delegation, and ce point. La delegation sud-africaine et, en parHeld-Marshal Smuts in particular, no longer ticulier, le marechal Smuts, ne demande plus
ask for the rejection of the draft resolution sub- le rejet de la resolution franco-mexicaine, qui a
mitted by the French and Mexican delegations ete soutenue par la majorite des membres de la
and supported and approved by the majority of Commission mixte des Premiere ct Sixieme
the Joint First and Sixth Committee. This fact Commissions. Ce fait a lui seul est significatif.
alone merits attention. The South Aflican dele- La delegation sud-africaine ne demande plus
gation does not ask for the rejection of this que eette resolution soit rejetee, eIle propose un
resolution, but submits an amendment to it, amendement. Cette delegation, en dIet, estime,
anticipating, not without reason, that if the mat- non sans raison, que si eIle porte l'affaire devant
ter is referred to a court, even the International un tribunal, flit-ce la Caul' internationale, si dIe
Court, if the question can be shifted to the jl1l'i- reussit a. la transporter sur le terrain juridique,
dical plane, it 111ay easilv be submerged, a~ legal l'affaire s'enlisera bientot dans un terrain aussi
soil is very marshy. But I personally do llot want mouvant. Pour ma part, je compte bien que
the whole matter to be submerged.
cette aHaire ne sera pas etouffee.
How in fact does the South African delegaComment, en fait, la delegation sud-africaine
tion present the quc~'L!on? It submits an amend- pose-t-elle la question? Elle presente un amendement to ask the International Court whether the ment qui consiste a demander a la Cour interquestions set forth in the Indian statement are nationale de Justice si les questions soulevees
w1thin the domestic jurisdiction of the Union, par la delegation de l'Inde relCvent de la juridic:ll a,:eordance with paragraph 7 of Article 2 of
tion interieure de l'Union, au sens de l' Article 2,
t.be Charter. The SOL!th African Union counts paragraphe 7, de la Charte. Ce faisant, l'Union
on receiving an answer in the affirmative. Y~s, Sud-Africaine compte bien obtenir une repanse
they are: at least Sir Hartley Shawcross sup- affirmative. Reponse affirmative, c'est, du
moins, le point de vne de Sir Rartley Shawcross.
ports this point of view.
Unfortunately, I (<lunat agree with Sir HartJe rcgrette de ne pouvoir accepter l'interpreta],oy ~~h,nvcross in hi~ interpretation of paragraph tian que donne Sir Hartley Shawcross du para7 of Article 2, and T cannot agree with his rec- graphe 7 de I' Article 2, ni appuver sa recomnmrncndation to refer the whole matter to the mandation tendant a soumettre l'affaire a la
International Court of Justice, because I do not Caul' internationale de Justice, paree que jc ne
want to submerge the matter, I do not want to venx pas etouffcr l'affaire, je ne veux pas la
jT:'\n~:fer it from the political to the juridical transporter du terrain palitique sur terrain juridiplane, although of course the matter has a juridi- que. 11 est bien evident que le problcme a non
cal as well as a moral-political aspect. The one seulement un aspect politique et moral, mais
does not exclude the other, as Sir Hartley Shaw- aussi un cote juridique. L'un n'exclut pas l'autre,
cross in particular suggests here, in trying to contrairement a ce que pretend Sir Rartley
prove that the matter is not within the compe- Shawcross, qui s'efforce de prouver que cette
tence of the General Assembly or of the United affaire releve de la competence de la COUT interNations in general and that it is within the com- nationale de Justice et non de celle de l' Assempetence of the International Court. Sir Hardey blee generale DU de l'Organisation des Nations
Shawcross refers to paragraph 7 of Article 2, but Unies. Sir Hartley Shawcross se fonde sur le
what does this say? It says that the Charter, paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2; que dit ce parawhich imposes definite obligations on all the graphe? 11 stipule que la Charte, qui irnpose
Members of our Organization, in no way au- des obligations precises a tous les Etats .Membres,
thorizes the United Nations to intervene in mat- I n'autorise en aucun cas !cs Nations Unies a.
I

8 decembre 1946

1043

ters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any State.
We need therefore to ascertain what matters
come within the domestic jurisdiction of a State.
I think the best way to answer this question is
to use the a contrario method or the method of
elimination. These are not matters which have
an international character j these are not matters
which concern inLcrnational relations. All that
is necessary now is to answer the following
question: does the matter submitted to the
General Assembly of the United Nations by the
delegation or Government of India, complaining of a discriminatory regime, really apply to
Indians in the Union of South Africa? Does
this question, by its very substance and character, belong precisely to those international
matters which fall within the competence of our
Organization and the General Assembly in particular? To this I give an absolutely firm and
confident reply: yes, it does. Why? It must not
be forgotten that at the basis of the Indian
Governement's complaint there is not only a
moral-political aspect, but also a juridical one.

The Indian's Government's complaint against
the South Mrican Government, in this matter
of a discriminatory regime, is justified in the
fullest sense, from the juridical· standpoint, precisely by the fact that it deals with the violation
of an inter-governmental, bilateral agreement
between the Indians and the South Africans,
between the Governments of India and of the
LTnion of South Africa. I have in mind the
Cape Town Agreement of 1927. I have in
mind the Cape Town Agreement of 1932, which
confirmed the first agreement. How can it be
said that all this falls within the domestic jurisdiction of the South African Union, as though
India were an integral part of the South African Union? Is it possible that the designs and
aspira tions of the Government of South Africa,
under the leadership of the honourable Field~
Marshal Smuts, go as far as this?
We have before us the inter-governmental,
bilateral agreements of 1927 and 1932, agreements which place obligations on both parties.
There is the agreement which states, for example
(and this obligation was undertaken by the
Government of the South African Union) :
"It is the duty of every civilized Government to devise ways and means and to take
all possible steps for the uplifting of every
section of their permanent population to the
full extent of their capacity and opportunities."
Further, the two Governments agreed that, in
the provision of education and other facilities,
the considerable number of Indians who remain
part of the permanent population should not be
allowed to lag behind other sections of the
people. This was an obligation undertaken by
the IJ1(Ean Government with regard to a part

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniert

intervenir en de1? affaires qui relevant essentielle
ment de la competence nationale d'un Etat.
11 convient done de determiner queUes sont
ccs affaires qui relevent de la competence nationale d'un Etat. Je pense que la meilleure reponse a cette question sera fournie par la methude a con/ratio, ou en procedant par elimination. 11 ne s'agit pas d'affaires ayant un caracthe international; il ne s'agit pas d'affaires qui
concernent les relations internationles. Demandons-nous done maintenant: la question soumise
a l'Organisation d~s Nations Unies, et portee
devant notre AssenibIee generale par la delegation ou le Gouvernement de l'Inde qui se plaignent de discrimination raciale, a-t-eUe trait reeUement aux Hindous de l'Afrique du Sud? Cette
question entre-t-eHe effectivement de par son
eS:'icnce et son caractere dans la categorie des
afIaires internationalcs qui relcvent de la competence ele notre Organisation et en particulier
ele l'Assemblee gcnerale? A cette question, je repondrai avec une conviction entiere: oui, cette
question releve bien de notre competcnce. Pourquoi? n ne faut pas oublier que la plainte du
Gouvernement de l'Inde ne se fonde pas uniquement sur des raisons d'ordre politique ou moral,
mais aussi sur des raisons d'ordre juridique.
La plainte du Gouvernement de l'Inde a legard
ell! Gouvernement de l'Union Sud-Africainc au
sujet des inegalites de traitemcnt basees sur la
race cst une p1ainte pleinement fondee en droit,
parce qu'elle a pour objet la violation d'un accord bilateral, intergouvernemental, entre les
Hindous et les Sud-Africains, entre le Gouvernernent ele l'Inde et ce1ui de l'Union Sud-Africaine: je veux pader de l'Accord du Cap de
1927, confirme par l'Accord du Cap conc1u en
1932. Pretendre que ces questions relevent de la
competence nationale de l'Union Sud-Africaine
l:evient it dire que l'Inde fait partie integrante de
l'Union Sud-Africaine. Est-il possible que les
intentions et les aspirations du Gouvernement de
l'Union Sud-Africaine, dirige par l'honorable
marechal Smuts, aillent jusque-Ia?
Nous somrnes en presence de deux accords bilateraux entre gouvernements, ce1ui de 1927 et
celui de 1932, qui imposent des obligations a
chacune des deux parties. Dans cet. accord, il
y a par exemple la phrase suivante, qui constitue un engagement pris par le Gouvernement
de l'Union Sud-Africaine:
"C'est le devoir de tout Gouvernernent ci·vili:;6 de trouver les moyens et de prendre
toutes les mesures possibles pour ameliorer la
situation materieHe et morale de chaque partie de la population permanente du pays,
pour· autant q u'il en a le pouvoir et la ppssibi1ite."
De plus, les deux Gouvernements se sont mis
d'accord sur le principe que les Hindous tres
nombreux qui continuent a faire partie de la
. population permanente du pays doivent benefider des mernes possibilites d'instruction et
d'education que les autres elements de la populati.on. C'est done la un engagement pris par le

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1044

of its poulation which, as everyone knows,
happened to be in South Africa merely because
the Cape Town Agreement of 1927, confirmed
in 1932, justified this immigration.
In these' circumstances, how can it be said
that this is a domestic matter of the Union of
South Africa, that it comes under domestic
jurisdiction and cannot have any significance of
an international character, and that it i1> not
one of those questions which must be included
in the international category? That is why reference to paragraph 7 of Article 2 is unjustified.
This reference is also unjustified because the
Article states that the Charter does not require
Members of the United Nations to submit such
matters for examination by the United Nations
under the present Charter. It does not say that
it forbids the submission of such matters, but
only that it does not "require" it. It is therefore
optional-that is, at the discretion of the Government concerned. The Government concerned
found that the right way was to bring the
matter here, to the General Assembly of the
United Nations. This is the best way, and the
Charter itself, and paragraph 7 of Article 2 in
particular, leaves it to the discretion of the
government concerned.

From the juridical point of view, therefore,
there are positively no grounds, on the basis
of paragraph 7 of Article 2, for rejecting the
complaint which has been submitted for the
General Assembly's consideration.
I shall conclude. Sir Hartley Shawcross has
spoken here of justice; it is not the first time
justice has been mentioned. I recall, for instance, a speech made by Mr. Hofmeyr, Minister
for Industry and Foreign Affairs, Vice-President
of the Union of South Mrica, who spoke on this
subject in March 1946 before the South African
Parliament. He then said, "We attack the
Indians in South Africa for looking outside
South Africa for help in regard to these matters
(that is, matters relating to discrimination). But
we forget that most of those local Indians or
their ancestors came to South Mrica because of
an inter-governmental arrangement". I did not
say this; it was said by Mr. Hofmeyr, Vice-President of the South Mrican Government. He
continued, "They came because we or our predecessors wanted them to come. . . . That being so,
the Government of India has surely continued to
bear some measure of responsibility in regard to
these people and the descendants of these people
whom it was pressed to allow to come to South
Mrica."

8 December 1946

Gouvernenlent de P1nde it l'egard d'une partie
de sa population qui, chacun le sait, n'est venue
en Afrique du Sud qu'en vertu de l'Accord du
Cap de 1927, confirme par celui de 1932, ct qui
prcvovait une telle immigration.
Cot'nment pretendre, dans ccs conditions,
qu'il s'agit d'une question relevant de la competence nationale, de la juridiction intcrieurc de
l'Union Sud~Mricaine; comment afTIrmer que
cette affaire ne petIt avoir un caractere interna~
tional ct qu'elle est etrangere i\ la categoric des
questions internationales? Il n'y a clOIlC pas
lieu de se rcferer a l'Article 2, paragraphe 7..
11 y a d'autant moins lieu de s'y rcfcrer que
ledit Article stipule qlle h C~I:,.·t" n'oblige
pas les Membres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies a soumettre des affaires de cc genre a
une procedure de reglement aux termes de la
presente Chartc. Cet Article ne defend pa!' aux
Membres de soumettre des affaires de ce genre a
l'examen de l'Organisation, il dit simplement
que la Charte ne les oblige pas a le faire.
Par consequent, cela reste facultatif, c'est-awdire
ce1a depend de l'opinion du Gouvernement in
teressc. En l'occurrence, le Gouvernement interesse a estime que la meilleure methode etait
de soumettre l'affaire a l'Assemb1ee des Nations
Unies. C'est en efIet, la meilleure methode, et
l'Article 2, paragraphe 7, de la Charte, laisse
au Gouvernement interesse la liberte de
l'adopter.
Par consequent, du point de vue juridique,
il n'y a aucune raison pour rejeter la plainte
dont est saisie l'Assemblee generale en se fondant sur l'Article 2, paragraphe 7.
w

I

,I

Je conc1us. Sir Hartley Shawcross a pade id
de la justice. Ce n'est pas la premiere fois que
nous entendons pader de justice. Je voudrais
citeI', a ce propos, une declaration faite en mars
1946 devant le Parlement de l'Union Sud~
Mricaine par M. Hofmeyr, Ministre de 1'1ndustrie et des Affaires etrangeres, Vice-Premier
de l'Union Sud-Mricaine, qui s'exprimait en
ces termes: "Nous nous elevons contre les
Hindous de l'Afrique du Sud qui, pour ces questions (relatives aux discrimination::; raciales), recherchent l'appui de l'etranger. Mais nollS
oublions que la majorite de ccs Hindous ou
de leurs ancetres sont venus en Mrique du
Sud a la suite d'un accord intergouvernemental." Ces paroles ne viennent pas de moi;
eHes ont ete prononcees par M. Hofmeyr, VicePremier Ministre de l'Union Sud-Africaine qui
a poursuivi en ces termes: "Si ccs Hindous sont
venus en Mrique du Sud, c'est pour repondre a
notre desir ou a ceIui de nos prcdcccsscurs . . .
Puisqu'il en est ainsi, il est evident que le Gou~
vernemept de I'lnde assume encore une certaine
pa:t de responsabilite a l' endroit de ces emigres.
qUI sont les descendants de ceux qu'll a ct~
oblige de laisser partir pour l'Mrique du Sud."
Justice demands that this historical fact should
La justice exige que ce fait historique soit
be clearly established and borne in mind. The bien etal;>li et qu'il reste grave dans notre mejustice of which Sir Hartley Shawcross spoke moire. La justice, comme l'a clit Sir Hartley
should be secured, as he said, by the institution ~ha.wc~oss lui-meme, doit etre rendue par une
and organs specially created for this purpose. He InstItutIOn et des organes specialement ctablis a
had in mind the International Court of Justice, cet diet. n pensait a la Cour internationale de

8 decemhre 1946

t

, 1045

Cinquante-deuxU~me seance

pleniere

considering that the way to secure justice in the ~ustice qu'il estima~t qualifiee pour rendre juspresent question was precisely by the Interna- tice dans cette affarre. J e ne suis pas d'accord
tional Court. I disagree with Sir Hartley Shaw- avec Sir Hart1ey Shawcross sur ce point.
cross in this respect also.
The Soviet delegation considers that justice
La delegation sovietique estime que la justice
must indeed be secured and that it should be doit etre rendue effeetivement, qu'el1e doit etre
secured by an international court; but this interN rendue par un tribunal et par un tribunal international court is here, it is yourselves, it is all of national; mais ce tribunal international est id,
us, it is our Organization which should deliver its c'est vous, c'est nous taus, c'est notre Organisaverdict. This is what we want, this is what we tion qui doit prononcer son verdict. Voila ce
demand.
que nous voulons; voila ce que nous exigeons.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mrs. Pandit, representative of India.
Mrs. PANDIT (India): When I spoke yesterday, I expressed a hope that the British Commonwealth would at least remain neutral in this
controversy, which vitally concerns one of its
most important members. But Sir Hartley Shawcross' speech has shattered my hopes. He has
spoken in a manner which I consider to be entirely partisan, however full of dialectical skill
it may have been.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a Mme
Pandit, representant de l'Inde.

Mme PANDIT (Inde) (tradztit de lJanglais):
Au cours de mon intervention d'hier, j'ai
exprime l'espoir que le Commonwealth britannique observerait au mains la neutralite dans la
presente controverse qui touche aux plus graves
interets d'un de ses membres les plus importants.
Le discours de Sir Rartley Shawcross a renverse
mes espoirs; malgre l'habilete dialectique don
i1 a fait preuve, il s'est exprime d'une maniere
que j'estime tout a fait partiale.
I shall only deal with two points. Sir Hartley
Je ne re1everai que deux points. Sir Hartle,
Shawcross has made a suggestion that any reso- Shawcross a insinue qu'une resolution adoptee a
lution passed by this Assembly by a narrow une faible majorite par la presente Assemblee n'a
majority is not obligatory, and therefore he sug- pas un caractere obligatoire, et il nous propose
gests that we should get a decision from the done de demander un avis a la Cour internaInternational Court of Justice. What is obliga- tionale de Justice. En quoi la decision de la
tory about the decision of the ,International Cour internationale aura-t-elIe un caractere
Court? 1£ a solemn resoluti6n of this Assembly obIigatoire? Si l'on peut faire fi d'une resolucan be flouted, what certainty is there that a tion prise solennellement par la presente Assemdecision of the International Court, if it goes blee, peut-on affirmer qu'il n'en sera pas de
against the Union of South Africa, will not also meme pour une dedsion de la COUT intemabe flouted? Is this all the respect that Mem- tionale de Justice qui irait a l'encontre des
bers of this great Organization are going' to show int&ets de I'Dnion Sud-Mricaine? Est-cevraifor resolutions passed by this Assembly if the ment ainsi que les Membres de notre grande
Organisation, si les decisions prises se trouvent
decisions happen to go against them?
leur etre defavorables, vont affirmer leur respect
des resolutions adoptees par l'Assemblee?
Je passe au d,euxieme point. Sir Hartley
The second point which I wish to mention
is the reference by Sir Hartley Shawcross to the Shawcross fait allusion ?-ux divisions regrettaunfortunate, but, I hope, temporary, differences bles mais, je l'espere, temporaires, qui existent
that exist in India and which are much in ~vi­ dans !'Inde et dont la presse americaine fait
dence in the American press today. I regret that grand etat aujourd'hui. .le regrette d'avoir a
I must say that Sir Hartley has not shown good dire que Sir Hartley Shawcross a manque de
taste in referring to these differences, which he tact en parIant de ces divisions, car il sait ou
knows, or should know, have been brought about devrait savoir qu'elles sont dues pour une grandc
largely by the role which the British Government pait au role que le Gouvernement britannique,
has played between the various elements in our au cours de la longue histoire des relations entre
country during the long history of Indo-British le Royaume-Uni et l'Inde, a joue au milieu
relations.
des elements divers qui constituent la population de notre pays.
Sir Rartley Shawcross a parM de ces divisions
He has referred to these differences with evident and unconcerned glee. I leave this Assem- avec une gaite manifeste et insouciante. Je
bly to form its own view of this. But I should laisse a la presente Assemblee le soin de juger
like to ask what is the relevance of these re- par elle-meme. Cependant, je voudrais demarks? I submit that they are merely another mander en quoi les remarques auxquelles je fais
red herring drawn' across the path of the Assem- allusion se rapportent a. la question. A man
bly to divert attention from the main issue. avis, eUe ne sont qu'une manreuvre visant a
India is struggling for freedom and is at the detourner du probleme principal l'attention de
same time grappling with her internal difficulties l'Assemblee. L'Inde, qui lutte pour sa liberte,
with every hope of overcoming them.
se trouve en meme temps aux prises aVec des·
difficultes inb~rieures dont elle espere fermement
,
triompher.
I had not thought it would be necessary for
Je ne pensais pas avoir a parler ainsi au\

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1046

8 December 1946

me to say these words today. T ask you to bear jourd'hui. le vous demande de m'accorder
with me for one more moment, and it will not votre attention quelques instants encore. le
be more than a moment because I am not going serai tres breve ear je ne vais pas plaider la cause
qui nous est soumise.
to argue the issue before us.
Nous sommes arrives a la fin d'un debat proWe have now come to the end of a long and
protracted debate, and before it ends by your longe. Quels que soient les resultats du vote qui
vote, whicheV'er way it goes, I want to thank. you terminera notre debat, je tiens a. vous remercier
and to express, with all the sincerity' at my com- et a vous exprimer en toute sincerite la gratitude
mand, the gratitude not only of the people of qu'eprouvent non seulement le peuple de l'Inde
India and the Indians in South Africa, but of the et les Hindous d'Mrique du Sud, mais aussi
millions in every country whose hearts have been des millions de gens appartenant a tous les pays
warmed and whose minds are eased by this dont les cceurs ont battu et dont les esprits ant
impressive expression of world opinion in de- ete soulages par l'efi'et de cette impressionnante
fence of justice and fundamental human rights, manifestation mondiale en faveur de la justice et
for many have been the speeches, profound the des droits fondamentaux de l'homme. Pendant
sincerity, and warm the sentiments that we have plusieurs jours, nous avons entendu de nomheard day after day. In all humility let me thank breux discours pleins d'une sincerite profonde
you and this Assembly for what already amounts et d'une chaude sympathie. En toute humilite,
to t;t great act of faith. We shall remember this je tiens a exprimer aux orateurs et a la presente
and know, in a way that cannot be forgotten, Assemblee ma reconnaissance. Nous n'oubliethat justice, truth, and the oppressed have friends rons pas ce vibrant acte de foi, et nous saurons
in every country and under every climate. This is que la justice, la verite et les opprimes possedent
all I want to say. I shall make no appeal. I left des amis dans tous les pays et sous toutes les
it with your conscience yesterday. I am content latitudes. J'ai dit ce que j'avais a dire. le ne
to let it rest there.
renouvellerai pas l'appel que j'ai adresse hier a
votre conscience. Qu'il me suffise d'en rester la.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: le donne la parole a Sir
I call upon Sir Carl Berendsen, representative Carl Berepdsen, representant de la NouvelleZelande.
.
of New Zealand.
Sir Carl BERENOSEN (New Zealand): 1 have
felt it necessary to explain in a very few words
the attitude of New Zealand towards the consideration in this Assembly of a dispute between
two countries with each of which I am happy
to say New Zealand is on terms of complete
friendship, of mutual respect and regard.
Neither my Indian colleague nor my South
African colleague will, I know, contest my statement that no country in the world pays a higher
regard to human rights or has done more, within
its capacity, to establish, to preserve and to further those ri~hts than New Zealand. I wi~h to
make it plain at the very outset that. in voting
on the question now before us, I shall not be
expressing our view on the merits of this dispute.
The view that we hold is based on something
more fundamental than the issues involved in

" 'f

: ~:

this dispute. gravely important as those issues are.
Our point of view bears upon the functions and
the authority of this body, upon which depend
not only the Rolution of this dispute. but the
future peace and prosperity of mankind.
All my collea];ues wiIJ know that there arC
certain aspect'! of the Charter of the United Na..
tiom with which New Zealand is in disagreement, and in very 8trollg- disag-reement. But we.
and every Member of the United Nations, have
accepted that Charter; this Organization is
the fruit of the Charter, it operates under the
Charter and it is Hmited by the Charter. What
that Charter authorizes the United N atiom to
do, this Assembly can do. What is not authorized by the Charter is beyond the competence of
this Assembly.

Sir Carl BERENDSEN (Nouvelle-ZClande)
(traduit de l'ang1ais) : J'estime qu'il est necessaire d'expliquer tres brievement l'attitude de la
Nouvellc-Zclande quant a l'e.xamen, par l'Assemblee. elu litige entre deux pays a l'egard desquels, je suis heureux de le dire, la NouvelleZelande eprouve des sentiments de pat'faite
amitie et de respect mntnel.
Je sais que ni le representant de l'lnde, ni
cclui de l'Union Sud-Africaine ne me contrecliront si j'affirme qu'aucun pays du l110nde n'est
plus respectueux des droits de l'homme que la
Nouvelle-Zclal1de et n'a davantage contribue,
clans la mesure de ses moyens, a dcfinir, defendre
et etendre ces droits. le tiens a declarer tout de
suite que notre vote sur la question dont nous
sammes saisis actuellement n'exprimera pas notre
opinion sur le fond du litige.
Notre opinion est basee sur une consideration
plus impartante que les questions que SQuleve ce
litige, si graves qu'elles soient. Nous prenons cn
consideration les fonctions et l'autorite de ceUe
Assemblee dont dependent, non seulement la
solution du litige, mais la paix future et la
prosperite de l'hurnanite.
Tous mes collcgues savent que la NouveUeZelande n'approuve pas certains points de la
Charte des Nations Unies et qu'elle les desapprouve m~me fortement. Mais, comme tous les
Membres de Nations Unies, nous avons aceepte
la Charte; or, l'Organisation est le fruit de la
Charte et son activite est reglementee et Iimitee
par ceUe Charte. Ce que la Charte permet aux
Nations Unies, l'Assemblee peut le faire. Ce qui
n'est pas autorise par la Charte depasse la
competence de l'Assembh~e.

~· : · :

t
'il!

tf'

~

~~

•

8 decembre 1946

1047

'Ve are not dealing with the Charter a~ it
sh:ould be. I wish we were. We are dealing with
the Charter as it is. And like most human prod uetions, the Charter is not perfect. Indeed, in
many respects it is remarkably imperfer1. No
one call deny that there are grave ambiguili~ in
the Charter, some of which bear most pertinently
on the question that this Assembly is now abollt
to decide. Everyone will admit that there an"
scriolls doubts as to the competence of the
A..<lsembly under the provi.~ions of the Charter to
deal with the points of substance involved in the
question under consideration. It is not merely a
legal point; it is a strict and precise question;
the Assembly can act only within the limits
allowed by the Charter, and the Charter sets
definite restrictions on its power of action.

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

Nous ne sommes pas en presence d'une Charte
tene qu'elle devrait etre, je le regrette. Nous
devons prendre la Charte telle qu'elle est. Or,
comme la plupart des creations humaines, elIe
n'est pas parfaite. En realite, sur beaucoup de
points, elle est notablement imparfaite. Personne
ne peut nier qu'elle contient de graves aml;>igUltes, dont plusieurs se rapportent precisement
a la question sur laquelle nous devons maintenant prendre une decision. Tout le monde
conviendra que les dispositions de la ·Charte
laissent subsister de graves doutes sur la competence que possede l' Assemb16e de sc prononcer
sur les questions de fond impliquees dans l'affairc
a l'etude. I1 ne s'agit pas seulement d'un point
de droit, il s'agit d'une question nette et precise;
l'AssembIee ne peut agir que dans les limites
permises par la Charte, et la Charte impose des
limites precises son action.
Nous estimons que l'AssemblCe devrait .iouir
des pouvoirs les plus etendl1s possible. Je suis
sur que personne ne doutera de la purete de nos
intentions, quand j'aurai explique les motifs qui
inspirent notre attitude sur cette question: Ctant
donne ces ambigultes et ces doutes- et personne
ne peut en contester l'existence apres avoir
entendu les debats de ce soir qui ont ete presque
exclusivement consacres a I'explication de la
situation juridique-nous pensons qu'il serait
fort peu sage et fort peu scant que l'Assemblee
enregistre une decision portant sur le fond d'une
question pour laquelle sa competence n'est pas
certaine tant qu'on n'aura pas pris toutes les
dispositions necessaires pour eclaircir ccs doutes.

a

Holding the views we do, that the Assembly
should have the widest possible powers, we
feel- and I am sure nobody will doubt the integrity of our purpose when I explain what the
motive i.~ that underlies our attitude on thL'!
question-that having regard to those ambiguities and doubts-and no one who has heard this
debate tonight can doubt that there -have been
doubts, because much of the debate has been
elevated to an. explanation of the legal position
-it would be most unwise and highly improper for the Assembly to record a decision
on the substance of a matter in regard to which
there is that present doubt as to its competence,
until every proper step has been taken to resolve those doubts.
We regard this as fundamental to the sucCe&'l
of the Assembly in carrying out its high and
sacred task, upon which rest the hopes and the
fears of all mankind. It is for those reasons, and
in the belief that the first necessity is to clear
away any possible doubt as to the widest possible
powers of the Assembly, that we feel the first and
primary duty to be'to resolve those doubts before
we even consider the grave issues involved in the
present dispute. What better way is there of resolving those doubts than to refer them to the
International Court of Justice, a body of the
United Nations, established, among other things,
for that very purpose?
Tt is for those reasons, and for no other reasons, that I propose to vote against the resolution
proposed by the Committee and in favour of
the proposed amendment.

Nous considerons que c'est la une condition
fondamentale pour que I' Assemblee ilUisse accomplir le devoir sacre sur lequel reposent les
espoirs et les craintes de l'humanite. C' est pour
ces raisons, et dans la conviction que la premiere
tache consiste a climincr tous lesdoutes concernant les pouvoirs les plus etenclus de l'AssembIee,
que nons estimolls que llotre premier et plus
clementaire devoir est d'eclaircir ces doutes avant
meme d'examiner les graves questions que pose
le present litige. Quel meilleur moyen d'eclaircir
ces doutes que de les soumettre a la Cour internationa1e de Justice, organe des Nations Unies
qui, entre autres fins, a ete justement cree pour
ceIa.
C'cst done pour ces motifs, et nuls autres, que
jc me propose de voter contre la resolution proposee par la Commission, et en faveur du projet
d'amendement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Arce, representative of Argentina.

Le PRE S IDENT; Je donne la parole it M. Arc~"
representant de l'Argentine.

M r. ARC)'; (Argentina) (translated from
8/Janish): Being of Latin origin, we Argen-

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l' espc.Nous Argentins. d'origine latine, nOU3
sommes, autant que quiconque, sensibles aux
sentiments humanitaires, surtout lorsqu'on les
exprime avec l'e.toquence et l'emotion dont vien··
nent de faire preuve certains orateurs, parmi
lesquels je me plais a mentionner les representants des Philippines, du Panama, et tr28 par.ticulierement Mme Pandit, notre distinguee

tinians are as susceptible as anyone to the
influence of human feelings, especially when they
are expressed with the eloquence and emotion
displayed by some previous speakers, amongst
whom I am pleased to mention the representatives of the Philippine Republic and of Panama,
and particularly Mrs. Pandit, our distinguished

gnol):

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting'

/

1048

8 December 1946

colleague representing India, whose fine political
discourse was imbued with profoundly human
feelings.
As evidence of our attitude to this subject, I
ought to remind you that at the beginning of
the Revolution of Emancipation of 1810, and
even before our political emancipation had been
proclaimed at the Congress of Tucuman in
1816, the Assembly, held in 1813, abolished
slavery. We are opposed to all racial or social
discrimination, and I have pleasure III stating
this publicly, even though we ourselves have no
internal problems of this kind. Hence we could
vote in silence and carry on in conformity 'with
our convictions without expressing the humanitarian ideas which are the inevitable corollary of
our .feelings; but we neither can nor ought to
do so.
The United Nations Organization was created
for the specific purpose of maintaining international peace and security. In other mattersand this should be clearly understood-we ought
to be very careful in assessing anything relating
to the separation of the powers which we, as
sovereign nations, have delegated or have not
delegated by signing the San Francisco Charter.
For that reason, I should not like my vote to
contribute ta the adoption of a bad precedent.
I shall therefore vote in favour of the proposal
that the International Court of Justice-which
is not a body outside our Organization, as
might be gathered from what some speakers
have said-should decide whether or not this
matter is within the jurisdiction of the United
Nations.
I am sure that the Court will give its decision
before this Assembly meets again, and thus
nobody «mId say that we are in favour of delaying tactics; this is all the more true smce the
propoc;al supported by Mrs. Pandit also requires
one rear before being substantiated in its preliminary stage.
A legal decision would also have the following great advantage: the Union of $outh
Africa has been accused; it has submitted to
the jurisdiction of the Court; if that Court w,ere
to decide against the Union, the question would
be completely solved before the year is out.
Thus, without prejudice to our dislike of any
racial discrimination, Argentina will vote in
favour of this question being first submitted to
the International Court of Justice. We shall thus
once again have shown our preference for solutions by arbitration and judicial means over
solutions of a political nature, which are frequently motivated by interests of a transitory
nature.

collegue de l'lnde qui, dans son beau discours,
a uni a un sentiment profondement humain un
sens politique averti.
Comme preuve de notre attitude a cet ep;ard,
je veux vous rappeler que, des le debut de la
revolution de mon pays, en 1810, pour l'independance, et avant meme que ne fut proc1amee
l'emancipation politique au Congres de Tucuman en 1816, notre assemblee de 1813 avait
aboli l'esclavage. Nous sommes opposes a, toute
discrimination raciale ou sociale et, je suis
heureux de le dire, il n' existe pas chez nous de
problemes de cette nature. Nous p'ourrions evidemment vot~r sans nous declarer, et agir confonnement a nos. convictions sans faire connaitre
les sentiments humanitaires qui nous anunent et
qui en decoulent naturellement; toutefois nous
ne pouvons, ni ne devons le faire.
L'Organisation des Nations Unies a ete creee
expressement pour preserver la paix et la securite internationales. Dans les autres domaines
il doit· etre clairement etabli que nous devons
etre tres prudents chaque fois que nous portons
un jugement sur la distinction entreles pouvoirs
que, en tant que nations souveraines, nous avons
ou n'avons pas deIegues 10rS de la signature de
la Charte a San-Francisco. Pour ces raisons, .le
ne voudrais pas que le vote de ma delegation
contribuat a creel' un precedent dangereux. Je
voterai pourtant pour que 1'on demande a la
Cour internationale de Justice-qui n'est pas un
organe etranger a notre Organisation, corrune
certains orateurs l'ont laisse entendre-de decider si cette question releve ou non de la juridiction des Nations Unies.
.le suis sur que la Cour se prononccra avant
la prochaine Assemblee, et par consequent, personnc ne pourra dire que nons favorisons les
atennoiemcnts, d'autant qu'll faudra egalement
un an avant que la proposition soutenue par
Mme Pandit ne prenne corps dans sa forme
premiere.
Une decision de caracfere juridique presente
cn outre un grand avantage: l'Union SudAfricaine a cte accusce; elle s'est soumise a la
juridiction de la COUT; si ce tribunal n'approuve
pas la these de 1'Union, le probleme sera entieremcnt resolu avant un an.
Avec l'independance que lui donne ses sentjments opposes a toute discrimination raciale,
l' Argentine votera pour que l'on sonmette au
prealable cette question a la Cour internationale
de Justice. Nous aurons ainsi temoigne une fois
de plus de notre attachement aux solutions arbitrales et juridiques plutot qu'aux solutions de
caractere politique qui, tres souvent, ne s'inspirent que des interets du moment. '

The PRESIDENT (tmnslated from French):
The general discussion. is closed, We shall now
prdceed to the vote. Before doing so, I think
it my duty to draw the Assembly's attention to
the question whether the subject on which we
are going to vote requires a two-thirds majority
or not.
I would refer to Article .18, paragraph 2, of
th~ Charter, whieh states: "Decisions of the

Le PRESIDENT: La discussion generale est
close, Nous allons passer au vote. Avant de le
faire, je crois de mon devoir d'attirer l'attention
de l'AssembIee sur le point de savoir si la matiere
au sujet de laquelle nous allons voter exige ou
non la majorite des deux tiers.
Je me refere a l'Article 18 de la Charte, dont
le paragraphe 2 declare: "Les decisions de l'h-

l

8 decembre 1946

1049

General Assembly on important qu~stions shall
be made by a two-thirds majority of the Members present and voting." An enumeration of
important questions follows. Paragraph 3 then
reads as follows: "Decisions on other questions,
including the determination of additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds
majority, shall be made by a majority of the
members present and voting."
In order to avoid discussion later on, and before proceeding to the vote, I should like to
know whether the Assembly considers the present
question to be an important matter requiring a
decision by a two-thirds majority.
I call upon Mr. Nicholls, representative of
the Union of South Africa.

Cinquante-deuxieme seance phSniere

sewblee generale sur les questions importantes
sont prises a la majorite des deux tiers des Membres presents et votants." ; Suit l'enumeration des
questions qui sont importantes. Le paragraphe
3 est ainsi libelle: "Les decisions sur d'autres
questions, y compris la determination de nouvelles categories de questions a tnincher a la
majorite des deux tiers, sont prises a la majorite
des Membres presents et votants."
Avant de proceder au yote et pour qu'il n'y
ait pas de discussion posterieurc, je voudrais
savoir si l' Assemblee considere la question comme
une matiere importante pour laquelle les decisions doivent ctre prises a. la majorite des deux
tiers.
J e clonne la parole a M. Nicholls, representant
de I'Union Sud-Africaine.

M. NICI-IOLLS (Union Sud-Africaine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je pense que l'Assemblee ne
peut conserver aucun doute sur l'importance de
ceUe question. C'est cette importance plus
qu'aucun autre aspect de la question que taus
les orateurs ont mise en relief avec vigueur au,
cours de ces debats. En fait, presque tous les
orateurs 1'ont soulignec; je ne pense pas qu'on
puisse le nier. Le representant du Mexique, par
cxemple, est alle jusqu'a dire que c'etait la ques~
tion la plus important de notre epoque. D'autres
ont declare qu'elle touchait aux bases memes
de notre Organisation.
,
The procedure of the Organization has been
La procedure de notre Organisation a ete
carefully devised in order to ensure the greatest soigneusement etablie afin d'assurer un accord
measure of 'agreement on all matters of impor- aussi complet que possible, sur toutes les questance. It was agreed that a two-thirds majority' tions importantes. On a decide q u'il faudrait la
was necessary so that the full weight of the majorite des deux tiers, afin que la protection
Organization might be behind every important des minorites soit assuree par le fait que le
decision as a protection for minorities.
poids entier 'de 1'Organisation appuiera toutes
les decisions d'importance.
We are about to take a very important deciNous sommes sur le point de prendre une
sion, a decision which will determine the funda- decision tres importante, une decision qui etamental rights of a Member State to appeal to blira le droit fondamental d'tm Etat Membre a
the International Court of Justice. Such is the hire appel a la Cour internationale de Justice.
privilege which South Africa affords to the com- Un privilege de cette sorte, l'Union Sudmonest criminal-an appeal to the highest africaine l'accorde au dernier des criminels: il
courts of the land, whatever his race, creed, a le droit, queUe que soit sa race, sa croyance, sa
language or colour may be.
langue ou sa couleur, de faire appel a l'instance
juridique supreme.
If the subject were to be treated as a minor
Si nous devions traiter cette question comme
matter, as a mere trifle, like the receipt of a aJfaire d'importance scconclaire ou une bagatelle,
document, it would reduce this debate to a par cxcmple comme un accuse de reception de
nullity. It would amount to a declaration that documents, ce debat se reduirait a zero. Ce serait
all that has been said in this debate is of such a prodamer que toute ceUe discussion est futile;
trivial character as to make the world wonder si bien que le monde pourrait s'etonner que
why it has generated such heat and occupied so nous y ayons depense tant d'ardeur et une part
many hours of the Assembly's time.
si importante du temps de l'Assemblee.
By not accepting the two-thirds majority here,
Si nous ne suivions pas ici la regIe de la mawe should stultify the rules of procedure devised jorite des deux tiers, nous aboutirions a enlever
to protect a small nation from the vote of a mere toute valeur a la procedure conltue pour protegeI'
majority on a matter which is vital to it, vital to une petite nation contre un vote a la majorite
its own existence.
simple lorqu'il s'agit d'une question vitale,d'une
question qui touche l'existence meme de cette
nation.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
I call upon Mr. Chagla, representative of India. M. Chagla, representant de l'Inde.
Mr. CgAGLA (India): In my opinion, the
M. OUAGLA (Incle) (traduit de l) anglais) :
question which we 'are discussing is not so impor- A mon avis, la question que nous discutons n,a
Mr. NICI-IOLLS (Union of South Africa): I
think the Assembly cannot possibly be in any
doubt as to whether this is an important matter
or not. No single aspect of this debate has been
more emphatically and more unanimously expressed than its importance. Practically every
speaker has referred to the fact of its importance. '
That, I think" cannot be denied. The repr~en­
tative of Mexico, for instance, went so far as to
say that it was the most important question of
our time. Others have said that it strikes at the
very roots of the Organization.

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

tant as to attract the application of Article 18
of the Charter. My friend, Sir Rartley Shawcross, laughs, and I shall meet both his laugh
and his argument.
Let us look at the scheme of Article 18;
I am sure the legal acumen Sir Hartley possesses
will appreciate the point. Article 18 says:
"Decisions of the General Assembly on important questions shall be made by a twothirds majority of the Members present and
voting. These questions shall include: recommendations with respect to the maintenance
of international peace and securit)', the election of the non-permanent members of the
Security Council, the election of the members of the Economic and Social Council, the
election of members of the Trusteeship Council in accordance with paragraph 1 c of Article 86, the admission of new :Mclllbers to
the United Nations, the suspension of the
rights and privileges of membership, the expulsion of Members, questions relating to the
operation of the trusteeship system, and
budgetary questions."

!

8 December 1946

1050

If Article 18 stopped there, then undoubtedly
the form in which this Article appears would
lead one to believe that the defini.tion is illustrative but not exhaustive; but when one turns
to paragraph 3 of the same Article the position
is entirely different. That paragraph reads:
"Decisions on other questions, including the
determination of additional categories of questions to be decided by a two-thirds majority,
shall be made by a majority of the members
present and voting,"

pas une importance te1lc qU'c~lc motive l'app1i~
cation de l'Article 18 de la Charte. ~'fon anu
Sir Hartley Shaweross sourit, et je suis tout pret
repondre sou souri~e et a. ~n ~rgument. .
Examinons les donnces de 1 Arttcle 18, et Je
suis persuade que Sir Rartley, avec sa perspicacite en matiere juridique~ suisira mOll point
llc \"tU" L 'Article 18 e~t ainsi COI1{;U:
.. Le.s decisions dl: I'Ax."emblec gCll(~l'a1c sur
ks questions important(.~ sont pril'l's la majoritc des deux tierl! des ~1cmbn:s prt'Sellt'i ct
;'otants. ~ont considcrccs comme q ucstiotls
importalltes: le:,; rccomlllulldatiolJs rChtlin:.'s au
maintien de la pail{ ct de la securitc internationales, I'ckction de mcmbres non permanent.."
du Conseil de recurite, l'election de rnembr~
tin Conseil cconomique et social. l'election de
mcmbres till COl1scil de tutclle, conformcment au paragl'aphe 1 re de l'Artidc 86: I'admission de nom'caux lIernbn:s dans l'Organi.~ation; la suspension dt~ droit" ct pri\'m~gcs
de },{cmbrcs; I'cxclusion de 1fcmbre$; lcs
questions relatives au fonctionnement du regime de tutcllc et les questions budgctaircs."

a

a

a

Si l'Article 18 s'arrctait id, la forme dans laq\leIIe il se presente ferait penscr que la definition est explicative, mais non limitative. Tout(~­
fois, q nand on jette un coup d'reil sur le paragraphe 3 du mcme Article, on change d'avis.
Ce paragraphe, en effet, renfermc ces mots:
"Les decisions sur d'autres questions, y
rompris la determination de nouvelles catetrancher
la majoritc
gories de questions
des deux tiers, seront prises la rnajoritc des
Membres presents et votant.c;,"

a

a

a

That clearly makes the category contained in
11 cn resuIte nettcmcn t qul' la ca tC,!{ori(' dt:$
paragraph 2 exhaustive. That category can only Cl lIcstions enumerees au paragraphe 2 est Hmibe added to by a majority of the Members t<lth'e. SeuJe la majoritc des Mcmbrcs presents
present and voting. That. I ~\lbl1lit, is perfectly ct Yotants peut y ajouter. J'estimc que r<:la tst
clear.
parfaitement clair,
The question which I would address to myself
]1.' me demandc done si les :Memhn~ de
is this: Should the lvlcmbers of the Asscmbl~. by scmblce devraiellt decider, par un vote pri:-; la
a majority, decide to add to the category ~hicil majoritc, d'ajouter de<; questions it la categorie
is enumerated in Article 18, paragraph 2? In qni figure au paragraphe 2 de I'Al'tidc 18; OU,
other words, the question which we arc going to Cll d'autrcs termes, HOllS d('vons HOlls dC'mander
ask ourselves is whether the matter before us is si la question est importantt', au sen~ 011 l'rIltend
important, important within the meaning of I'AItide 18.
Article 18.
'
Every question that the Assembly discusses
Toute que.'ltinl1 que l' A~cmbl(-e dis('llte ec:t
is important. We do not waste our time ~ll1portante;. nollS ?c perdons pas notrc tem~
discussing unimportant questions. But Article 18, a en examIner qUI ne le soient pas. 1\Jais le
paragraph 2, gives you an indication of what paragraphe 2, Artide 18, donne tine idee de re
those who drafted the Charter felt were im. que les auteurs de la Chartc ronsidfraicnt ('omme
portant matters, and if you look at the clauses q ue~tions. importantes. LC:',s dispositions de eet
mentioned there, you will see that they are an
Article, SI on l.cs ex~mine bien, re\'rlent qu('lIes
indication of what are important matters. If
sont les questIOns Impoliantcs. Si l'on etudi\'
you· study each one of those, you will find that
c.hacnne d'entrc el~es, on s'aper\oit que l~ qur-:the matters which we are discussing are not imtlOns qu~ nODS tr.utons ne sont pas imp()rtant~,
portant from that point of view.
de cc pomt de vue.
What are the two matters which we are disQueUes sont les deux questions dont nOllS dis~
cussing? Let us first of all look at the main
cu~on.s? Tout d'abord, examinons la resolution
re.sollltion, the resolution which has been repnnclp,ale. c~ll.e qui. a fait l'ohjet d'un rapport
ported by the Joint First and Sixth Committee.
de la CommISSIon I11lxte de.'! Premil'rt~ (~t Sixieme
In its operative part, the resolution merely reCommissions. Le dispositif de la r6lo1ution n'a
quests the two Governments to report at the next
pOUf eff'et que de demander aux deux GOllyeme-

rA".

a

8decembre 1946

1051

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

session of the General Assembly "the measures
adopted to that effect". Thus, the operative
part of the main resolution is merely calling upon
South Africa and India to report at the next
sessions as to the measures the two Governments
have taken.

ments de rendre compte a la prochaine session
de l'AssembIee generale des mesures prises dans
le sens indique. Ainsi done, le dispositif de la
resolution principale ne tend qu'a prier l'Union
Sud-Africaine et l'Inde de rendre compte a la
prochaine session des mesures prises par leurs
Gouvernements respectifs.
L'Assemblee a ajourne toute decision. Elle
The Assembly has suspended action; it wants
to know what South Africa has done regard- desire savoir ce que l'Union Sud-Africaine a fait
ing discriminative legislation, and it is only at a l'egard des lois consacrant les inegalites de
the next session, if the South Mrican Govern- traitement, et ce n'est que lors de la prochaine
ment has not acted, that the Assembly would call session, si le Gouvernement de l'Union Sudit to account. If the question comes up, it might Africaine n'a pris aucunne mesure, que l'Assembe argued with considerable force that it would blCe lui demandera des comptes. Si te1 est alors
be a matter of such importance as is contem- le cas, on aura de bonnes raisons de soutenir
que l'on se trouve en presence d'une question de .
plated by Article 18.
I'importance de cenes qui sont visees a l'Artide 18.
Examinons l'amendement. Cet amendemcnt
Let us turn to the amendment. The amendment asks for a reference of the matter to the se presente sous la forme d'une demande d'avis
International Court of Justice for its opinion. No a la Cour internationale de Justice. Il ne s'agit
action is to be taken. South Africa is merely pas d'intervenir. L'Union Sud-Africaine ne fait
asking for an advisory opinion from the Inter- que demander un avis consultatif a la Cour intrrnationale de Justice.
national Court of Justice.
11 me semble tres dangcrcux de vouloir acIt seems to be most dangerous to go on adding
to the category given in Article 18, paragraph 2. croitre la categoric prcvuc au paragraphe 2 de
We believe, or assume to believe, in democracy l' Artic1e 1B. Nous crayons ou nous affectons
and in the rule of the majority, and it is only in de croire a la democratie et au regne de la maspecific cases that the makers of the Charter jorite, et ce n'est que dans des cas specifiques
thought that, for the protection of the minority, que les auteurs de la Charte ont pense qu'il
a two-thirds majority was necessary. I do appeal etait necessaire d'avoir une majorite des deux
to you, independently of the present question, tiers pour proteger la minorite. Independamnot to lay down the principle whereby. the cate- ment de cette question, je vous prie de ne pas
gory of cases requiring two-thirds majority would . poser un principe qui entrmnerait l'accroissebe increased. We should be most careful and re, ment du nombre dcs cas Oll la majorite des deux
luctant about this; it is only in exceptional tiers est exigible. A cet egard, nous devons faire
cases, where drastic action is taken against preuve de beaucoup de prudence et decirconsa Member and is in order to protect that pection. N'ajoutons a cette categoric que les
1I1ember from a bare majority, that the cate- cas exceptionnels ou des mesuref; energiques sont
prises a l'egard d'un Membre, et Iorsqu'il s'agit
gory should be added to.
de defendre ce Membre contre une majorite
simple.
~ Therefore, I do ask you, if this question is to
En consequence, si nous votons sur le point
be put to the vote, that is, the question whether de savoir si cette question doh figurer dans la
this matter should be put into the category categorie de cenes pour lesquelles une majorite
requiring the two-thirds majority, not to vote des deux tiers cst exigee, je vous demande de ne
in support.
pas voter pour l'affirmative.

I call upon Riad Bey, representative of
Saudi Arabia.

Le PRESIDENT: Je tiens a attirer l'attention
de l' Assembh~e sur l'importance de la decision
,qu'elle va prendre. C'est la premiere fbis,
depuis la reunion de Londres,que nous avons
a prendre une telle decision. Nous alIons certainement Creel' un precedent.
A moins que quelqu'un ne demande encore
la parole, je vais donc consulter l'AssernbIee sur
le point de savoir si e1Ie estime que la question en discussion est importante au sens de
I'Article 18.
.
Je donne la parole a Riad Bey, representant
de l'Arabie saoudite.

RIAD Bey (Saudi Arabia): The point under
discussion now is not that large question that
was put before us and has been discussed at
length. It is a legal question and is quite separate from the question we have been discuss-

RIAD Bey (Arabie saoudite) (traduit de l'anglais) : La question qui fait en ce moment l'obiet
de nOIl debats n'est pas ce vaste probleme qui
nous a ete soumis et que nous avons deja longuement discute. C'est une question d'ordreiuri-

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I would draw the Assembly's attention to the
importance of the decision it is about to take.
This is the first time since the London meeting
that we have had to take such a decision. A
precedent will undoubtedly be created.
If no one else wishes to speak, I shall consult the Assembly on the question whether it
considers 'that the matter now before it is important in the sense of Article 18.

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

8 December 1946

1052

ing since yesterday. I think the jurists, the legal
members of this Assembly, can claim a right
to explain their views.

a

dique, qui n'a rien voir avec ceIle que nous
avons discutee hier. Je pense que les juristes qui
font partie de cette AssembIee ant le droit d'etre
entendus et d'exposer leur point de vue.
Je ticns a dire, avant tout, que les questions
I would say, first of all, that the important
questions are exceptional, and as such must be importantes ont un caractere exceptionnel, et
interpreted very strictly, and not in a large or comme telles, doivent etre traitees non pas dans
broad spirit. You must not create a precedent un sens large, mais de fa<;on tres stricte. Vous ne
for this question, for which, whatever side you devez pas Creel' un precedent apropos d'une
take, you can find a very simple solution." One question qui, de quelque fa~on que vous l'ensolution is to ask the two Members of this big visagiez, peut se resoudre sans difficulte. U ne
family to arrive at a settlement, alld the other solution consiste a prier les deux Membres de
solution is to ask the International Court to give cette grande famille de trouver un terrain d'ena verdict. Let us assume this and assume also tente; une autre serait de demander a la Cour
that important questions are exceptional. After internationale de rendre un arret. Adoptol1s cette
paragraph 2 of Article 18 has mentioned these hypothese et supposons aussi que les questions
exceptional cases, paragraph 3 deals not with importantes sont exceptionnelles. Aprcs l'enumeration des cas exceptionnels donnce au paraquestions, but categories of questions.
graphe 2, de I'Article 18, le paragraphe 3
concerne non pas des questions, mais des
categories de questions.
Lors .de la redaction de la Charte, personne
. When the Charter was drafted, there was'
never any thought of putting individual ques- n'a songe a nous soumettre les questions d'espece.
tions before us. Otherwise, you would have Sinon, hier vons auriez presente la question de
presented the question of simultaneous transla- l'interpretation simuItanee comme "question imtion yesterday as an "important qllestio:o" and portante" et vous auriez demande, avant de
asked us, before the vote, whether or not it was proceder au vote, s'iI s'agissait ou non d'une
'important. Simultaneous translation saves our question importante. L'interpretation simuItanee
time, cutting it by a third, helps us to under- permet .d'economiser un tiers de noire temps et
stand what we discuss; yet nobody asked if it de comprendre ce dont nous discutons; cepenwere an important question or not. It does not dant, personn~ n'a demande si, en la circonstance, il s'agissait d'une question importante;
enter that category.
elIe n'entre pas dans cette categorie.
Void ce que dit le paragraphe 2: Sont consiParagraph 2 says that these questions shaJJ
include: recommendations with respect to the db-ees comme questions importantes: les recom~
maintenance of international peace and security, mandations relatives an maintien de la paix et
elections, rights and privileges of membership, de la securite internationales; Ies elections; les
expulsion. Then paragraph 3 was added, which droits et privileges des Membres, ainsi que leur
mentions two sorts of ideas. One deals with exclusion. On a ensuite ajoute le paragraphe 3,
"decisions on other questions". It mentions qui exprime deux idees differcntes. L'une a trait
questions: that means individual questions, aux "decisions sur d'autres questions", et il s'agit
Again, when it speaks about the majority of . la de questions, c'est-a-dire de questions d'espetwo-thirds, it uses another word, another quali- ees. Dans la suite, a pl'OpOS notamment de la
fication: it mentions "categories", It says: "in- majorite des deux· tiers, on se sert d'un autre
cluding the determination of additional cate- mot, et 1'0n pade de "categories". L'article dit
gories of quesj:ions." It does not say, "additional en dIet: "y compris la determination de nouquestions", but "additional categories of ques- veIles categories de questions", cet article ne dit
tions". If, therefore, you wish to regard this as .pas: nouvelIes questions, mais nouvelles catean important question, the vote must be prece- gories de questions. Done, si vous desirez que
ded by another vote, to add as a, category all cette question soit consideree camme une quesquestions such as regulations for resort to the tion importante, iI faut auparavant proceder it
Court, or asking the Court for an opinion, or un vote autorisant la creation d'une nouveIIe
all questions regarding disputes of that kind. categorie ou entreraient toutes questions ayant
There must first of all be a category, then a trait a la procedure de recours ou de dcmande
cl' avis a la Cour, ou toutes questions relatives a
question.
des differends de cet ordre. II faut d'abord creel'
une categorie, puis y faire figurer la question.
Article 18 says, "decisions on other questions," employing the word "questions". Then it
uses another expression: "including the determination of additional categories of questions to
be decided by a two-thirds majority." We must
therefore add a category into which t11is question of the Indians in South Africa will enter.
We vote first, then, on the category,. and the
question will come afterwards. But, by calling
/ ' ...,

...

!'

L'Article 18 mentionne les "decisions sur
d'autres questions" et emploie dans ce cas le
mot "questions", puis il se sert d'une· autre
expression: "y compris la determination de nouvelles categories de questions a trancher a la
majorite des deux tiers", Nous devons done
ajouter une nouvelle categorie, dans laquelIe
entrera cctte. question des Hindous de l'Mrique
du Sud. PUIS, nous mettrons aux voix la crea-

8 decembre 1946

1053

it an individual question, we shall never finish.

I think it is very important to submit to the
consideration of my able and learned colleagues,
especially the jurists, that this matter is important, that we cannot vote for individual
questions, but for categories of questions. When
the category is important, then any questions
entering this category will be important.

"The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. L6pez, representative of
Colombia.

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

tion de cette categorie, et nous en arriverons
ensuite a la question proprement dite. Mais en
la qualifiant de question d'espcce, nous n'en
finirons jamais.
Je pense qu'il est extreroement important de
signaler a l'attention de roes eminents collegues,
et particulierement a l'attention des juristes, qu'il
s'agit la d'une question serieuse, et que nous ne
pouvons pas voter sur des questions d'espece,
mais sur des categories de questions. Lorsque la
categorie est importante, il va de soi que toutcs
les questions qui entrent dans cette categorie
setont des questions importantes.
J e donne la parole
Le PRESIDENT:
M. L6pez, representant de la Colombie.

a.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): The amendment
submitted by the delegation of the Union of
South Africa calls for a request to the International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion,
and Article 96 of the Charter provides that the
General Assembly or the Security Council may
request the International Court of Justice to
give an advisory opinion on any legal question.

M. LOPEz (Colorobie) (traduit de l'anglais):
L'amendement presente par la <;Ie](~gation de
l'Union Sud-Africaine tend a demander un avis
consultatif a la Cour internationale de Justice;
et l'Article 96 de la Charte prevolt que l'Asserriblee generale ou le Conseil de sccurite peuvent
demander a la Cour internationale de Justice
un avis consultatif sur toutes questions d'ordre
juridique.
A mon avis, l'Article 96 montre clairement
It seems clear enough to me that Article 96
shows that a request for an advisory opinion, qu'une demande d'avis consultatif n'entre pas
is not one of those important questions which dans la categorie des questions importantcs exicall for a two-thirds majority vote, but, on the geant une majorite des deux tiers, mais constitue,
contrary, is one that should be decided by a ma- au contraire, une question qui doit ctre decidee
jority vote. Moreover, we should be establishing a la simple majorite. En outre, nous etablirions
a most dangerous precedent, contrary to the ,best un precedent extrcmement dangereux, nuisible
functioning of this Organization, if, by a decision au bon fonctionnement de notre Organisation,
of the Gen~ral Assembly, we were to establish si, par decision de l'Assemblce generale, nous
the precedent that requesting the International stipulions qu'une demande d'avis consultatif a
Court of Justice for an advisory opinion requires la Cour internationale de Justice exige une
majorite des deux tiers.
a two-thirds majority vote.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. MacEachen, representative of
Uruguay.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. MacEachen, representant de l'Uruguay.

Mr. MACEACHEN (Uruguay): At the outset, I want to declare that Uruguay has voted for
the resolution of the Committee which is in
favour of the Indian point of view.

M. MAcEACHEN (Uruguay) (traduit de
l'anglais): Tout d'abord, je tiens a declarer que
la delegation de l'Uruguay a vote en faveur de
la resolution de la Commission, laquelle est
favorable au point de vue exprime par la delegation de l'Inde.
Je suis monte a la tribune, parce que nouS
savons que cette question presente une grande
importance. Contrairement a l'avis exprime
par le representant de la Colombie, j'estime
qu'une majorite des deux tiers constitue une
garantie pour les petites nations. Dne simple
majoritc peut s'obtenir facilement.
Il me semble que l'important est de savoir si
la question qui nous est soumise entre dans la
categorie envisagee a l'Article 18, paragraphe 2,
DU se trouvent ces mots: "recommandations
relatives au maintien de la paix internationale".
Je n'ai pas assiste aux reunions de la Commission mixte, mais le representant de notre delegation, qui a assist€ a ces reunions, m'a appris
que la delegation de l'Inde a presente la question comme ayant une tres grande importance,
parce que les relations entre les deux pays interesses se trouvaient. en jeu, et que, par conse-

We come to the rostrum because we understand that the matter now under discussion is
of great importance. Contrary to the views expressed" by the representative of Colombia, I
think that a two-thirds majority is a guarantee
to small nations. Simple majorities may be
easily obtained.
It seems to me that the important question is
to know whether the subject matter before us is
one that falls within the category contemplated
in Article 18, which in .paragraph 2, mentions,
"recommendations with respect to the maintenance of international peace." I did not attend
the meetings of the Joint Committee, but the
representative from our delegation who did
attend those meetings has informed me that the
Indian delegation presented its case as a very
serious one, because the relations between the
two, cO,untries were affected, and consequently,

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1054

recommendations concerning the maintenance
of good relations betwecn the two countries had
to be made.
On this account, I have not the slightest doubt
that the recommendation that we are about to
voLe on is one falling exactly within the phrase
"recommendations with respect to the maintenance of international peace", and it therefore is
precisely specified as requiring a two-thirds
majority.

quent, il etait necessaire de presenter des recommandations concernant le maintien des bonnes
relations entre les deux pays.
C'est pourquoi, jc ne doute aucunement que
la recommandation que nous allons voter entre
dans le cadre des "recommandations concernant
le maintien de la paix intemationaJe". et que,
par consequent, toute decision a cet e~ard {"xige
une majorite des deux tiers.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Arce, representative of Argentina.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole it
M. Arce, representant de l'Argentine.

111'. ARGE (Argentina) (translated from
I am guing to satisfy the representative of Saudi Arabia. Let us establish a category: whenever there is a question of the General Assembly of the United Nations wishing
to intervene in matters which, it is suspected,
may be within the domestic jurisdiction of a
State-this being the most important question
of all for protecting the life of this Organization-a two-thirds majority shall be required.
I challenge all the small and medium-sized
countries represented here to tell me whether
the possibility of the General Assembly of the
United Nations wishing to intervene by political
action III the internal affairs of a small country
is an important question or not.
I would ask the President to take note that I
should like to establish a new category; this will
satisfy the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Whenever a question arises on which there is a
doubt whether this Assemblv is entitled or not
to intervene in national affairs, this shall be an
impul'tant question requiring a two-thirds majority, Otherwise we of the small nations are
left at the mercy of any political combination.
The Security Council with its power of veto
would be a small matter compared with such
a formidable possibility; wc should have created
a second veto for all the small nations.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol): Je vais faire plai.<:ir au repr6:entant de
l'Arabie saoudite. Nous allons etablir une categorie de questions: chaque fois que l'Assemblce
generale d6sirera intel"Venir dans des affaires qui
peuvent etre considerees comrne affaires interieures d'un pays, question importantc entre
toutes si Pon veut assurer l'existence de notre
Organisation, on exigera la majoriiC des deux
tiers. Je fais appel a tous les Etats, petits et
moyens, id representes, et leur demande si la
possibilite que PAs..~mbIee p;eneraIe vcnille
intervenir par une action politique dans les
affaires interieures d'un petit pays, constitue ou
non une question importante.
Je vous demande, Monsieur le President, de
nnt"r qu(' je cl~sire etablir id nne nouveIle categorie; le representant de l'Arabie saoudite sera
ainsi satisfait. Chaque fois qu'il s'agira de savoir
si cette Assemblee a ou non le droit d'intervenir
dans une question de carartere national. nou~
serons en face d'une question important(' qui
exigera la majoritc des deux tiers. S'i! n'en ctait
pas ainsi, nous, petite.., nations, now: trouvc-rinl1s
n. la merd de n'importe queUe roalition politique, eventualite fonnidable en comparaisoll tie
laquelle le Conseil de securitc et son droit dc
veto seraient peu de cho~e, car nailS aurion~
eree un nouveau droit de veto it l'encontre de
toutes le." petites nations.
Je regrette beaucoup d'ctre en camplet dr.<~ac­
cord avec mon cher ami et col1e~u(". l'anc'icn
Pr~~i(knt de In Colomhie. chef cll' la d€lt;gation
colombienne; maL~ je ne puis aclmrttre. nu nom
du pays que je reprel'cnte, que Pon romcic!h€'
comme une qUl'l'tion sans imPDrtanre le fait de
s'immiscer Oll non-car c'est bien de ceIa qu'il
s'agit-dans Ics affaires interiellres de l'un de
nos pays, de l'un des petits pays.
D'autl'e part, pour emploYer une demonstration par l'absurd-e, je desire demander au repre~en.t~t de PInde, dont l'habilete dialectique et
J~ll1dlque est manifeste, s'il pc-miC que la que.<;tlOn de savoir si M. Lie doit avoir ur.lIX S('C'I"<"tai,res au lieu. ~e trois, que.<;tion budgetaire qui
eXlge un~ deCISIOn a la majorite des deux til'l"S.
~~t plus Importante que la question de savoil' si
I A~semblee des Nations Unies peut intcl'venir
~~n.s, les, affaircs interieurcs d'un pays? Je le
I epete, c est la preuve par l'absurde.

~ jJlwish):

/

8 December 1946

I profoundly regret having to disagree with
my distinguished friend and colleague, the former President of Colombia, and head of that
country's delegation; but I cannot admit, in the
l:ame ~f the country I represent, that the questlon of mtervention or non-intervention-for that
is tbe real issue-in the domestic affairs of one
of our countries-one of the small countries-is
all unimportant one.
e can also prove things by a reductio ad
adsu,.dum. I should like to ask the representative of India, whose dialectical and legal skill
have been impressively demonstrated, to tell me
whether he really believes that 'a discussion on
whether Mr. Lie should have two rather than
tllre~ ~mployees, wl1ich is a budgetary question
reqUlrmg .t~o-thirds majority, is more important
tha~l deCldmg whether the Assembly of the
Unlted Nations may intervene in the internal
affairs of a country. As I said before proof
can also be provided by reductio ad ads~rdum.
In concludin,e: this short statement, which I
regret I had to make with the ardour of a per-

"'!

Pour conclure, j'exprime le vif regret d'~tre
oblige d'user d'une telle veht~men("e pour de-

8 decelnbre 1946

1055

50n defending the only thing his country has,
namely its right, I should like to say that Argentina has neither the power of veto, nor great
armies, nor a big navy, nor a large number of
aeroplanes, with the help of which she might
aspire to world domination. All my country
wishes is that its right may be respected, and its
right will be respected if this Assembly.is unable
without a two-thirds majority, to intervene in its
internal affairs.
I should therefore like to make a formal
motion on a point of order and propose that,
whenever it is to be ascertained whether intervention in a country's internal or domestic affairs whieh are not specifically referred to in
the Charter, is permissible or not, this shall be
an important question within the meaning of
Article ] 8, and shall therefore require a twothirds majority.

The PRESIDENT (tTanslated from French):
Before calling on the speakers who have put
down their names,· I should like to try to restore
a little serenity to the discussion. Political questions may cause our passions to run high; procedural questions should leave us calm, because
it should not be forgotten that the majority is
liable to change and that the object of rules of
procedure is to protect the minority.
I think that the representative of Saudi
. Arabia has clearly shown that, on this occasion,
there is no reason to apply Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter, and that, in fact, the
terms of that paragraph refer not to questions
taken individually, but to categories of questions.
I honestly believe that this has been convincingly
demonstrated.
But I think that the representative of Uruguay
in his turn made a good point in asking the
Assembly if it considered that the matter under
discussion was concerned with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Allow me
once more to read to you Article 14 of the
Charter, which is as follows:
"Subject to the provisions of Article 12,
the General Assembly may recommend measlilTS for the peaceful adjustment of any situation, regardless of origin, which it deems likely
to impair the general welfare or friendly relations among nations, including situations
resulting from the violation of the provisions
of the present Charter setting forth the Purposes and Principles of the United Nations".

I consider that if, as we should, we read Article 14 of the Charter in conjunction with
paragraph 2 of Article 18 and primarily with
the expression "recommendations with respect
of the maintenance of international peace and
security", the situation before us becomes
clearer.
I should like to mention to the representative
of Argentina that it is obviously impossible for
UR to follow his suggestion to create a new categot'y of questions in which the General Assembly
would intervene in the domestic affairs of a

Cinquante.deuxu~me seance pleni(lfe

fendre la seule chose que possede I'Argentin(;:
son droit; je veux dire par la que l' Argentin~
ne possede ni droit de veto, ni fortes armees,
ni grandes esca8res, ni avions nombreux dont
elle puisse se servir pour chercher ~l dDminer le
monde: la seule chose que l'Argentine demande
c'est le respect de son droit, et ce droit sera
respecte si l' Assemblee generalc ne peut pas
intervenir dans ses a11aires interieures, a moins
qu'une intervention n'ait ctc dccidee a la
majorite des deux tiers.
Je propose done la motion d'ordre suivante:
chaque fois qu'il s'agira de savoir si les Nations
Units peuvent ou non intervenir dans les problemes interieurs ou nationaux d'un pays, alors
que ces problemes ne sont pas expressement mentionnes dans la Charte, cette question sera considerce comme importante au sens de l' Article 18
et, en consequence, exigcra la majorite des dellX
tiers.
.
Le PRESIDENT: Avant de donner la parole
aux orateurs qui se sont fait inscrire, je voudrais
essayer de ramener le calme dans le d€bat. Des
questions politiques peuvent nous passionnel':
les questions de procedure doivent nous laisser
de sang-froid; il ne faut pas oublier d'ailleurs
que la ma.joritepeut changer de camp et qne les
regles de procedure ant pour objet de protegeI'
la minorite.
Je rense que le representant de l'Arabie saOHdite a clairement demontrc qu'il n'y avait pas
Heu, en cette occasion, de faire application du
paragraphe 2 de l' Article ] 8 de la Charte et
qu'en fait cette disposition visait non pas des
questions prises individuellement, mais des cate~
gories de questions. Je crois honnctement que la
demonstration est convaincante.
Mais je pense que le representant de l'Uruguay a fort bien pose la question a son tour en
demandant a l' Assemblee si dIe considerait que
ce qu'elIe discute en cc moment interesse ie
mainticn de la paix et de la securite internationales. Permettez-moi de vous re1ire l' Article 14
de la Charte, qui est ai~si con9u:
"SOllS reserve des dispositions de l'Article
12, l' Assemblt~e generale peut recommander
les me..<;ures propres a. assurer l'ajustement
pacifique de toute situation, quelle qu'en soit
l'origine. qui lui semble de nature a nuire au
bien general ou a compromettre les relations
cllnicales entre nations, y compris le.s ::;;tU;Itions resultant d'une infraction aux dispmdtions de la presente Charte ou sont enonces
les buts et les principes des Nations U rues."
Je crois que, si vous rapprochez, comme cela
doit ctre fait, l' Article 14 de la Charte avec le
paragraphe 2 de l'Article·] 8 et surtout avec cette
expression "les recommandations relatives an
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales", la situation que nous sommes en train
d'examiner s'eclaire.
.Te voudrais faire observer au representant de
l'Argentine qu'il DOUS est evidemment impossible
de le suivre dans la voie Oll il voudrait nom
conduire, en proposant de ereer une l10uvelle
categorie, ceUe des questions dans lesque1Jcs

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1056

State, as this would be expressly contrary to
the terms of the Charter.

I call upon Mr. Lapez, representative of
Colombia,
Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): I do not propose to
argue out the case which my distinguished
friend, the Chairman of the Argentinian delegation, has tried to make. I take it for granten
that the Assembly remembers very well that I
said nothing, that I implied nothing, which
might authorize him to represent me as holding
the opinion that interference in the domestic
affairs of a State is not an important matter;
at least I do not remember having said such 3.
thing.
My remark referred to Article 96 of the
Charter, which I am going to read again, as I
shall base on this same Article my additional
remarks. The Article reads:
"The General Assembly or the Security
Council may request the International Court
of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any
legal question."
What is the matter that we have under consideration? A request to the International Court
of Justice for an advisory opinion. Why is it that
the South African delegation wants the opinion,
and why is it that the representatives who support that contention want an opinion, from the
International Court of Justice? Why do they
want to make it impossible to request that opinion, by insisting that it be requested by a twothirds majority? Why not give the Assembly the
opportunity to request that opinion by a
majority vote, which is the easiest way to act on
that request?

I am sorry to disagree with my friend Mr.
Arce. He wants to protect the rights of the
small nations; but in this case I find that the
protect1on of the Indian population in South
Africa does not require a two-thirds majority but
a majority vote. Whichever way we take it, if
we want to have an opinion from the Court
the ca:-;icst way to get it is by a majority vote:

If. as a general rule, the protection of the
srn.al! countries lies in their ability to request an
opinion from the Court. we should make it
ea~i( . r and not more difficult to request that
OpInIOn.

8 December 1946

l'Assemblee generale interviendrait dans les a~.
faires interieures d'un Etat, puisque ce seralt
formellement contraire aux dispositions de la
Charte.
Je donne la parole a M. L6pez, representant
de la Colombie.
M. LoPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Je n'ai pas l'intention de refuter ici la these que
mon distingue collegue, le president de la delegation de l'Argentine, a essaye de soutenir. Je
suis certain que l' AssembIee se souviendra parfaitement que je n'ai rien dit ni laisse entendre
qui puisse autoriser mon collegue a me representer comme partisan de l'opinion que l'intervention dans les affaires interieures d'un Etat ne
constitue pas une affaire importante. En tout
cas, je ne me souviens nullement d'avoir dit quoi
que ce soit dans ce sens.
Les observations que j'ai faites se rapportaient
11 l'Article 96 de la Charte. Je vais en donner
a nouveau lecture, car cet Article servira de
fondement a mes nouvel1es remarqnes. L' Article
est rcdige ainsi qu'il suit:
"L' Assemblee generale ou le Conseil de
securitc peut demander a la Cour internationale de Justice un avis consultatif sur toute
question juridique."
Or, qu'avons-nous 11 examiner? Une requete
a la Caul' intel'nationale de Justice pour obtenir
de cene-ci un avis consultatif. Pour queUe raison
la delegation de l'Union Sud-Mricaine desiret-elle, pour queUe raison les representants qui
partagent le meme point de vue desirent-ils
obtenir un avis consultatif de la Cour internationale de Justice? Pourquoi cherchent-ils a
rendre cette demande impossible en exigcant
qu'elle soit votee a une majorite des deux tiers?
Pourquoi ne pas permettre a 1'Assemblee de
demander eet avis consultatif a la majorite simple, ce qui serait, en l'espece, la fagon la plus
simple de proceder ?
Je regrette de ne pas etre d'accord avec man
ami M. Arce. Celui-ci desire proteger les droits
des petites nations; clans le cas present, cepencl~nt, j'estime gue ~a protection de la population
hmdoue de l'Union Sud-Africaine n'exige pas
l~ majorite des deux tiers, mais bien la majorite
sl:l1ple. De q uelque maniere que nOllS exami1110ns la question, si nous desirons obtenir l'avis
de la Cour, l.a fa~on la plus simple d'y parvenir
est ~e recouTl; au vote a la majorite simple.
SI en general, la protection des petits pavs
reside dans la possibilite qui leur est accordee de
de.mander un avis a la Cour, il nous faut tout
f~lre . pour rendre plus facile, et non pas plus
di1?ctle, la procedure permettant d'obtenir cet
aVIs.

The PRESlng?,T (translated from French):
The representative of El Salvador is the la.'Jt
speaker on the list. I propose that the Assembly
sh~u!d nro~e~d to the vote when this representatlVe has fimshed his speech.

Le PRESIDENT: Le representant du Salvador
est le ;Iemier orateur inscrit. Je propose a l'Assemblee de passer au vote lorsque ce representant
aura termine son discours.

Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador): I was somewhat
reluctant to take part in this debate because,

~. CASTRO (Salvador) (traduit de l' anglms) : Je prends la parole" apres que1que hesita-

8 decembre 1946

1057

naturally, I feel that everyone· in taking sides,
one way or the other, is trying to promote the
interest or the best possibilities of his own case.
But, in fact, I feel that the opinions that have
been given here, although they are in apparent
contradiction, can very easily be hannonized.

. Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

tion, parce que j'ai l'impression, fort naturelle,
que chaque orateur, se pronow;;ant en faveur de
l'une ou l'autre partie, s'efforce de servir ses
propres interets ou d'exposer sa propre cause
sous le meilleur jour possible. De fait, je crois
que les opinions cxprimees ici, bien qu'apparemment contradictoires, sont facilement condliables.
. Jc ne crois pas, par exemple, qu'une forte
divergence cl' opinion ressorte des observations
formulees par le representant de l' Argentine et
par le representant de la Colombie, parce que
I'un et l'autre semblent parler de deux chose~
entierement diffcrentes. En fait, deux resolutions
distinctes nous sont soumises; l'un des orateurs
a paru songer a la premiere, l'autre a la seconde.

For instance, I do not think that there is
any great difference or any such divergence of
opinion between the remarks made by the
representative of Argentina and the representative of Colombia, because they seem to be referring to two entirely different things. In fact, we
have two different resolutions before us, and one
of the representatives seems to be referring to
one and the other representative to the other.
I share the opinion of the representative of
Uruguay, and I want to say a little about the
same question. In fact, there is no doubt that, as
regards the Franco-Mexican proposition, which
refers to the question of substance presented by
the delegation of India, it is absolutely necessary
to regard it as a very important question and as
a question that has to do with the maintenance
of international peace and security. In order to
prove this assertion, I shall read the first part of
the Franco-Mexican resolution:

J e partage l'opinion exprimee par le l:epresentant de I'Uruguay et desire ajouter que1ques
mots sur le meme sujet. I1 ne fait aucun doute
que la proposition de la France et du Mexique,
relative a la question de fond soumise par la
delegation de l'Inde, doive necessairement etre
consideree comme une question tres importante,
une questioI1 qui concerne le maintien de la paix
et de la securite internationales. A l'appui de ce
que j'avance, je me contenterai de lire la
premiere partie de la resolution presentee par la
France et le Mexique :
"The General Assembly,
"L'Assemblee generale,
"Having taken note of the application made
"Prenant acte de la demande formulee par
by the Government of India regarding the
le Gouvernement de l'lnde et relative au
treatment of Indians in the Union of South
traitement des Hindous etablis dans I'Union
Africa, and having considered the matter:
Sud-Africaine, et apres examen de la question,
"States that, because of that treatment,
"Constate qu'en raison de Ce traitement les
friendly relations between the two Member
relations de bonne amitie entre les deux Etats
States have been impaired, and unless a satMembres des Nations Unies se trouvent
isfactory settlement is reached, these relations
alterees et risquent de s'alterer encore
are likely to be further impaired."
davantage a l'avenir, si un accord satisfaisant
n' est pas realise."
That is why this important question comes
Voila pourquoi cette importante question
under Article 18, which requires a two-thirds tombe sous le coup de l'Artic1e 18, en vertu
majority for such questions as the following: duquel une majorite des deux tiers est necessaire
"recommendations with respect to the mainte- pour les questions comme ce11e-d: "les recomnance of international peace and security." mandations relatives au maintien de la paix et
If the relations between the Union of South de la securite internationales". Si les relations
Mrica and India have been impaired on ac- entre l'Union Sud-Africaine et l'lnde ont ete
count of the question that we are debating, it is alterees en raison de la question que nous disnatural that the recommendation that is made cutons, il est naturel que la r,ecommandation
in the Franco-Mexican proposition is intended contenue dans la proposition de la France et
to re-establish friendly relations between the two du Mexique vise a retablir les relations amicales
countries, that it therefore has to do with the entre les deux pays et que, par consequent, elle
maintenance of international peace and security, concerne le maintien de la paix et de la securite
and that therefore, according to paragraph 2 internationales. En outre, en vertu du paraof Article 18, this resolution will require a two- graphe 2 de l' Article 18, cette resolution devra
faire l'objet d'un vote a la majorite des deux
thirds .majority.
tiers.
But now we come to the amendment proposed
Nous en. arrivons maintenant a l'amendement
by the South African delegation. That amend- propose par la delegation de l'Union Sud-Mriment has to do with a question of simple pro- .caine. Cet amendement ne touche qu's. une
cedure. It is a question of asking for an advisory simple question de procedure. I1 s'agit de deopinion from the International Court of Justice, mander un avis consultatif a la Cour internawhich will not decide the question of substance; tionale de Justice, et non de lui demander de
it will simply decide the question of competence. se prononcer sur le fond; la Cour ne tranchera
It is a simple procedure to ask for an advisory que la question de competence. C'est une proopinion in order to continue the discussion of cedure simple que de demander cet avis consulthe question and to decide upon the jurisdiction. tatif afin de pouvoir poursuivre la discussion du
I

t058

Fifty-se cond Plenary Meetin g

8 December 1946

.
prob
et tranche r la question de compe tence.
Whell the jurisdiction is decided, which 18 a Dne lcme
fois tranche e la question de compe tence- que5tion of procedure, then the. case may b.e et c'cst bien la une
question de proced~~~n
studied and definitely settled. ThIs therefore~ IS pourra etudier le
differend et le regler defl~l1tlvde­
a question of procedure~ and n.ot, a ques~lon ment C'est donc,
je le repete, une questIo n, e
which requires ~ two-thlr~s maJon~y. It l~as~
roc~dure pour laquelle la majori te des tlC: rs
question which ~5 rather l~cluded m the S' ~'est as ~ecessai
re; elle releve plutot du derme r
paragra ph of ArtIcle 18, WhICh reads as follow , I parata phe de l'Articl
e 18, qui est ainsi .con~u:,
"Decisions on other qucstions, including
"Les decisions ~ur. d'autre s questI Ons'ti
the dete~mi;lation of additional categories of
con;pris la det?rmm,atlOn de n?urell 'es '~rit6
(uestions to be decided by a two-thirds magones de ~uestlOns a t:anc?e r a a. m,a ! des
.1 .'t sllall ])c made by a maJ'ority of the
des deux tIers, sont pnses a la maJon te
lUll), ,.
,
t t"
'Members present and voting."
membres presents et vo an s.
,
t
Therefore, the opinion of the El Salvador
La delegation du ~~vador est par co~eq~~t€_
ion is that thc proposal presented by d'avis que la proposltlOn
delegat
presentee par es
,
.
.
t d la France est une
the dr.1r(!atiom of l\lcxi,:n and of France 1S
a gahons d u M'
eX1q~e e
e
. , cd deux
propo; al'of substance that requires a two-thirds question de fo~d
CXlgeant une ma]on t es l'Arma 'orit , in accordance with the second para- hers conform ement
au. paragr~p~e,2 de
] h ~f Article 18 and that the question ticle 18, et que la questlo
~~a~sking the Interll:l.;ional Court of Justice for . a la Cour internationale ndede 1 a~ls 4 peman der
JustIce sur la coman <~plllion concerning the competence
the ~ete~ce de l~Assemblee. generale en ce ca~ parGWl."r,,! As~cmblv to deal with this particu lar tlculier constltu
e un P?lll.t ?e. proced ure qUI peut
q\l{'stinn. is jl qllt:~tinn of proccdure th(lt reqnires ctre tranche par
la maJont e SImple.
nlllv a majority vote.
I

0:

Le PRESID ENT: Je vous prie de faire trbl attention avant de vous decider, car la questio n est
vraime nt delicate et comporte bien des nuanc.es,
La question que nous avons a tranch er n'est pas
de savoir si la decision que nous aHons prendr e
est une decision import ante, mais bien de savoir
si la question que nous avons discuree est u~e
question import ante. ]e vous dema.nde de hre
attentiv ement le texte du paragr aphe 2 de
l'Artic1e ] 8, qui commence par ees mots: "Les
decisions de !'Asse:mblee genera1e sur les questions importa lltes." Ce sont les questio ns importante~ qui doiven t etre reglees par des decisions prises a la majorite des deux tiers, queUe
que soit l'impor tance aux yeux des uns et des
taken.
atltres de la decision qui va etre prise.
I cannot agree with the interpretation given.
Je ne puis pas me rallier a l'interp retatio n du
hy the representative of El Salvador. 1£ we de- represe ntant
du Salvador. Si nous decido ns en
cide that the question is import ant and that it effet que la questio
n est import ante et qu'e1le
should be decided by a two-thirds majority, I doit etre tranche
e a la majorit e des deux tiers, je
shall be obliged to put to the vote first the serai forCl~ de mettre
d'abord aux voix l'amen deamendment, presuming it is an amendment, of ment, a suppos
er que ce soit un amend ement,
the Union of South Africa, which entirely de l'Union Sud-Af
ricaine, qui couvre .enticre covers the resolution proposed by the French ment la resoluti
on proposee par les delega tions
and Mexican delegations. If the amendm ent fran~ai
se et mexica ine; et l'adopt ion evenwere adopted, the Franco-Mexican proposal tueHe de cet
amend ement ne permet trait pas de
could not then be voted on, since you would mettre
aux voix la proposition franco- mexica ine:
have voted by a simple majority and your de- Des
10rs, VOIlS auriez vote a la majori te simple
cision would not aIJow me to consult you on a et la
decision que vaus aurie~ prise ne me perproposal 011 which you consid~red a two-thirds
mettrai t pas de veus consulter sur une propos imajority necessary, That is obviously impostion sur laquelle VOllS estimez devoir vous prosible,
noncer ala majorit e des deux tiers. C'est evidem ment impossible.
If you decide that the question which we have
Si vous d6cidez que la question que now
debated at such length and in such moving avons si longue ment
debattu e, et dans des terIDes
terms is an import ant question in the sense of si pathCtiques, est
une question import ante au
Article 18, then all the questions related to it sens de l'Articl
e 18, alors toutes les questio ns qui
will require a two-thirds majority, If this is s'y rattach ent daivent
etre mises aux voix a la
decided, I shall first put to the vote the South majorit
e des deux tiers. S'il en est ainsi decide ,
African amendment, which I 5haIl consider je mettrai
d'abord aux voix l'amen demen t sudadopte d only if it receives a two-thirds majority, africain
, que je considererai comme adopte seulehrcausc , in fact, it covers the entire question,
ment s'i! reunit la majorit e des deux tiers parce
The PRESID ENT (translated from French):
I would ask you to be very pruden t in your
derisioTl, bccn~sc the question is really delicate
and has many sllhlcties. The qnestion w~~ch
wc h:1\(' to deride is not whether the declslOn
we arc about to take is an important decision,
but rather \vhether the question which we have
disc\lssed is an importa nt question. I would
ask yon to read the text of Altic1e 18, para~raph 2, carefully. It beg'ins with the words,
"Derisions of the General Assembly on important questions", It is import ant questions which
have to be decided by a two-thirds majority,
irrespective of the importance which particu lar
members attach to the decision that is to be

8 decembre 1946

1059

and its adoption would be equivalent to· a rejection of the Franco-Mexican proposal, which
certain persons consider should require a twot11irds majority.

I hope that the question is now clear. I shall
ask you to say, by replying "yes" or "no,"
whether you consider that the question wc have
becn discussing is an important question ih
thc sense of Article 18, paragraph 2 of the Charter. If, by a simple majority, it is considered
that the question is important, the decisions
must be taken by a two-thirds majority. In
view of the importance of the question I think
it wise to vote by roll-call.
I call upon Mr. Vyshinsky, representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

qu'il couvrc en realite toute la question et que
son adoption equivaudrait au rejet de la proposition franco-mexicaine que certains estiment
devoir etre adoptee eventuellement a la majorite
des deux tiers.
J'espere que la question est maintenant clairement posee. Je vous demande de dire, en repondant oui ou non, si vous considerez que la
question que nous avons discutee est une question importante au sens du paragraphe 2 de
I'Article 18 de la Charte. Si l'on considere, a.
la majoritc simple, que c'cst une question importante, les decisions devront etre prises a la
majorite des deux tiers. Etallt donne l'importance de la question, je croiR prudent de proced~r
par appel nominal.
Je danne la parole de M. Vychinsky, representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe):
Monsieur le President, si l'interpretation a bien
rendu le sens de votre proposition, celle-ci consiste en ceci: c' est a l' Assemblee de decider si
la presente question, la resolution etc., est importante ou non. La delegation sovictique
estime que cette fa.-;on de presenter les choses
rend la decision plus difficile. 11 ne s'agit pas
en efIet de decider si la question est importante
ou non, mais de decider de la methode de vote
que nous adopterons en ce qui concerne la
resolution qui porte sur cette question.
Il a deja ete dit id qu'une question peut etre
It has already been said here that a question
may be very important, but that the decision tres importante, mais que teUe decision prise a
taken on that question may be of less, or even of son egard peut ne pas etre aussi importante et
no, importance; for example, the ,question peut mcme ne presenter aucune importance.
whether a particular proposal should be sub- Par exemple, la question de savoir si tene ou
mitted to the Assembly may be of great import- telle· proposition doit etre soumise a l'Assemblee
ance; but in taking a decision regarding the day peut presenter une grande importance; mais
on which a meeting will be held to discuss this pour prendre une decision sur le jour ou aura
important question, it is not at all necessary that lieu la seance consacree a cette question importhis decision be declared important or to vote tante, il n'est nullement necessaire de declarer
upon it with the same majority as on the question cette decision-la importante ou de la voter a
la meme majorite que s'il s'agissait de voter
itself.
sur la question elle-meme.
L'Article 18, paragraphe 3, de la Charte ne
Article 18, paragraph 3, of the Charter says
nothing ab.out the importance or uniniportance dit rien au sujet de l'importance des questions.
of a question. Article 18, paragraph 3, says that L'Article ] 8, paragraphe 3, indique que les
decisions on other questions-apart from those decisions au sujet des questions autres que celles
rnentioned' in paragraph 2, which does in fact enumerces au paragraphe 2-qui mentionne
speak of the importance of a question-decisions eff'ectivement l'importance des questions-ces deon other questions, including the determination of cisions, y compris la determination de nouvelles
additional categories of questions to be decided by categories de questions a trancher a la majorite
a two-thirds majority, shall be made in such and des deux tiers, sont prises de telle et telle masuch a way. The Soviet delegation, therefore, niere. C'cst pourquoi, la delegation sovi,ctique
considers it right to put the question a's follows: estime qu'il faut poser la question de 1", fas;on
Does the Assembly consider it necessary to vote by suivante: l'Assemblee juge-t-e1le necessaire dans
a two-thirds majority without taking into account ce cas de prendre une decision a la majorite des
whether the question is important or not? If the deux tiers sans se demander si cette question
Assembly considers that, in conformity with para- est importante ou non? Si l'Assemblce estime
graph 3, the two-thirds majority rule should be que la: majorite des deux tiers est necessaire,
applied, it will so decide. Therefore, the question conformement au paragraphe 3 de I'Artic1e 18,
whether or not the matter is important or not eHe en decidera ainsi. Il n'y a done pas lieu
should be eliminated.
de poser la question de savoir si nous sommes
en presence d'une question importante all non.
Accordingly, we propose that the Assembly
N ous proposons donc de mettre aux voix la
take a vote on the following question: Does the question suivante: l'AssembIee juge~t-elle neces-

Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): If the
interpretation given was correct, the President's
proposal consists of the following: Should the
Assembly consider this question, resolution, et
cetera, important or unimportant? The Soviet
delegation considers that this way of putting the
question makes a decision more difficult; we do
not have to decide whether the matter is or is not
important, but the method or procedure we
should adopt in voting on the proposed resolution.

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1060

8 December 1946

Assembly consider it necessary, in conformity
with paragraph 3 of Article 18, to call for a vote
by ~. two-thirds majority?

saire d'exiger une decision a la majorit6 des
deux tiers, eonformement au paragraphe 3 de
l' Article 18?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
am practically in agreement with Mr."Vyshinski.
I do not think that it is Article 18, paragraph 3,
which should be invoked, for the reasons given by
the representative of Saudi Arabia. But I propose
to put the question as follows:
Does the Assembly consider it necessary to
apply the two-thir~s majority rule to the decisions which will be taken on the question referred to in do~ument A/205?

Le PRESIDENT: Je suis presque d'accord avec
M." Vychinsky. Je ne pense pas que ce soit le
paragraphe 3 de l'Article 18 qu'il faille invoquer, pour des raisons qui ont cte demontrees
par le representant de l'Arabie saoudite. Mail!
je propose de poser la question comme suit:
L' Assemblee estime-t-e1le neeessaire d'appli.
quer la majorite des deux tiers aux decisions qui
seront prises sur la question rapportee au docu~
ment A/205?

Mr. PARODI (France) ('translated from
French): In view of the importance of the question and the little time available for its examination, I should like it to be understood th"at our
decision will not create a precedent, that it will
not have the force of a juridical interpretation,
and that it will not finally bind us on other
questions.

M, PARODI (France): En raison de la gravite
de la question et du peu de temps dont" nous
avans dispose pour l'etudier, je voudrais ,implement demander qu'il soit cntendu que notre
decision ne constituera pas un precedent, qu'eIle
n'aura pas la valeur d'une interpretation juridique et ne nOlls licra pas de£initivemcllt en
d'autre~ questions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
do not think that the manner in which the question is put at present can create any precedent.
It should also be understood that if we agree to
put the question as I have just suggested, the two·
thirds majority rule will apply to the amendment
submitted by the delegation of the Union of
South Africa.
I repeat the question once more: Does the
Assembly consider it necessary to apply the twothirds majority rule to the decisions which will be
taken on the question referred to in document
A/205?
(A vote was taken by roll-call.)
Voted for: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador,· Greece, Iceland, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Sweden,
Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uruguay.
, Voted against: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Iran, Iraq, Liberia,
Mexico, Philippine Republic, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Venezuela, Yugoslavia.
Abstention: France.

Le PRESIDENT: Je pense que la fac;on dont
la question est actueIlement posce ne peut ereer
aucun precMent. 11 devrait aussi ctre entendu,
si nous acceptons de poser la question telle que
je viens de le suggerer, que le vote a la majorite
des deux tiers s'appliquerait a l'amendcment depose par la delegation de l'Union Sud-Africaine.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : The
result of the voting is as follows:
Number voting, 54 j in favour, 29 j against, 24 j
abstention,l.
'
. { _ The Assembly consequently decides that the
''decisions to be taken require a two-thirds
majority.
The Assembly has now before it a resolution
submitted by the Joint First and Sixth Committee and the text, called an amendment, submitted by the South African delegation.

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du vote:

Je rappelle une derniere fois la question: l' Assemblce estime-t-elle necessaire d'appliquer la
majorite des deux tiers aux decisions qui seront
prises sur la question rapportce au document
A/20.5?
(Il est proeM! un vote 1Jar appel nominal.)
Votent pour: Afghanistan, Argentine, Australie, Belgique, Bolivie, Bresil, Canada, CostaRica, Danemark, Republique Dominicaine,
Equateur, Salvador, Grece, Islande, Liban,
Luxembourg, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaragua, Norvege, Panama, Paraguay, Perou,
Suede, rurquie, Union Sud-Africaine, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Drugu·ay.
Votent contre,' ~epublique socialiste sovietique
de 13ielorussie, Chili, Chine, Colom}:Jie, Cuba,
Tchecoslovaquie, Egypte, Ethiopie, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, lnde, Iran, lrak, Liberia,
Mexique, Philippines, Pologne, Arabie saoudite,
Syrie, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine,
Union des Republiques soeialistes sovietiques,
Venezuela, Yougoslavie.
S'abstient,' France.
Nombre de votants: 54; voix pour: 29; voix
contre: 24; abstention: 1.
L' Assemblee decide, en consequence, que les
decisions doivent etre prises Cl la majorite des
deux tiers.
L'Assemblee est maintenant en presence de
la resolution rapportee par la Commission mixte
des Premiere et Sixieme Commissions et d'uD
texte qualifie d'amendement propose par la
delegation de l'Union Sud-Africaine.

8 decem bre 1946

1061

As I have already said, I consider that this text,
called an amendment, should be put to the vote
first whilst noting that the object of this amendment is that it should entirely replace the resolu'~..
tion submitted to us. I propose, therefore, to put
this text to the vote, bearing in mind the consequences of the vote just taken by the Assembly,
namely, that it will not be adopted unless it
receives a two-thirds majority.
(A vote was taken by roll-call.)

Cinquante-deuxil~me

seance prenf~re

Ainsi que j'ai deja eu l'occasion de le dire,
j'estime qu'il faut d'abord mettre aux voix ce
texte qualifie d'amendement, en faisant tomefois observer que cet amendement a pour objet
de remplacer completement la resolution qui
nous est soumise. Je propose done de mettre ce
texte aux voix en tirant, a son sujet, la consequence du vote que l' Assemblee vient d'emettre,
a savoir qu'il ne sera adopte que s'il recueille
les deux tiers des voix.
(ll est procede aun vote par appel nominal,)

Voted for: Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Votent pour: Argentine, Australie, Belgique,
Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Bresil, Canada, Costa-Rica, Danemark, EquaEl Salvador, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands, teur, Salvador, Grece, Luxembourg, Pays-Bas,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Perou,
Sweden, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United SuMe, Turquie, Union Sud-Africaine, RoyaumeKingdom, United States of America.
Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Voted against: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Votent contre: Republique socialiste sovictique
Republic, Chile, China,' Colombia, Cuba, de Bielorussie, Cluli, Chine, Colombie, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Tchecoslovaquie,
R€publique
Dominicaine,
Ethiopia, France, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Egypte, Ethiopie, France, Guatemala, Haiti,
Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Honduras, Islande, Inde, Iran, Irak, Liban,
Mexico, Norway, Panama, Philippine RepUblic, Liberia, Mexique, Norvege, Panama, RcpubPoland, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Ukrainian Soviet lique des Philippines, Pologne, Arabie saoudite,
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Syrie, Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine,
Republics, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia.
Union des Rcpubliques socialistes sovietiques,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yogoslavie.
Abstentions: Afghanistan, Bolivia.
,S'abstiennent: Afghanistan, Bolivic.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The amendment of the Union of South Africa
is rejected by thirty-one votes to twenty-one with
two abstentions.
We shall now vote upon the Franco-Mexican
resolution (document AI 105).

Le PRESIDENT: L'amendement de l~Union
Sud-Africaine et rejete par trente et une voix
con'tre vingt et une, et deux abstentions.
N.ou~ passons au vote sur la resolution francomeXIcame.

(ll est procUe au vote par appel nominal.)
(A vote was taken bV roll-call.)
Votent pour: Afghanistan, Republique sociaVoted for: Afghanistan, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, liste sovi€tique de Bielorussie, Chili, Chine, CoCuba Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, lombie; Cuba, Tchecoslovaquie, Republique
Egyp~, Ethiopia, France, Guatemala, Haiti, Dominicaine, Egypte, Ethiopie, France, GuateHonduras Iceland, Inaia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, mala, Haiti, Honduras, Islande, Inde,' Iran,
Liberia, Mexico, Norway, Panama, Philippine Irak, Liban, Liberia, Mexique, N orvege, PaRepublic, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Ukra~n­ nama, Republique des Philippines, Pologne,
ian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of SovIet Arabie saoudite, Syrie, Republique socialiste
Socialist Republics, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugo- sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
socialistes . sovi6tiques, Uruguay, Venezuela,
slavia.
Yougoslavie.
.
Votent contre: Argentine, Be1gique, Canada,
Voted against: Argentina, Belgium, Canada,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Greece, Luxembourg, Costa-Rica, Salvador, Grece, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Para- Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Union of South Africa, United guay, Perou, Union Sud-Africaine, RoyaumeUni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Kingdom, United States of America.
S'abstiennent:
Australie, Bolivie, Bresil,
Abstentions: Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, DenDanemark,
Equateur,
Suede, Turquie.
mark, Ecuador, Sweden, Turkey.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number voting, 47; in favour, 32; against 15;
abstentions, 7. The two-thirds majority required
is 32 votes.
The proposal is therefore adopted by thirtytwo votes, a two-thirds majority of the M embers voting.

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du vote:
Nombre de votants: 47, voix pour: 32; voix
contre: 15; abstentions: 7.
La. majorite des deux tiers requise est de 32
voix.
La proposition est done adoptee par trentedeux voix,
la majorite des deux tiers des
M embres votants.

a

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

/.

1062

8 December 1946

139. Pres~nce of armed forces of Members of the United Nations on nonenemy territories: report of the First
Committee: resolution (documents
A/203 and A/203/Add.ll

139. Presence de forces armees des Etats
Membres des Nations Unies sur des
territoires tlon ennemis. Rapport de
la Premiere Commission (documents
A/203 et A/203 / Add. 1)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the report of
the First Committee on the presence of armed
forces of Members of the United Nations on
non-enemy territories (annex 49).
The representative of Ecuador, Rapporteur of
the First Committee, is not present. I think,
however, that all the delegations are familiar
with the report, and that it is not necessary to
read it.

Le PRESIDENT: Le point suivant a l'ordre du
jour est le rapport de la Premiere Commission
sur la presence de forces armees des Etats ~tIem­
bres des Nations Unies sur des territoires non
ennemis (annexe 49).
Le representant de I'Equateur, Rapporteur ~e
la Premiere Commission, n'est pas present. Mals
je pensc que toutes les delegations ont pris
connaissance du rapport et qu'il n'est pas necessaire d'en donner lecture.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom):
l\1:r. President, the British delegation has an
amendment to propose to the resolution on
armed forces. I do not know whether you are
proposing to discuss it tonight or riot. It is
quite a short matter.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume- VIIi)
Monsieur le President,
la d6ll~gation du Royaume-Uni a depose un
amendement au projet de recommandation relatif aux, forces armees. J e ne sais pas si vous
envisagez la discussion pour ce soir. La question peut etre traitee rapidement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The debate is open. I call upon Sir Hartley
Shawcross, representative of the United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: La discussion est ouverte.
La parole est a Sir Hartley Shawcross, representant du Royaume-Uni.

(traduit de fanglais):

Sir Hartley SI-IAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom):
I am happy to think that the present matter is (traduit de l' anglais): Je pense que la presente
not one which is likely to arouse feeling or take question n'est pas de nature a soulever les
up the time that was occupied by the l~.,t ques- passions et que son examen ne sera pas aussi
tion. I shall not enter into any discussion as to prolonge que celui de la question pf(~cedente.
it., relative importance. But this is a matter J e ne discuterai pas de son importance relawhich is, I think, not now likely to require any tive, mais cette question, a man avis, n'entrallong discussion. It may be that it will be suffi- nera pas de longs debat.,. 11 me semble qu'un
cient to have one or two speeches On each side ou deux discours dans cliaque sens suffiront et
and then to dispose of it, because r think and que nous pourrons alors prendre une decision
helieve that it is not a question which is likely to car je suis persuade qu'i! n'y a pas la matiere
provoke any controversy. It comes before the a controverse. Cette question se pose a l'AssemA.'1.Remblv in verY different circumstances and in blee dans des conditions et dans une atmosphere
a very different' atmosphere from those which tres differentes de celles qui regnaient lorsqu'elle
existed when the matter Wa~ discussed in the fut cliscutce par la Commission politique et je
PnHtical Committee, and I was very glad to see suis tres heurcux de voir que mon ami ~1. Molomy, friend, Mr. Molotov, raising his hand to tov desire prendre la parole. Je suis absolument
~peak. I have no doubt he is going to support certain qu'i! est dispose a soutenir cet aIllende this amendment and that we shall all go away in ment et que nous allons nous separer apres nous
complete agreement about it.
etre mis entiercment d'accord.
The A.,sembly will recall that the First ComVons vous rappelez que la Premiere Commismittee decided thFtt as a fimt step in the general sion de l'Assemblee a decide que, pour bire un
n~d uction of armaments, and with a view to premier pas dans la voie de la reduction geneimplementing Article 43 of the Charter in regard rale des armements et pour mettre en reuvre
to the provision of military forces to ensure l'Article43 de la Charte qui prevoit la consticollective security, Member States should, by tution de forces armees pour le maintien de la
31 December of this year, furnish information as paix et de la securite internationalcs, les Etats
to tJle number of troops, and other mattcrs, both Membres devront fournir, d'ici le 31 decembre,
within and without their own home territorY. des informations sur Ies effectifs et SIU d'alltres
That i.<; the resolution which is recorder! in c!OCl;- objets tant a l'interieur qu'a I'extcrieur de leurs
ment A/203. That matter is now settled; I fronticres. Cette resolution a ete consignee dans
apprehend that there will be no opposition to it le document A/203. La question est maintehere. We fully accept the view of the Assem- mint reglee; j'ai l'impression qu'eUe ne renconhh- that this information, if verified, could be of trera pas d'opposition ici. Nous nOllS raIlions
v::llue in the important studies of disarmament entierement a I'opinion de l'Assemblee seIon
ann ~ecl1rity on which we are now engaged.
laquelle ces informations, si elles sont verifiees
~ontribueront grandement aux important~
etudes que nous venons d'aborder en matiere de
desarmement et de securite.

8 decembre 1946

1063

Cinqucmte-deuxieme seance pl~n'~re

The question now is-and this is the question
11 s'agit maintenant de savoir-et ce probleme
which you will find posed in document Aj203 j est pose dans le document Aj203j Add. I-si les
Add. l-""hether the information submitted renseignements, une fois fournis, doivent ctre
. llould, after its submissidn, be subjected to some soumis sur plaee a un systeme simple de verifica..mple system of examination, of verification and tion, eontrole et ajustement.
.cconciliation, on the SpOT.
ElJt who ever heard of a requirement that acPeut-on coneevoir, en effet, que 1'on fournisse
counts should be ~ubmitted and compared with des comptes rendus et qu'on les compare avec
other a(,(,OIlOts without a provision that they d' autres sans en prevoir la verification? C' est
would also be audited? That i~ what we are pourquoi nous demandons que les statistiques
a.r.king for here, that these statistics which we que nous fournirons au cours des prochaines
~hall snbmit in the next few weeks should be sub- semaines soient soumises a verification. Oui
jeet to an audit. Can anybody doubt now that done pourrait en nier la necessitc?
.that ought to be dune?
Two important developments' have occurred
Depuis la derniere discussion, deux evcnesince this matter was disclIssed.
ments importants se sont produits:
Firstly-and I direct particular attention to
En premier lieu-et ce point revet a mes
this because what we do now in regard to this yeux une grande importance car eela peut
matter may be a test of our good faith in regard constitner une epreuve de notre bonne foi en
to the ·widcr question-the principle of intenla~ ce qui coneeme un sujet plus vaste-chacun
tional control in inspection and verification, aeeepte maintenant le principe du controle inwhich until recently had been rejected in certain ternational, sous fonne d'inspection et de veriquarters, has now been fully accepted by fication, allquel certains s'etaient opposes
everybody. It no longer causes any dispute be- jusqu'a ces dcrniers temps. 11 n'y a plus entre
tween us. Those who felt difficulty in supporting nOlls a ce snjet matiere a discussion. Ceux qui
this proposal when it came before the First Com- eprouvaient des scrupules a appuyer cette promittee, because there was at that time some position lorsqu'elle s'est posee pour la prel11i~rc
doubt as to how far this general acceptance of fois a la Premiere Commission, car on avait
international control by international agencies alars des doutes au sujet d'une approbation
had gone, may now vote in favour of this generalisee du principe du eontrole internaamendment without any fear of embarrassing tional par les institutions internationales, ceuxothers or of prejudicing the general principle, la peuvent maintenant voter en faveur de 'cet
because the principle of international control amendement sans craindre d'embarrasser les
autres ni de porter prejudice au principe geneby international agencies is accepted.
ral, parce que le principc du contrOle international par les institutions internationales est
dcsormais acceptc.
The second difference is that there is now no
En second lieu, nous n'avons plus a craindre
longer any reason for fear that the process of que cette verification entrame un retard quelverification could cause delay in the submission conqtIe dans la communication des renseigneof the information. That was a fear which, very ments. Cette crainte avait, et cela est tout
naturally, caused a number of p~ople to refrain naturel, empcche ccrtaines personnes d'appuyer
in the first instance from supporting the pro- d'emblee la proposition. Nous n'avons jamais
posal. We never had it in mind to cause delay, eu l'intention de provoquer un retard et nous
and we have amended our proposal to put that avons amende notre proposition pour dissiper
beyond all question of doubt. The information, toute espece de doute a ce sujct. Les renseignethe figures, the statistics, the particulars-all ments, les chiffres, les statistiques, les precisions,
tous ces elements doivent ctre fournis avant le
the~e things have to be delivered before the
thirty-first of this month. We raise no <]uestion 31 decembre. Nous n'avons aueun doute sur
as to that. We assume that everyone, whether cc point. Nous pensons que tous les Etats, qu'ils
they voted in favour of the resolution or against aient ou non vote en faveur de cette resolution,
it, will submit these figures, these statistics, these Iourniront ces chiffre'l, ees statistiques et ces preparticulars, before 31 Deceni.ber. We intend to cisions avant le 31 decembre. En ce qui nous
concerne, nous sommes resolus a le faire.
do it ourselve.<;.
La Commission de controle, c'est-a-dire la
The Supervisory Committec--that is to say,
the audit committee-the committee which is Commission de verification, Commission qui
to find out whether the figures submitted by the cloit etablir si les chiffrcs fournis par les diffedifferent countries are directly comparable with rents Etats sont directement comparables, doit
each other, is to be established afterwards, so etre constituee ulterieurement; il n'y a done pas
there is no question whatever of any delay in a prevoir de retard dans la fourniture des
the submission of the figures. So much for those chiffres. Voila ce que j'avais it dire sur ces deux
points.
two points.
Permettez-moi 1;1aintcnant d'aller au devant
Let me anticipate one other possible criticism.
d'une
autre critique ,eventuelle. Bien entendll,
We are not, of course, suggesting for a moment
nOllS
ne
suggerons nulIement un systemc minuany elaborate, complicated, or eostly system of
espionage as regards the affairs of other coun- tieux, complique ou couteux d'espionnage ~es
tries. A perfectly simple system of international affaires interieures des autres Etats. Le Comlte

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1064

audit could be 'set up quite quickly and easily, at
once, by the Military Staff Commitee of the
Security Council.

l

8 Decem ber 1946

d'etat-major du Conseil de securite pourrait
mettre sur pied tres rapidement et tres aisement
un systeme extrcmement simple de verification
internationale.
Pourquoi suggerons-nous a l'Assemblee qu'il
Why is it that we suggest to the Assembly
that it is desirable to establish an audit system est desirable de Creel' un systeme de contr61e de
of that ldnd? Why, indeed, is it necessary to ce genre? Pourquoi faut-il done Creel' un systeme
establish an, audit system in regard to any mat- de verification pour tout-en particulier pour
ter-for example, in regard to our own accounts? nos propres comptes rendus? Certes, nous ne
Not because we suspect anybody, any more than soup<;onnons personne, pas plus que l'existence
we have an audit system in regard to our pwn du systeme de verification des comptes ne signiaccounts because we suspect the Secretariat. Not fie que l'Assemblee nourrisse des suspicions a
because we suspect that any particular State will I'egard du Secretariat. Ce n'est pas que nous
not submit accurate returns. We assume that, as soup<;onnions un Etat quelconque de fournir
I have said, all States, whether they voted f6r or des chiffres inexacts. Nous pn~sumons, comme
against the resolution, will comply with it and je l'ai dit, que tous les Etats, qu'ils aient vote
comply with it in all good faith. I am particularly pour ou contre la resolution, se conformeront,
anxious, and I say this advisedly, that thlS et en toute bonne foi, a ses dispositions. Je
amendment should not be regarded as any kind desire vivement, et je le dis a dessein, que l'on
of indication of suspicion of anybody. It is not ne considCre pas cet amendement eomme une
that, but we must be realistic about this matter. indication de mefiance a l'egard de qui que ce
soit. II n'en est rien, mais il faut voir les choses
de fa<;on realiste.
These returns, you know, will always be
S'ils ne sont pas verifies, ces comptes rendus
treated with a great deal of cynicism and sus- provoqueront, VOllS le savez, bien du scepticisme
picion if they are not verified. A lot of people et bien des SQup<;ons. Beaucoup de .gens ne se
have not realized that Great Britain has demo- rendent pas encore compte que la Grande-Brebilized four-fifths of her forces and I do not tagne a demobilise les quatre cinquiemes de
doubt that, when our returns are put in, there ses forces armees. Je suis certain qu'apres publiwill be surprise at the smallness of the forces cation de .nos releves, on s'etonnera que mon
which my country maintains, We should like pays conserve si peu de force~ armees. Nous
our own figures to be verified so that hereafter voudrions qu'on verifie nos propres chiffres afm
nobody will be able to challenge them. Nobody que personne ensuite ne puisse les contester.
will be able to say, "Oh, well; they said, of Personne alors ne pourra dire: "lIs pretendent
course, that they had only so many hundreds of n'avoir que tant de centaines de milliers de
thousands of troops, so many hundreds of thou- soldats, tant de centaines de milliers d'aviateurs,
sands of airmen, but nobody believes that; the mais personne ne le eroit; rien n'a etl!: verifie,
figures were not verified, They were able to et ils ont pu mettre les chiffres qui leur plaisent."
send in any figures that they liked." We do not Nous ne voulons pas qu'il puisse en etre ainsi.
want that situation to arise. We want the figures Nous tenons a ce que les chiffres que nous pu~
that we send in, small as they may appear to be, blierons, si faibles qu'ils paraissent, soient souto be subject to verification and audit on be- mis a une verification et a un controle au nom
half of this Organization.
de 1'0rganisation.
You will remember that, under the Covenant
Vous vous souvenez que, d'apres le Pacte de la
of the League of Nations, there was a req1lire- Societe des Nations, on clevait fournir des indiment that particulars had to be sent in and cations et des releves sur les effectifs militaires,
returns made about military strength and mattcrs et autres questions analogues. Or, autant que
of that kind. As far as I can gather from je puisse en juger d'apres les enquetes que j'ai
the enquiries that I have made, the data sup- faites, les donnees fournies etaient releguees a
plied were put away in some little pigeon-hole, Geneve au fond de cartons plus ou moins voluor some big pigeon-hole, in Geneva, and nobody mineux et personne ne leur portait la moindre
took the slightest notice of them because no- attention, parce que personne ne les considerait
body thought that they were really reliable comme des chiffres auxquels on put se fieI'.
figures. We must this time be more realistic Cette fois-d, nous devons faire preuve de plus
about all these matters. As far as the United d.e realisme clans ce domaine. En ce qui conKingdom is concerned, we wish our returns, our ceme le Royaume-Uni, nous tenons a ee que
statistics, to command full confidence through- nos donnees et nos statistiques inspirent .une
out the world. We invite verification. We open confiance absolue dans le monde entier. Nous
our doors to it, and I assume that, in this matter, sollicitons le' contr61e, nous ouvrons nos portes
no other State can do less.
toutes grandes et j'estime qu'a cet legard aucun
Etat ne peut faire moins.
The second reason is that these statistics will
La seconde raison est que ces statistiques
require reconciliation with each other, if they devront s'ajuster les unes aux autres si l'on veut.
are to be of any value for the purpose for which vraiment qu'elles jouent le role qu'on leur a asthey have been asked, the purpose of comparing signe, c'est-a-dire qu'elles permettent de comthe armed strengths of different countries the pareI' les forces armees des differents pays, de
purpose of deciding what steps should be taken decider des mesures a prendre conformement. a

B decembre 194b

1065

under Article 43 of the Charter in order that
we may set up that system of collective security
about which we have spoken and in order that
we may get on with the process of disarmament.
Sizes of divisions, the strength of army corps,
the nature of reserve forces ----:- particularly the
nature of ref,erve forces - all these are matters
which differ widely in different countries. What
is a para-military organization? An organization
may be so regarded in one country Rnd included
in the statistics, but not so regarded in another.
I am not going to weary you by enumerating the
different categories of matters in which differences may arise in this way.
. The duty of the auditing committee, if I may
call it that, would be to put the figures on a
comparable basis, to reconcile them so that when
one looks at the world picture, at the figures
submitted by all the different countries, one can
see the whole thing in its proper perspective and
know that onc is comparing like with like.·
I do hope that we may be unanimous about
this matter. I can see no good reason why we
should not. We have startcd on the detailed
examination of disarmament proposals, and we
, have started on them with high hopes of success.
Already, I believe, our discussions about them
are helping to promote greater confidence
among the countries of the world. The world is
trying to believe that at last we are all growing
a little closer together, and I hope and believe
that we are. But in this great endeavour on
which we have embarked, this proposal is a
most significant step forward, if we mean
business.
Its adoption by this Assembly now, and its
unanimous adoption by all the great Powers,
will show the world that we do mean business;
and in two ways. It will show the world-and I
stress this point-that when we say, as we all do
say, that we agree that a full measure of control
and inspection is necessary in connexion with
disarmament, we are not simply making vague
and general promises and professions which wc
mayor may not implement in the future, but
we are saying that which we mean and which we
are prepared to do now. If we are not prepared
to agree to a simple process of verification now in
regard to this comparatively unimportant mat·
ter, what confidence would remain in the world
when the time comes when we shall be ready to
put into operation the far more rigid and far
more elaborate system of controland supervision
which would, for instance, have to be established
as part and parcel of the prohibition of atomic
warfare. This is, perhaps, a test of our sincerity
in these matters.

The actual operation of the inspection system,
simple as it will be, will give us some useful,
practical lessons on which we can act in drawing
up the more elaborate plans which will be necessary for the general disarmament scheme and

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

l' Article 43 de la Charte, en vue de l11.cttre sur
pied le systeme de sccurite collective dont nous
avons parle et de pouvoir nous faire progresser
en matiere de desarmement.
L'importance d'une division, l'effectif d'un
corps d'armee, la nature des reserves-particuliere:r.nent ce dernier point-tout cela varic
considerablemcnt suivant les pays. Qu'est-ce
qu'une organisation paramilitaire? Dne organisation de ce genre pcut entrer dans les statistiques de certains pays, mais non des autres.
Je ne veux pas vous ennuyer en enumerant les
diffcrentes categories de questions qui peuvent
donner lieu a des interpretations clifferentes.
Le Comite de verification, si je peux l'appeler
ainsi, devra etablir les chiffres sur des bases comparables, les ajuster de fagon telle que si l'on se
reporte au tableau des effectifs mondiaux, aux
chiffres fournis par les c\iffcrents· pays, on puisse
voir toute la question sous son vrai jour et savoir
que l'on compare des choses comparables.
]'espere fennement que nous arriverons a
l'unanimite sur ce point. Je ne vois aucune
raison qu'il en soit autrement. Nous avons commence Et examiner en detail les propositions de
desarmement et ce debut nous donne de grands
espoirs de reussite. Je peuse que des maintenant
nos discussions contribuent a creer une atmosphere de confiance entre les differents pays. Le
monde veut croire que nous pal"venons enfin a
nous rapprocher un peu les uns des autres i
j'espere et je crois en dIet que c'est le cas. Mais,
pour la realisation de la grande tache que nous
avons entreprise, la proposition actuelle constitue
un grand pas en avant, si nos intentions sont
serieuses.
Si l'Assemblee accepte maintenant cette proposition et si toutes les grandes Puissances l'adoptent a I'unanimitc, nous aurons fait voir au
l110nde que vraiment nos intentions sont serieuses, et cela de deux fa9ons. Nous aurons
fait voir au monde-et je tiens a souligner ce
point-que, si nous reconnaissons, comme nous
le faisons tous, le necessite de prendre des
mesures completes de controle et d'inspection a
propos de desarmement, nous ne faisons pas
simplement des promesses et des declarations
vagues et generales auxquelles nous pourrons
nous tenir ou ne pas nous tenir a l'avenir. Non,
nous ferons voir que nos paroles correspondent
bien it nos intentions et aux actes que nous
sommes prets a entreprendre. Si nous ne sommes pas prets des maintenant a decider d'un
moyen simple de verification dans cc domaine
relativement reduit, queUe confiance pourrait
avoir le monde le jour OU nous devrions mettre
sur pied un systeme de controle beaucoup plus
rigide et bcaucoup plus complexe comme celui
qu'il faudra par exemple ereer en tant que partie
essentielle de l'interdiction de la guerre atomique.
Le cas actuel est peut-etre destine a mettre a
l'epreuve notre sincerite.
Le fonctionnement effectif de ce systeme de
controle, si simple qu'il puisse etre, nous fournira
quelques le~ons pratiques et utiles Sur la fa~on
dont nous pourrons agir pour elaborer les plans
plus complexes qui seront indispensahlcs pour

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1066

8 December 1946

which the Security Council will shortly have to
consider. Verification, or audit, as I prefer to
call it, will make these figures mean something
in the eyes of the world; the acceptance of the
proposal will show to the whole world that we
are sincere when we say we fully accept, each
of us, the system of control and verification; and
the" adoption of that system will help us in
establishing the more elaborate proposals in
connexion with general disarmament. For these
reasons, I ask for unanimous support on this
matter.

un projet de desannement general et que le
Conscil de sccurite devra bicntot examiner. Le
controle ou la verification--je prefere ce demier
rnot-donrieront aces chiffres une veritable
signification aux YClIx elu l11onde; de plus,
l'adoption de cette proposition fera voir all
monde que nous sommes sinceres qnanel nous
elisons que tous nous acceptolls entihement le
systeme dc controle\ et de Yerification et enfin
I'adoption de ce systcme nous aidcra a etablir
le systeme plus minutieux de de,~armement general. Pour ces raisons, je demande que l'Assemblee se prononce unanimement en faveur de
l'amendcment cn question.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Molotov, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT:
Je donne la parole a
M. Molotov, representant de I'Union des
RepubIiques sodaIistes sovietiques.

Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): We are
considering now a question which was raised on
the initiative of the Government of the Soviet
Union-the question of the presence of troops
of the United Nations on the territories of other
United Nations and in non-enemy States.

M. MOLOTOV (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Nous etudions en ce moment une question quia ctc
posee sur l'initiative du Gouv(;rnement sovietique, relativement au stationnement de troupes
de certains Membres des Nations Unies sur le
territoire d'autres Membres des Nations Unies
et d'Etats non ennemis.
We proposed that all States which are repreNous avions propose que tous les Etats represented on the General Assembly should submit sentes a l'AssembIee generale fournissent des ininformation regarding their troops stationed on formations Sur les troupes qu'ils maintiennent a
foreign territories belonging to other Members l'etranger, sur des territoires appartenant a d' auof the United Nations. We proposed also that tres Membres des Nations Unies. Nous avions
information be submitted regarding military egalement propose que des infonnations fussent
bases, including naval and aircraft bases, which fournies sur les bases rnilitaires, y compris les
were created, by one or another of the United bases navales et aeriennes, qui ont ete creees par
Nations, beyond the confines of their own coun- td ou tel Mcmbre des Nations Unies en dehors
tries. Thus, we raised the question that all de son territoire. CeIa revenait a demander a
Member States should give an account to the tous les Etats Membres de soumettre a I'OrganiUnited Nations regarding, their armed forces sation des Nations Unics un etat de leurs forces
stationed for some reason or other beyond the armees stationnees, pour telle ou telle raison,
confines of their countries, despite the fact that hors de leurs frontieres, encore que la guerre
the war is long since ended.
soit tenninee depuis longtemps.
The submission of this information is of
La communication des renseignements de
great importance to the Security Council and cette nature a une grande importance pour le
its Military Staff Committee at the moment Conseil de securite et pour son Comite d'etatwhen they are working on the plan for organiz- major au moment mcme Oll ils elaborent un
ing the armed forces which must be placed at plan de l'brgamsation des forces armees qui
the disposal of the Security Council for the pur- doivcnt ctre mises a la disposition du Conseil de
pose of maintaining universal peace.
sccuritc en vue du maintien de la paix generale.
The submission of this information concerns
La presentation de ces informations concerne
above all such great Powers as the United States en premier lieu les grandes Puissances, telles que
of America, Great Britain, and the Soviet les Etats-Unis d'Amerique, la Grande-Bretagne
Union, which during the war were compelled to et l'Union sovietique qui, au cours de la guerre
send their troops beyond the confines of their ont etc forcees d'envoyer leurs troupes en deho~
countries to fight our common foe. According de leurs frontieres pour lutter contre notre
to the proposal of the Soviet Government, all ennemi commun. ScIon la proposition du
countries-and above all-the great Powers, Gouvernement sovietique, tous les Etats, et
ought to give an account of the armed forces avant tout les grandes Puissances devraient
and military bases which they still maintain in faire un rapport Sur celles de leurs f~rces annees
the ,territories of other Members of the United et de leurs bases militaires qui se trouvent encore
Nations. The necessity to submit such infonna- sur le territoire d'autres Membres des Nations
tion would naturally heIp to put an end as soon Unies. L'obligation de fournir ces informations
a~ possibl~ to this abnormal situation.
contribuerait, cela va de soi, a mettre fin au
plus vite a cette situation anormale.
Indeed, since the war ended long ago, how
Puisque la guerre est ~er~~nee depuis longcan one justify the presence of forces on a temps, comment p~ut-on JustifIer la presence de
foreign. tenitory, except for a few cases which
trou~es sur un terntoire etranger, si ce n'est dans
are well known and understandable to all of certal11S cas que nous conn?;-~"ns et que nous

8 decembre 1946

1067

us? The presence of foreign troops in the territory of one or another of the United Nations
can, as we know, be utilized by another State
for the purpose of exercising inadmissible pressure on its internal affairs. It can be a means
not only of exercising pressure on the domestic
affairs of a country in question, but of influencing the relations of this country with neighbouring States. It is quite obvious that such a
situation is inadmisssible.
As was to be expected, the proposal of the
Soviet Government met with great sympathy, especially on the part of small countries.
It is those countries which frequently feel very
acutely a pressure from outside, especially when
it is reinforced by the presence of armed forces
on the territories of these small States.
As we all know, certain small States have not,
up to now, been able to get rid of foreign
troops which invaded their territories as far back
as the era of imperialistic conquests of the nineteenth century, and which have not been willing, up to now, to go home. In other cases,
foreign troops appeared in the territories of
other States after the first world war and, up
to now they have been anxious to remain, by
hook or by crook, on these foreign territories.
Lastly, after the second world war, we also
observed similar events. The troops of certain
Powers found themselves in the territory of
States Members of the United Nations, and
they are unwilling to leave it.
We cannot pa"s over thC'.se latter ca~es, all
the more so because all this is being done hefore
our very eyes, contrary to the no~inal relations
which ought to exist between the United Nations,
and in contravention of elementary rules which
all our Governments should observe.
In making its proposal, the Soviet Government stated that it was ready to submit full
information regarding Soviet troops which are
still present in the territories of other Members
of the United Nations. The Soviet Union has
nothing to hide from anybody as regards its
situation in this respect. It would seem that
none of us should be afraid of submitting information regarding troops in the territories of
other Members of the United Nations. This
would, in many respects, be of help to the work
of the Military Staff Committee. It is to be assUlned that it would also help to persuade the
troops of certain Statefl not to prolong their stay
in foreign territories, since the war is at an end
and the circumstances which gave rise to the
necessity for the presence of Allied troops in
these territories no longer exists.
However, not all States adopted an impartial
and calm attitude toward the proposal of the
Government of the Soviet Union. The discussion of this question showed that such a demand
was not to the liking of representatives of certain States. It appears that they would like,
somehow, to dispense with the submission of
such information. It is only in this way that

Cinquante~deuxieme seance plenl~re

comprenons tous. La presence de troupes
etrangeres sur le territoire d'un Etat Membre
des Nations Unies peut, on le sait, etre utilisee
par un autre Etat pour exercer une pression
inadmissible sur les affaires interieures du
premier. Non seulement dIe peut constituer un
moyen de pression sur les affaires interieures
d'un pays, mais dIe peut permettre d'exercer
une influence sur les rapports de Ce pays avec
ses voisins. Une telle situation est evidemment
inadmissible.
Ainsi qu'on pouvait s'y attendre, la proposition du Gouvernement sovietique a rencontre une
grande sympathie, surtout pam1i les petits pays.
Ce sont justement ces pays qui, souvent, se
montrent tres sensibles a une pression du dehors,
surtout lorsque cette pression est renforcee par la
presence de forces arm6es sur leur territoire.
On sait que certains petits pays n'ont pas
reussi jusqu'ici a se d6barrasser de la presence
des troupes etrangeres qui ont envahi lenr terri~
toire lors des conquetes imperialistes duo XIXe
siec1e et qui jusqu'a present n'ont pas voulu
rentrer chez eHes. Dans d'autres cas, les troupes
etrangeres se sont installees sur le territoire de
certains Etats, apres la premiere guerre mondiale, et e1Ies aspirent encore aujourd'hui a
rester en territoire etranger en invoquant toutes
les raisons et pretextes. Enfin, des evenements
analogues se sont produits apres la seconde
guerre mondiale. Les troupes de certaines
Puissances sont venues sur les territoires d'Etats
faL'lant partie des Nations Unies et elles y
restent.
Nous. pouvons d'autant moins nous desinteresser de ces derniers cas que tout ceci se fait
sous nos yeux contrairement aux relations normales qui doivent regner entre les Nations Unies
et en violation des regles elementaires, que tous
nos Gouvernements doivent respecter.
En soumettant sa proposition, le Gouvernement sovietique a declare qui'il etait pret a
foumir des renseignements complets sur les
troupes qu'il maintient encore sur le territoire
d'autres Membres des Nations Unies. L'Union
sovietique n'a rien a cacheI' ~ qui que ce soit
en ce qui concerne sa situation it cet egard.
Aucun d'entre nous, semble-toil, ne devrait avoir '
peur de fournir des renseignements sur les
troupes qu'il mmntient sur les territoires c1'autres Membres des Natioml Unies. Ces renseignement!? senTiraient grandement mix travaux du
Comite d'etat-major. Ce1a servirait egaIement,
peut-on croire, a ce que les troupe'> de certains
Etats ne prolongent pas leur sejour sur le terri·
toire d'autres Etats, rlcs lors que la guerre est
terminee et qu'ont disparu les circonstances qui
necessitaient la presence dC's troupes alliees sur
ces territoires.
Cependant, tous les Etats n'ont pas adopte
une attitude calme et objective a l'egard de la
proposition du Gouvernement de l'Union sovietique. La discussion de cette question CL montre
que la demande sovietique etai1 desagreable aux
representants de certains Etats. I1 apparatt que
ces Etats voudraient se dispenser, d'llne maniere
ou d'une autre, de communiquer ces renseigne-

Fifty-second Plenary Meeting

1068

8 December 1946

one can explain the fact that the simple ques- ments. On ne saurait expliquer autrement les
tion raised by the Soviet Government led to so raisons pour lesquelles la question si simple,
many complications in the course of its dis- posee par le Gouvemement sovietique a provo~
que tant de complications 10rs de son examen.
cussion.
.
Vous savez que le Gouvernement des EtatsAs you know, the Government of the United
Unis
a soumis deux propositions pour completeI'
States submitted two proposals to complete the
la
proposition
sovietique.
Soviet proposal.
La premiere de ces propositions consistait a
The first proposal was that information be
required as regards the troops stationed not demander que ces renseignement~ soient fournis
only on the territories of the Members of the non seulement en ce qui concerne les troupes
United Nations, but also on the territories of the stationnees sur le territoire des Membres des
former enemy States. The Soviet delegation saw Nations Unies, mais aussi en ce qui coneerne
no reason for the presentation of this demand. celles qui se trouvent sur le territoire des Eta~s
The fact is that the Allied troops which occupy ex-ennemis. La delegation sovietique ne voyalt
the territories of the former enemy countries are pas pour queUe raison une telle demande devait
stationed therein in strict conformity with the etre formulee. En effet, les troupes alliees qui
Armistice terms which were made public and are occupent le territoire des Etats ex-ennemis, s'y
known to everybody. J\10reover, their presence trouvent en vertu de conditions d'armistice qui
there is limited to the date of the conclusion ont ete publiees et qui sont connues de tous. De
of peace treaties, and the conclusion of these plus, leur sejour n'est prevu que jusqu'a la contreaties, in the case of most countries, is guaran- clusions des traites de paix, laquelle est assuree,
pour la plupart de ces pays, dans un avenir tres
teed in the very near future.
pro~he.

Nevertheless, the Soviet delegation did not
object to this United States demand. We were
anxious to remove any obstacles to the settlement of the question regarding the submission
of information on troops stationed on foreign
territories.
Further, the United States Government,
backed by the Un~ted Kingdom, submitted a
proposal concerning the submission of information on troops stationed at home. To this
question is devoted paragraph 4 of the draft
resolution which we are now discussing.
The Soviet delegation tried to persuade the
United States and United Kingdom representatives that this proposal was inappropriate in the
present solution. The Soviet delegation pointed
out that this question would be settled in connexion with the proposal for a general reduction
of armaments, which is being discussed now.
Such an addition, in the same resolution, would
only serve to complicate the question, the question of troops stationed on foreign territories.
The Soviet delegation proposed that the two
different questions should not be confused~ne,
the question of the troops abroad, and secondly,
the question of troops at home. However, our
view was not accepted.
The General Assembly is presented with a
resolution, paragraph 4 of which refers to the
fact that the Members of the United Nations
should submit information as to "the total number of their uniformed personnel on the active
list, wherever stationed, at home as well as
abroad, including military type organizations".
The Soviet delegation considers this paragraph unacceptable for the following reasons.
The proposal to submit information regarding
troops at home, ~s well as regarding troops
abroad, will only serve to divert attention from
the question which was put before the General
Assembly. Are we interested in diverting attention from the question of troops stationed on
foreign territories? Why is it necessary to divert

Neamnoins, la delegation sovietique ne s'est
pas opposee a cette demande des Etats-Unis;
nous tenions avant tout a ecarter les obstacles
qui s'opposaient a la solution de la question,
relative aux renseignements a fournir sur les
troupes stationnees en territoire etranger.
D'autre part, le Gouvernement des EtatsUnis, avec l'appui Royaume-Uni, a propose que
des renseignements sQient fournis en ce qui concerne des troupes maintenues a l'interieur des
Etats. Le point 4 du projet de resolution que
nous examinons etait precisement consacre a
cette question.
La delegation sovietique a tente de convaincre
les representants americain et britannique que
cette proposition n'etait pas a sa place dans la
presente resolution. Nous avons indique que
cette question serait resolue en meme temps que
la proposition que nous discutons actuellement
au sujet de la reduction generale des armements.
Inserer ce point dans la presente resolution ne
fait que compliquer la question laquelle porte
en fait sur les troupes st(ltionnees en territoire
etranger. La delegation sovietique a propose de
ne pas confondre deux questions differentes, celle
des troupes maintenues a l'etranger et celle des
troupes stationnees sur le territoire national.
Mais notre point de vue n'a pas ete adopte.
L'Assemblee generale est saisie d'une resolution dont le point 4 propose que les Membres
des Nations Unies fournissent des renseignements
sur "l'effectif total du personnel militaire en
service actif, en quelque endroit qu'il soit stationne, que ce soit sur le territoire national ou
a l'etranger, y compris les organisations de type
militaire".
La delegation sovietique estime que ce point
est inacceptable pour les raisons que je vais
exposer. La proposition de fournir des renseignements tant sur les troupes stationnees sur
le territoire national que sur celles maintenues
a l'etranger, ne fait que detourner l'attention de
la question qui avait ete soumise a l'Assemblee
generale. A-t-on interet a detourner notre attention des troupes stationnees en territoire etran-

8 decembre 1946

1069

attention from this important question? Why
complicate this question by such additional proposals as will hindet our examination of the
situation in respect of troops in foreign territories? If we are anxious to know the truth
regarding the situation in respect of the troops
of Members of the United Nations in foreign
territories, we should not impede the submission
of such information, we should not render more
difficult the clarification of this question by diverting attention to other no less complicated
::J.uestions.
For this reason, the Soviet delegation proposes
that paragraph 4 of the resolution be deleted.
Then the resolution will only contain the request
to present information regarding troops stationed OIl foreign territories. It will be a great
achievement on the part of the United Nations
if it succeeds in obtaining this information without further procrastination.
Paragraph 4 of the resolution is unacceptable
also for other reasons. This paragraph refers
only to the submission of information regarding
"uniformed personnel," but it says nothing
about the submission of information regarding
armaments. However, we know very well that
war is not waged with' bare hands. Consequently, in order to obtain a correct idea of the
armed forces, it is necessary to request information regarding not only the uniformed personnel,
but also armaments, including, naturally, all
types of weapons.
The Soviet delegation objected to paragraph
4, but when this paragraph was nevertheless
accepted we suggested that it should refer not
only to uniformed personnel, but also to armaments. However, this proposal was declined on
the insistence of the British representative, Sir
Hartley Shawcross, and the United States representative, Senator Connally.
Paragraph 4 therefore, is still drafted in such
a way as to refer only to information regarding
uniformed personnel and says nothing about information regarding armaments. Thus, if we
adopt this paragraph, the information obtain~d
under this decision will present a distorted pICture of armed forces, since this information will
contain no mention of armaments, of atomic
bombs, of rocket projectiles, et cetera. Silence
will be maintained about all this. If such a decision is accepted, many may interpret it to mean
that for some reason or other it was decided to
evade the submission of information regarding
the actual state of affairs in respect to armed
forces. We may be asked why we hide this information on armaments, why we evade submission of this information once the question
of armed forces within each State has been
raised?

We were told nothing reasonable in explanation
of these justifiable questions. Our proposal for
the submission of information to cover not only
uniformed personnel, but also the armaments

Cinquante-deuxieme seance pleniere

~er? Pourquoi devrions-nous detourner l'attentIOn de cette importame question? Pourquoi
compliquer cette question par des amendements
qui nous generont dans l'examen de la situation
des troupes stationnees en territoire etranger? Si
nous voulons connaltre la verite sur la situation
en ce qui concerne les troupes des Membres des
Nations .U nies stationnees a etranger, n ous ne
devons pas empecher que ces renseignements
soient fournis, nous ne devons pas rendre plus
difficile l'elucidation de cette question en detournant l'attention sur d'autres questions non moins .
complexes.
Pour cette raison, la delegation sovietique propose de supprimer le point 4 de la resolution.
Celle-ci ne comportera alors qu'une demande de
fournir des rcnseignements sur les troupes stationnecs al'etranger. L'Organisation des Nations
Unies aura remporte un grand !;ucces si eHe
reussit a obtenlr ces renseignements sans de
nouveaux atermoiements.
Le point 4 de la resolution est inacceptable
pour d'autres raisons encore. Ce paragraphe ne
mentionne que les renseignements a fournir en
ce qui concerne "le personnel militaire", il ne
mentionne pas les renseignements concernant les
armements. Or, nous le savons bien, on ne fait
pas la guerre les mains vides. Par consequent,
pour avoir une idee exacte des forces armees, il
faut demander des renseignements portant non
seulement sur le personnel militaire mais aussi
sur les armements, en y comprenant, bien cntendu, tous les genres d'annes.
La delegation sovietique s'est prononcee
contre le point 4. Mais lorsque ce point a ·6te
neanmoins adopte, naus avons propose d'y in·
clure non seulcment le personnel militaire, mais
aussi les armements. Notre proposition a etc
ecartee a la demande du representant britannique, Sir Hartley Shawcross, et du representant
americain, le senateur Connally.
Le point 4 est donc reste dans la redaction
definitive qui parle seulement des renseignements
a fournir en ce qui concerne le personnel mili,taire et qui ne fait pas mention d'informations
portant sur les armements. De cette fa~on, si ce
point est a,dopte, les renseignements que nous
obtiendrons a la suite de cette resolution donneront une image deformee des forces armees,
puisque ces renseignements ne feront pas mention des armements, des bombes atomiques, des
projectiles a reaction, et ca::tera. Tout"ceci sera
donc passe sous silence. Si .une teUe decision est
adoptee, bien des gens pourront l'interpreter
comme signifiant qu'on a voulu, pour certaines
raisons, eviter de demander des renseignem.ents
portant sur la situation reelle des forces armees.
On pouna nous demander pourquoi nous dissimulons ces renseignements sur les armemcnts,
pourquoi naus nous derobons a la communication de ces informations, alors qu'il est fJllcstion
de forces armees stationnees sur le territoirc
national de chacun des Etats.
Ces questions sont legitimes, mais personne id
n'y a repondu d'une fa~on logique. On n'a pas
voulu soumettre au vote de la Premiere Commission notre proposition tendant a demander

Fifty~third

Plenary Meeting

10 December 1946

1070

which this personnel possesses, was not voted upon des renseignements, non seulemcnt sur le per~
in the .First Committee. The demand of the sonnel militaire, mais aussi sur les annements
United States and British delegations not to put dont dispose ce personnel. La demande faite
that Soviet proposal to the vote received twenty- par les representants americain .e! brita??~quc
four votes; eighteen voted against this demand de ne pas sournettre cette propOSItIOn sovIetique
and ten abstained. Consequently, this demand a reuni vingt~quatre voix; dix-huit represent~n~s
was carried through by such a number of votes ont vote contre et dix se sont abstenus. Ainsl,
as did not even constitute one half of the Mem~ cette demande l'a emporte par une majorite qui
bers of the United Nations. But, as a result of ne reunit meme pas la moitie des Membres de
the rejection of the Soviet proposal, paragraph 4 l'Organisation des Nations Unics. A la suite du
remains in this one-sided form. We shall not be rejet de la proposition sovieti9-ue, le point 4 a et.e
able to get an objective picture of the armed maintenu sous ceUe forme mcomplete. JamalS
forces on the basis of this paragraph, and that nous n'obtiendrons une description objective des
is why the delegation of the Soviet Union objects forces armees si nous nous fondons sur ce point.
Voila pourquoi la delegation sovietique s'oppose
to its adoption.
a l'adoption de ce point.
Nous traitons ici d'une question politique il11~
We are discussing an important political question. All peoples filled with a desire for lasting portante. Tous les peuples qui aspirent a une
peace and the development of friendly relations paix durable et au developpement de relations
among all peace-loving countries are interested amicales entre taus les pays pacifiques sont
interesses a la bonne solution de cette question.
in a correct solution of this question.
Nous avons devantnous une resolution dont
We are presented with· a resolution which in
its greater part is acceptable to all of us. We la majeure partie est acceptable pour nous tous.
have reached agreement on the first three para- Nous sommes entihement d'accord sur les trois
graphs of the resolution. Paragraph 4 leads us premiers points de cette resolution. Le quatrieme
aside. Moreover, the submission of information point de cette resolution nous ecarte de la quesunder this paragraph would provide a distorted tion. De plus, les renseignements qui seraient
picture of the armed forces in our countries. fournis confonnement a ce point, donneraient
Therefore, paragraph 4 should be excluded from une image deformee de nos forces armees. C'est
the resolution. Only by taking this paragraph pourquoi 11 faut supprimer le quatrieme point
out, will the General Assembly avoid placing de cette resolution. C'est seulement en exc1uant
itself in an awkward situation in the eyes of ce point que l'AssembIee generale, en prenant
public opinion if it adopts the present resolu- cette resolution, evitera de se placer dans une
tion; by so doing, on the contrary, will help to situation delicate vis-a.-vis de l'opinion mondiale,
settle s11ch an important matter as that of the et contribuera a I'ceuvre si importante qui
elucidation of the state of affairs in respect of consist a preciser la situation des troupes de~
the troops of Members of the United Nations Membres des Nations Unies stationnees en terrion foreign territories.
toire etranger.
On the basis of all these considerations the
En vertu de toutes ces considerations, la deleSoviet delegation suggests that we take out para- gation sovietique propose d'exclure le point 4 de
graph 4- from the resolution. The attitude of the la resolution qui vous est soumise. La position
Soviet delegation towards the amendment of the de la delegation sovietique a l'egard de l'amenBritish representative follows from what I have dement britannique decoule de ce que je viens
said regarding paragraph 4 of the resolution.
de dire au sujet du point 4 de la resoludon.
The continuation of the discussion was adLa suite de la discussion est reportee a la
journed to the next meeting.
seance suivante.
The meeting rose at 12.55 a.m.
La seance est levee a 0 h. 55.

FIFTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING
Held on Tuesday, 10 December 1946, at 4 p.m.

CINQUANTE-TROISIEME SEANCE PLENIERE
Tenue le mardi 10 decembre 1946, a 16 heures.

CONTENTS

Pdg,

TABLE DES MATIERES

,

Pages

14-0. Presfncc of armed forces of Members of
the United Nations on non-enemy territories: report of the First Committee:
1070
resolution (continuation)
President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium).

140. Presence de forces armees des Etats

140. Presence of armed forces of Members
of the United Nations on non-enemy
territories: report of the First Committee: resolution (continuation) (documents A/203 and A/203/Add.l)

140. Presence de· forces armees des Etats
Membres des Nations Uni-es sur des
territoires non ennemis. Rapport de
la Premiere Commission (documents
A/203 et A/203/Add.1L (Suite de
la discussion.)

Th~ P~ESIDENT- (translate;I from French):
The fIrst Item on the agenda IS the continuation

Members des Nations Unies sur des ter-

ri~oires non enncmis. Rapport de la Pre-

mIere Commission. Resolution (suite) .. 1070
President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

. Le PRESIDE~T: Le premier point a l'ordre du
JOur est la SUIte de la discussion du rapport
