V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, 36
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General on the
termination of the United Nations Financing System for
Science and Technology for Development and the transfer
of its resources and responsibilities, 37
1. Decides to terminate the United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development as at
31 December 1986 and to transfer its responsibilities and
resources to an identifiable facility entitled "United Nations Fund for Science and Technology for Development", to be established as a trust fund within the United
Nations Development Programme;
2. Requests the Intergovemmental Committee on
Science and Technology for Development to provide
policy guidance and priorities for activities of the Fund
within the framework ofthe Vienna Programme of Action
on Science and Technology for Development;3 8
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, when identifying projects to be
financed from the Fund, to take into account the policy
guidance and priorities recommended by the Committee
and to report to the Committee on their application;
4. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to establish close working relationships between
the Fund and the Centre for Science and Technology for
Development on programmatic and substantive matters,
and requests the Secretary-General to inform the Committee at its ninth session about the arrangements made;
5. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to inform the Committee at its
ninth session on the arrangements made for the Fund;
6. Invites Governments and the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme to give
greater emphasis to science and technology for development;
7. Urges all Governments and the international community as a whole to provide the Fund with adequate financia! resources to enable it to carry out its functions.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/184.

Report of the Secretary-General in implementation of General Assembly resolution 40/173

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/173 of 17 December 1985, as
adopted, in which it requested the Secretary-General to
prepare a comprehensive analytical report on a concept of
international economic security for submission to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council,
Recognizing, in this regard, that an integrated and coordinated approach to economic development and cooperation, with a view to the creation of conditions of stability and well-being, has been a primary accomplishment

36 See Official Records of 1he Economic and Social Council, /986.
Supp/eme111 No. 9 (E/1986/29), annex l.
31 A/C.2/41/3.
38 Report ofthe United Nalions Conference on Science and Techno/ogy
for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.

141

of the United Nations since its founding and is enshrined
in Article 55 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Requests the Secretary-General, keeping in mind the already existing consensus on economic development a~d
international co-operation, in preparing his report on mternational economic security, ínter afia:
(a) To analyse approaches and contributions to economic development and international economic cooperation, and identify common elements in those approaches with emphasis on those that can further contribute to promoting international economic co-operation and
development, particularly that of developing countries;
(b) To take into account the views expressed at the
forty-first session of the General Assembly regarding possible ways and means of strengthening the dialogue on development and international economic co-operation for
the benefit of ali;
(e) To keep in mind the role and responsibilities of existing international and regional organizations, institutions and forums.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/185.

Fight against locust and grasshopper infestation
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution S-13/2 of 1 June 1986 on the
United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990, in which it
noted the importance of, ínter alia, increased food production to meet the needs of Africa, and its resolution 41/29
of 31 October 1986 on the emergency situation in Africa,
Recalling a/so the disaster in Africa resulting from the
drought of 1984 and 1985, and conscious of the ongoing
etforts to combat the adverse etfects of the resulting famine,
Noting resolution CM/Res. l 072 (XLIV) adopted by the
Council ofMinisters ofthe Organization of African Unity
at its forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa
from 21 to 26 July 1986, 3"9
Alarmed by the unrelenting destructive etfects of the
current locust and grasshopper invasion of many African
countries and the potential spread ofthe infestation within
Africa and beyond, and concerned at the economic and social consequences, including the reduction in agricultura!
production, which could continue for severa! years, the
consequent displacement of atfected populations, and, in
particular, the etfects on longer-term economic and social
development,
Recognizing the potential problem created by billions of
insects capable of devouring as much as 80,000 metric
tons of cereal crops per swarm daily, of migrating great
distances from points of origin and thus of denying
agricultura! production to millions of producers and ultimately consumers,
Noting that the resources of Africa are insufficient to
control the locust infestation, which will need to be countered by concerted etforts at the national, regional and international levels,
Recognizing the etforts ofthe African countries, national
and international organizations and the international donor community in support of the control of locusts and

142

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

grasshoppers, especially the Global lnformation and
Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and its role in identifying this potential disaster,
I. Expresses its appreciation to donor countries, organizati<:ms _of t_he ~nited. Nations system ~nd ot~er competent mst1tutions m the1r efforts to contam the mfestation;
2: Urges !he Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe
U~1ted Nahons to strengthen its co-ordinating mechamsms and its technical and field operational support for
locust and grasshopper control;
3. Endorses and encourages the continued cooperation of local, regional and global organizations and
donors in the campaign to control the current threat to
agriculture caused by locusts and grasshoppers, including
the exchange and dissemination of information on pests
and insects;
4. Encourages the donor community to continue to
marshal its resources in support of the affected countries
to bring locusts and grasshoppers under control;
5. Encourages also the affected countries to continue to
ensure that adequate resources are made available to combat_ these_ recurrent crises, in particular by strengthening
the1r nat1onal plant protection services;
6. Urges ali parties concerned to establish and
strengthen early warning systems in respect of the affected
countries and to co-ordinate their efforts in this regard;
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with t~e ~irector-Gen~ral of t~e Food and Agriculture
(?rg~mza~•~m of the Um~ed Nat1ons, to take catalytic act10n m_ ra1sm~ the co~sc1ous_ness of the world community
regardmg thts potenttally d1sastrous situation;
8. Invites the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization ofthe United Nations to submit
an _up-to-date report on the locust and grasshopper infestatton to the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1987.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/186.

lnclusion of Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries

The General Assembly,
N oting Economic and Social Council decision 1986/ 15 3
of 11 July 1986, in which the Council endorsed the conclusion and rec~mmendati~n of the C:ommittee for Development Planmng regardmg the mclusion of Kiribati
Mauri~ania and Tuvalu in the list of the least develope<l
countnes,
Decides to include Kiribati, Mauritania and Tuvalu in
the list of the least developed countries.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/187.

Proclamation ofthe World Decade for Cultural
Development

The General Assembly,
Considering recommendation No. 27 40 adopted by the
World Conference on Cultural Policies convened by the
40 Sec

United Nations Educational, Scientitic ,111d Cultural Organization, World Co11jere11ce 011 Cu/1ural Policies, Mexico Ciry, 26
July-6 A ugu,r 1982. Final Reporr (CLT /MD/ 1, Pari,, Novernher 1982),
part V

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at Mexico City in 1982, in which it recommended that the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
propose to the General Assembly of the United Nations
the proclamation of a world decade for cultural development,
Considering also resolutions 11.20 of 25 November
198341 and 11.10 of 8 November 198542 adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its twenty-second
and twenty-third sessions, respectively,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/69 of 23 July 1986, in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly take a decision at its
forty-first session on the question of the proclamation of a
world decade for cultural development,
Taking into account the interest that the intemational
community, including the organizations ofthe United Nations system, have shown in the proposed decade,
Recognizing that voluntary efforts at the national leve)
by interested individuals and non-governmental and govemmental organizations are principal vehicles for advancing the objectives of the decade,
Taking note of the draft plan of action for the world
decade for cultural development, submitted by the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, 43
1. Proclaims the period 1988-1997 the World Decade
for Cultural Development, to be observed under the auspices ofthe United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Approves the four main objectives of the Decade: acknowledging the cultural dimension of development; af~n:nin~ an_d enriching cultural identities; broadening part1c1pat1on m culture; promoting international cultural cooperation;
. 3. Invites all States, intergovernmental and internatlonal non-governmental organizations, and interested individuals to take an active part in the fulfilment of the object~ves of the Decade and, for that purpose, to make
ava1lable, on a voluntary basis and taking into consideration their particular situation, priorities and means, the
necessary intellectual, human and financia! resources;
4. Encourages the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system participating in the fulfilment
of the objectives of the Decade to do so in a manner that is
in accordance with established programme priorities and
does not entail additional financia! impltcations for nonvoluntarily funded programmes;
5. Re9u_ests t_he Secret~ry-General to ensure, through
the Admm1strat1ve Comm1ttee on Co-ordination, that activities undertaken by the United Nations system in support ofthe Decade are co-ordinated in such a manner as to
avoid duplication and overlap;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to report biennially to the General Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session, on

41 Scc Unitcd Na11011, Educational, Scicntitic and Cultural Organization, Record., o} the Ge11crul Co11jere11ce, Twe111y-wcond Sessio11,
vol. 1, Re.10/a1io11s, sect. 11.
42 /bid., Twenry-rhird Ses,ion, vol. 1, Resolurio11s, scct. 111.
4 •1 E/llJKó/l..10. anne,
