United Nations

A/RES/60/194

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 52 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/488/Add.2)]

60/194. Follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Barbados 1 and the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 2 adopted by the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, and
recalling its resolution 49/122 of 19 December 1994 on the Global Conference,
Reaffirming also the Mauritius Declaration 3 and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States (“Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation”), 4 adopted by the International Meeting to Review the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States on 14 January 2005, and recalling its resolution
59/311 of 14 July 2005, in which it endorsed the outcomes of the International
Meeting,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 5
Welcoming the decision taken by the Commission on Sustainable Development
at its thirteenth session 6 to devote one day of its review sessions to the review of the
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation, focusing on that

_______________
1

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
5
See resolution 60/1.
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 9 (E/2005/29),
resolution 13/1.

05-49924

A/RES/60/194

year’s thematic cluster, as well as on any new developments in the sustainable
development efforts of small island developing States using existing modalities, and
to request the Secretary-General to submit a report to the Commission at its review
session on progress in and obstacles to sustainable development in small island
developing States, including recommendations to enhance the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for Implementation,
Recognizing that it is crucial to mobilize resources from all sources for the
effective implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 7

2.
Welcomes the renewed commitment of the international community to the
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States;2
3.
Urges Governments and all relevant international and regional organizations,
United Nations funds, programmes, specialized agencies and regional commissions,
international financial institutions and the Global Environment Facility, as well as
other intergovernmental organizations and major groups, to take timely action for
the effective implementation of and follow-up to the Mauritius Declaration3 and the
Mauritius Strategy for Implementation,4 including the further development and
operationalization of concrete projects and programmes;
4.
Calls for the full and effective implementation of the commitments,
programmes and targets adopted at the International Meeting to Review the
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States and, to this end, for the fulfilment of the provisions
for the means of implementation, as contained in the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation, and encourages small island developing States and their
development partners to continue to consult widely in order to develop further
concrete projects and programmes for the implementation of the Mauritius Strategy
for Implementation;
Encourages the implementation of partnership initiatives, within the
5.
framework of the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation, in support of the
sustainable development of small island developing States;
Notes with interest the convening by the Department of Economic and
6.
Social Affairs of the Secretariat, pursuant to resolution 59/311, of regional meetings
of small island developing States, held in Saint Kitts and Nevis, Samoa and
Seychelles, as well as the interregional meeting of small island developing States,
held in Rome in November 2005, and requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
reports of the regional and interregional meetings to the Commission on Sustainable
Development at its fourteenth session;
Notes the recent efforts to strengthen the Small Island Developing States
7.
Unit in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and urges the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the Unit is sufficiently and sustainably staffed to undertake
its broad range of mandated functions with a view to ensuring the full and effective
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation, within existing
resources, including by redeploying resources;

_______________
7

2

A/60/401.

A/RES/60/194

8.
Requests the relevant agencies of the United Nations system, within their
respective mandates, to mainstream, as appropriate, the Mauritius Strategy for
Implementation in their work programmes and to establish a focal point for matters
related to small island developing States within their respective secretariats;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
9.
Assembly at its sixty-first session on the follow-up to and implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy for Implementation;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Follow-up
to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”.

68th plenary meeting
22 December 2005

3
