VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

continue to make new provisions in order to offer a selection of projects to donor countries that may be willing to
finance a particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
14. Reaffirms that the resources of the Voluntary
Fund should be used to support catalytic and innovative
activities in order to implement further the objectives of
the World Programme of Action within the framework of
the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, with priority given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of
the least developed countries;
15. Invites Governments and non-governmental organizations to continue their contributions to the Voluntary
Fund, and calls upon Governments and nongovernmental organizations that have not yet done so to
consider contributing to the Fund so as to enable it to respond effectively to the growing demand for assistance;
16. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Sweden for having acted as host to the Global Meeting of
Experts to Review the Implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons at the
Mid-Point of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, held at Stockholm from 17 to 22 August 1987, and to
the experts who participated;
17. Requests Member States and all relevant organs
and bodies of the United Nations system to submit to the
Secretary-General their comments on the recommendations outlined in paragraphs 10 to 39 of the report of the
Global Meeting of Experts, 36 as well as on the report of
the Secretary-General on the evaluation of the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning
Disabled Persons during the first half of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons35 and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report thereon to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1988;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/59.

Crime prevention and criminal justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice
under Economic and Social Council resolution
155 (C) (VII) of 13 August 1948 and General Assembly
res?lution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950, the importance of
which was reaffirmed by the Assembly in its resolution
41/107 of 4 December 1986,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations in
the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, inter alia, the reduction of criminality, encouragement of
more efficient and effective administration of justice, observance of all human rights and promotion of the highest
standards of fairness, humanity and professional conduct,

36 See CSDHA/DDP/GME/7 of I September 1987.

187

Recognizing the crucial functions of the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control in developing practical
crime prevention and criminal justice policies and strategies as a standing expert body of the Economic and Social
Council and as a preparatory body for the quinquennial
United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders,
Noting with concern that the significant increase in the
work-load of the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Branch of the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, particularly in relation to the follow-up to the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, has not been matched by corresponding adjustments in the level of resources needed to discharge this
work-load and to implement properly the additional work
mandated by the policy-making bodies,
Acknowledging that the serious constraints on the human and financial resources available to the Secretariat for
work in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice
may jeopardize the progress achieved to date, as well as future activities,
Reaffirming that the quinquennial congresses on the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders are of
fundamental importance to progress in the field of crime
prevention and criminal justice and provide unique opportunities for focusing on specific priority problems, as well
as for assessing general trends and sharing perspectives,
establishing norms and standards and evaluating their implementation, monitoring the results of the United Nations programme of work as a whole and setting priorities
for action in the following quinquennium,
Recognizing the pivotal role of the United Nations,
through its programme activities and congresses on the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, in promoting the exchange of expertise and experience and
closer international co-operation in this field,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on
crime prevention and criminal justice;37
2. Urges Member States and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to translate into action, as appropriate,
the respective recommendations, policies and conclusions
stemming from the Milan Plan of Action and other relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted unanimously by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders38 and
to accord priority attention to the forms of crime identified
in the Milan Plan of Action through strengthening international co-operation;
3. Welcomes the results of the comprehensive review
of the functioning and programme of work of the United
Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice conducted by the Secretary-GeneraJ39 and considered
by the Economic and Social Council and the Committee
on Crime Prevention and Control;
4. Approves the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1986/11 of21 May
1986 and 1987/53 of28 May 1987, and requests the Secretary-General and the relevant bodies to take appropriate
measures for their full and prompt implementation, pay-

37 A/42/453.
38 See Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, Milan, 26 August-6 September 1985: report
prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IV. I).
39 E/1987/43.

188

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

ing particular attention to the elements identified in paragraph 3 of Council resolution 1987/53;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures to ensure that the United Nations programme of
work in crime prevention and criminal justice is supported
by adequate resources through, inter alia, appropriate
redeployment of staff and funds, including from relevant
departments at Headquarters, and to ensure that the specialized and technical nature of the programme and the
high priority attached by Member States to crime prevention and criminal justice are fully reflected in the future
management and staffing of the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Branch;
6. Endorses the recommendations related to the preparation of the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, to be
held in 1990, contained in Economic and Social Council
resolution 1987 / 49 of 28 May 1987, and requests the Secretary-General to take immediate steps to ensure the successful and cost-effective preparation of the Eighth Congress, including the early appointment of its SecretaryGeneral, the organization and appropriate scheduling of
the interregional and regional preparatory meetings and
the timely finalization and circulation of the required
documentation through the provision of the necessary resources, including temporary assistance;
7. Calls upon Member States to participate actively in
preparations for the Eighth Congress, particularly
through involvement of the United Nations national correspondents in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice, the submission of relevant position papers on the
different agenda items, the establishment, whenever appropriate, of national focal points and the encouragement
of contributions from non-governmental organizations,
academics and other experts;
8. Invites the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control at its tenth session to accord priority to preparations for the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and to
ensure adequate follow-up to the review of the functioning
and programme of work of the United Nations in the field
of crime prevention and criminal justice undertaken by the
Economic and Social Council;
9. Encourages Member States and relevant organizations, in particular the regional commissions, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Department of
Technical Co-operation for Development of the Secretariat, to support and complement the activities of the
United Nations regional and interregional institutes for
crime prevention and control, particularly the newly established African Regional Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, as well as the
United Nations Latin American Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, by providing technical and financial assistance;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to develop appropriate strategies to revitalize the United Nations Trust
Fund for Social Defence and appeals for increased contributions from Member States, private foundations and others able to assist;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly, at its forty-third session, on the implementation of the present resolution, taking also into account the relevant recommendations of the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control at its tenth session, providing updated information on preparations for the Eighth
Congress;

12. Decides to consider this subject again, under the
item entitled "Crime prevention and criminal justice", at
its forty-third session.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/60.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind, including distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of 3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983, 39/130 of 14 December 1984, 40/39 of 29 November 1985 and 41/108 of 4
December 1986,
A ware of the important contribution that the implemen tation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women 40 can make to eliminating all
forms of discrimination against women and to achieving
legal and de facto equality between women and men,
Noting the emphasis placed by the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace on ratification of and accession to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its sixth
session, 41 notably general recommendations 2, 3 and 4 on
ways and means of implementing article 21 of the Convention,42
1. Welcomes the ratification of or accession to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women by an increasing number of Member
States;
2. Urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the Convention;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention; 43
40 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise rhe
Achievemenrs of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forry-.m·ond Session.
Suff'ement No. 38 (A/42/38).
Ibid., sect. IV.
4 , A/42/627.
