A/RES/73/165

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 74 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 17 December 2018
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/Add.2)]

73/165.

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other
People Working in Rural Areas
The General Assembly,
Welcoming the adoption by the Human Rights Council, in its resolution 3 9/12
of 28 September 2018, 1 of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas,
1.
Adopts the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other
People Working in Rural Areas, as contained in the annex to the present res olution;
2.
Invites Governments, agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate the
Declaration and to promote universal respect and understanding thereof;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to include the text of the Declaration in
the next edition of Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments.
55th plenary meeting
17 December 2018

Annex
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and Other
People Working in Rural Areas
The General Assembly,
Recalling the principles proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, which
recognize the inherent dignity and worth and the equal a nd inalienable rights of all
members of the human family as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world,
__________________
1

18-22260 (E)

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/73/53/Add.1), chap. II.

240119

*1822260*

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Taking into account the principles proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 2 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 3 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 4 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 4 the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 5 the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 6 the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 7 relevant conventions of the
International Labour Organization and other relevant international instruments that
have been adopted at the universal or regional level,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Right to Development, 8 and that the right to
development is an inalienable human right by virtue of which every human person
and all peoples are entitled to participate in, contribute to and enjoy economic, social,
cultural and political development, in which all human rights and fundamental
freedoms can be fully realized,
Reaffirming also the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples,9
Reaffirming further that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing and must be treated in a f air and equal
manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis, and recalling that the
promotion and protection of one category of rights should never exempt States from
the promotion and protection of the other rights,
Recognizing the special relationship and interaction between peasants and other
people working in rural areas and the land, water and nature to which they are attached
and on which they depend for their livelihood,
Recognizing also the past, present and future contributions of peasants and other
people working in rural areas in all regions of the world to development and to
conserving and improving biodiversity, which constitute the basis of food and
agricultural production throughout the world, and their contribution in ensuring th e
right to adequate food and food security, which are fundamental to attaining the
internationally agreed development goals, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 10
Concerned that peasants and other people working in rural areas suffer
disproportionately from poverty, hunger and malnutrition,
Concerned also that peasants and other people working in rural areas suffer from
the burdens caused by environmental degradation and climate change,
Concerned further about peasants ageing around the world and youth
increasingly migrating to urban areas and turning their backs on agriculture owing to
the lack of incentives and the drudgery of rural life, and recognizing the need to
improve the economic diversification of rural areas and the creation of non -farm
opportunities, especially for rural youth,
Alarmed by the increasing number of peasants and other people working in rural
areas forcibly evicted or displaced every year,
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
8
Resolution 41/128, annex.
9
Resolution 61/295, annex.
10
Resolution 70/1.
2
3

2/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Alarmed also by the high incidence of suicide of peasants in several countries,
Stressing that peasant women and other rural women play a significant role in
the economic survival of their families and in contributing to the rural and national
economy, including through their work in the non-monetized sectors of the economy,
but are often denied tenure and ownership of land, equal access to land, productive
resources, financial services, information, employment or social protection, and are
often victims of violence and discrimination in a variety of forms and manifestations,
Stressing also the importance of promoting and protecting the rights of the child
in rural areas, including through the eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition,
the promotion of quality education and health, protection from exposure to chemicals
and wastes, and the elimination of child labour, in accordance with relevant human
rights obligations,
Stressing further that several factors make it difficult for peasants and other
people working in rural areas, including small-scale fishers and fish workers,
pastoralists, foresters and other local communities, to make their voices heard, to
defend their human rights and tenure rights, and to secure the sustainable use of the
natural resources on which they depend,
Recognizing that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an
increasing challenge for rural people, and stressing the importance of improving
access to productive resources and investment in appropriate rur al development,
Convinced that peasants and other people working in rural areas should be
supported in their efforts to promote and undertake sustainable practices of
agricultural production that support and are in harmony with nature, also referred to
as Mother Earth in a number of countries and regions, including by respecting the
biological and natural ability of ecosystems to adapt and regenerate through natural
processes and cycles,
Considering the hazardous and exploitative conditions that exist in many parts
of the world under which many peasants and other people working in rural areas have
to work, often denied the opportunity to exercise their fundamental rights at work and
lacking living wages and social protection,
Concerned that individuals, groups and institutions that promote and protect the
human rights of those working on land and natural resources issues face a high risk
of being subjected to different forms of intimidation and of violations of their physical
integrity,
Noting that peasants and other people working in rural areas often face
difficulties in gaining access to courts, police officers, prosecutors and lawyers to the
extent that they are unable to seek immediate redress or protection from violence,
abuse and exploitation,
Concerned about speculation on food products, the increasing concentration and
unbalanced distribution of food systems and the uneven power relations along the
value chains, which impair the enjoyment of human rights,
Reaffirming that the right to development is an inalienable human right by virtue
of which every human person and all peoples are entitled to participate in, contribute
to and enjoy economic, social, cultural and political development, in which all human
rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully realized,
Recalling the right of peoples to exercise, subject to the relevant provisions of
both International Covenants on Human Rights, 4 full and complete sovereignty over
all their natural wealth and resources,
Recognizing that the concept of food sovereignty has been used in many States
and regions to designate the right to define their food and agriculture systems and the
18-22260

3/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

right to healthy and culturally appropriate food produced through ecologically sound
and sustainable methods that respect human rights,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the
community to which he or she belongs, is under a responsibility to strive for the
promotion and observance of the rights recognized in the present Declaration and in
national law,
Reaffirming the importance of respecting the diversity of cultures and of
promoting tolerance, dialogue and cooperation,
Recalling the extensive body of conventions and recommendations of the
International Labour Organization on labour protection and decent work,
Recalling also the Convention on Biological Diversity 11 and the Nagoya
Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity, 12
Recalling further the extensive work of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the Committee on World Food Security on the right to food,
tenure rights, access to natural resources and other rights of peasants, in particular the
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, 13 and the
Organization’s Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security, 14 the Voluntary
Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries in the Context of Food
Security and Poverty Eradication and the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the
Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National
Food Security, 15
Recalling the outcome of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development, and the Peasants’ Charter adopted thereat, in which the need for the
formulation of appropriate national strategies for agrarian reform and rural
development, and their integration with overall national development strategies, was
emphasized,
Reaffirming that the present Declaration and relevant international agreements
shall be mutually supportive with a view to enhancing the protection of human rights,
Determined to take new steps forward in the commitment of the international
community with a view to achieving substantial progress in human rights endeavours
by an increased and sustained effort of international cooperation and solidarity,
Convinced of the need for greater protection of the human rights of peasants and
other people working in rural areas, and for a coherent interpretation and application
of existing international human rights norms and standards in this matter,
Declares the following:
Article 1
1.
For the purposes of the present Declaration, a peasant is any person who engages
or who seeks to engage, alone, or in association with others or as a community, in
small-scale agricultural production for subsistence and/or for the market, and who
__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
United Nations Environment Programme, document UNEP/CBD/COP/10/27, annex,
decision X/1.
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2400, No. 43345.
14
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document CL 14 4/9 (C 2013/20),
appendix D.
15
E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
11
12

4/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

relies significantly, though not necessarily exclusively, on family or household labour
and other non-monetized ways of organizing labour, and who has a special
dependency on and attachment to the land.
2.
The present Declaration applies to any person engaged in artisanal or smallscale agriculture, crop planting, livestock raising, pastoralism, fishing, forestry,
hunting or gathering, and handicrafts related to agriculture or a related occupation in
a rural area. It also applies to dependent family member s of peasants.
3.
The present Declaration also applies to indigenous peoples and local
communities working on the land, transhumant, nomadic and semi -nomadic
communities, and the landless engaged in the above-mentioned activities.
4.
The present Declaration further applies to hired workers, including all migrant
workers regardless of their migration status, and seasonal workers, on plantations,
agricultural farms, forests and farms in aquaculture and in agro -industrial enterprises.
Article 2
1.
States shall respect, protect and fulfil the rights of peasants and other people
working in rural areas. They shall promptly take legislative, administrative and other
appropriate steps to achieve progressively the full realization of the rights set forth in
the present Declaration that cannot be immediately guaranteed.
2.
Particular attention shall be paid in the implementation of the present
Declaration to the rights and special needs of peasants and other people working in
rural areas, including older persons, women, youth, children and persons with
disabilities, taking into account the need to address multiple forms of discrimination.
3.
Without disregarding specific legislation on indigenous peoples, before
adopting and implementing legislation and policies, international agreements and
other decision-making processes that may affect the rights of peasants and other
people working in rural areas, States shall consult and cooperate in good faith with
peasants and other people working in rural areas through their own representative
institutions, engaging with and seeking the support of peasants and other people
working in rural areas who could be affected by decisions before those decisions are
made, and responding to their contributions, taking into considerat ion existing power
imbalances between different parties and ensuring active, free, effective, meaningful
and informed participation of individuals and groups in associated decision -making
processes.
4.
States shall elaborate, interpret and apply relevant international agreements and
standards to which they are a party in a manner consistent with their human rights
obligations as applicable to peasants and other people working in rural areas.
5.
States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that non-State actors that they
are in a position to regulate, such as private individuals and organizations, and
transnational corporations and other business enterprises, respect and strengthen the
rights of peasants and other people working in rural areas.
6.
States, recognizing the importance of international cooperation in support of
national efforts for the realization of the purposes and objectives of the present
Declaration, shall take appropriate and effective measures in this regard, between and
among States and, as appropriate, in partnership with relevant international and
regional organizations and civil society, in particular organizations of peasants and
other people working in rural areas, among others. Such measures could include:
(a) Ensuring that relevant international cooperation, including international
development programmes, is inclusive, accessible and pertinent to peasants and other
people working in rural areas;
18-22260

5/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

(b) Facilitating and supporting capacity-building, including through the
exchange and sharing of information, experiences, training programmes and best
practices;
(c) Facilitating cooperation in research and in access to scientific and
technical knowledge;
(d) Providing, as appropriate, technical and economic assistance, facilitating
access to and sharing of accessible technologies, and through the transfer of
technologies, particularly to developing countries, on mutually agreed terms;
(e) Improving the functioning of markets at the global level and facilitating
timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help to
limit extreme food price volatility and the attractiveness of speculation.
Article 3
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to the full
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms recognized in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and all other
international human rights instruments, free from any kind of discrimination in the
exercise of their rights based on any grounds such as origin, nationality, race, colour,
descent, sex, language, culture, marital status, property, disability, age, political or
other opinion, religion, birth or economic, social or other status.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to determine and
develop priorities and strategies to exercise their right to development.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to eliminate conditions that cause or help
to perpetuate discrimination, including multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination, against peasants and other people working in rural areas.
Article 4
1.
States shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against peasant women and other women working in rural areas and to
promote their empowerment in order to ensure, on the basis of equality be tween men
and women, that they fully and equally enjoy all human rights and fundamental
freedoms and that they are able to freely pursue, participate in and benefit from rural
economic, social, political and cultural development.
2.
States shall ensure that peasant women and other women working in rural areas
enjoy without discrimination all the human rights and fundamental freedoms set out
in the present Declaration and in other international human rights instruments,
including the rights:
(a) To participate equally and effectively
implementation of development planning at all levels;

in

the

formulation

and

(b) To have equal access to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, including adequate health-care facilities, information, counselling and
services in family planning;
(c)

To benefit directly from social security programmes;

(d) To receive all types of training and education, whether formal or
non-formal, including training and education relating to functional literacy, and to
benefit from all community and extension services in order to increase their technical
proficiency;

6/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

(e) To organize self-help groups, associations and cooperatives in order to
obtain equal access to economic opportunities through employment or self employment;
(f)

To participate in all community activities;

(g) To have equal access to financial services, agricultural credit and loans,
marketing facilities and appropriate technology;
(h) To equal access to, use of and management of land and natural resources,
and to equal or priority treatment in land and agrarian reform and in land resettlement
schemes;
(i) To decent employment, equal remuneration and social protection benefits,
and to have access to income-generating activities;
(j)

To be free from all forms of violence.

Article 5
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to have access
to and to use in a sustainable manner the natural resources present in their
communities that are required to enjoy adequate living conditions, in accordance with
article 28 of the present Declaration. They also have the right to participate in the
management of these resources.
2.
States shall take measures to ensure that any exploitation affecting the natural
resources that peasants and other people working in rural areas traditionally hold or
use is permitted based on, but not limited to:
(a)

A duly conducted social and environmental impact assessment ;

(b) Consultations in good faith, in accordance with article 2 (3) of the present
Declaration;
(c) Modalities for the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits of such
exploitation that have been established on mutually agreed terms between those
exploiting the natural resources and the peasants and other people working in rural
areas.
Article 6
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to life, physical
and mental integrity, liberty and security of person.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas shall not be subjected to
arbitrary arrest or detention, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, and shall not be held in slavery or servitude.
Article 7
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to recognition
everywhere as persons before the law.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to facilitate the freedom of movement of
peasants and other people working in rural areas.
3.
States shall, where required, take appropriate measures to cooperate with a view
to addressing transboundary tenure issues affecting peasants and other people
working in rural areas that cross international boundaries, in accordance with
article 28 of the present Declaration.

18-22260

7/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Article 8
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to freedom of
thought, belief, conscience, religion, opinion, expression and peaceful assembly.
They have the right to express their opinion, either orall y, in writing or in print, in the
form of art, or through any other media of their choice, at the local, regional, national
and international levels.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right, individually
and/or collectively, in association with others or as a community, to participate in
peaceful activities against violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
3.
The exercise of the rights provided for in the present article carries with it
special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions,
but these shall only be such as are provided for by law and are necessary:
(a)

For respect of the rights or reputations of others;

(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or
of public health or morals.
4.
States shall take all necessary measures to ensure protection by the competent
authorities of everyone, individually and in association with others, against any
violence, threat, retaliation, de jure or de facto discrimination, pressure or any other
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise and defence of the
rights described in the present Declaration.
Article 9
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to form and join
organizations, trade unions, cooperatives or any other organization or association of
their own choosing for the protection of their interests, and to bargain collectively.
Such organizations shall be independent and voluntary in character, and remain free
from all interference, coercion or repression.
2.
No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those which
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
national security or public safety, public order (ordre public), the protection of public
health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to encourage the establishment of
organizations of peasants and other people working in rural areas, including unions,
cooperatives or other organizations, particularly with a view to eliminating obstacles
to their establishment, growth and pursuit of lawful activities, including any
legislative or administrative discrimination against such organizations and their
members, and provide them with support to strengthen their position when
negotiating contractual arrangements in order to ensure that conditions and prices are
fair and stable and do not violate their rights to dignity and to a decent life.
Article 10
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to active and
free participation, directly and/or through their representative organizations, in the
preparation and implementation of policies, programmes and projects that may affect
their lives, land and livelihoods.
2.
States shall promote the participation, directly and/or through their
representative organizations, of peasants and other people working in rural areas in
decision-making processes that may affect their lives, land and livelihoods; this
includes respecting the establishment and growth of strong and independent
8/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

organizations of peasants and other people working in rural areas and promoting their
participation in the preparation and implementation of food safety, labour and
environmental standards that may affect them.
Article 11
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to seek, receive,
develop and impart information, including information about factors that may affect
the production, processing, marketing and distribution of th eir products.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to ensure that peasants and other people
working in rural areas have access to relevant, transparent, timely and adequate
information in a language and form and through means adequate to their cultur al
methods so as to promote their empowerment and to ensure their effective
participation in decision-making in matters that may affect their lives, land and
livelihoods.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to promote the access of peasants and
other people working in rural areas to a fair, impartial and appropriate system of
evaluation and certification of the quality of their products at the local, national and
international levels, and to promote their participation in its formulation.
Article 12
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to effective and
non-discriminatory access to justice, including access to fair procedures for the
resolution of disputes and to effective remedies for all infringements of their huma n
rights. Such decisions shall give due consideration to their customs, traditions, rules
and legal systems in conformity with relevant obligations under international human
rights law.
2.
States shall provide for non-discriminatory access, through impartial and
competent judicial and administrative bodies, to timely, affordable and effective
means of resolving disputes in the language of the persons concerned, and shall
provide effective and prompt remedies, which may include a right of appeal,
restitution, indemnity, compensation and reparation.
3.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to legal
assistance. States shall consider additional measures, including legal aid, to support
peasants and other people working in rural areas who would otherwise not have access
to administrative and judicial services.
4.
States shall consider measures to strengthen relevant national institutions for the
promotion and protection of all human rights, including the rights described in the
present Declaration.
5.
States shall provide peasants and other people working in rural areas with
effective mechanisms for the prevention of and redress for any action that has the aim
or effect of violating their human rights, arbitrarily dispossessing them of their land
and natural resources or of depriving them of their means of subsistence and integrity,
and for any form of forced sedentarization or population displacement.
Article 13
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to work, which
includes the right to choose freely the way they earn their living.
2.
Children of peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to
be protected from any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the

18-22260

9/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

child’s education, or to be harmful to a child’s health or physical, mental, spiritual,
moral or social development.
3.
States shall create an enabling environment with opportunities for work for
peasants and other people working in rural areas and their families that provide
remuneration allowing for an adequate standard of living.
4.
In States facing high levels of rural poverty and in the absence of employment
opportunities in other sectors, States shall take appropriate measures to establish and
promote sustainable food systems that are sufficiently labour-intensive to contribute
to the creation of decent employment.
5.
States, taking into account the specific characteristics of peasant agricult ure and
small-scale fisheries, shall monitor compliance with labour legislation by allocating,
where required, appropriate resources to ensure the effective operation of labour
inspectorates in rural areas.
6.
No one shall be required to perform forced, bonded or compulsory labour, be
subjected to the risk of becoming a victim of human trafficking or be held in any other
form of contemporary slavery. States shall, in consultation and cooperation with
peasants and other people working in rural areas and the ir representative
organizations, take appropriate measures to protect them from economic exploitation,
child labour and all forms of contemporary slavery, such as debt bondage of women,
men and children, and forced labour, including of fishers and fish wor kers, forest
workers, or seasonal or migrant workers.
Article 14
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas, irrespective of whether they
are temporary, seasonal or migrant workers, have the rights to work in safe and
healthy working conditions, to participate in the application and review of safety and
health measures, to select safety and health representatives and representatives in
safety and health committees, to the implementation of measures to prevent, reduce
and control hazards and risks, to have access to adequate and appropriate protective
clothing and equipment and to adequate information and training on occupational
safety, to work free from violence and harassment, including sexual harassment, to
report unsafe and unhealthy working conditions and to remove themselves from
danger resulting from their work activity when they reasonably believe that there is
an imminent and serious risk to their safety or health, without being subjected to any
work-related retaliation for exercising such rights.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right not to use or to
be exposed to hazardous substances or toxic chemicals, including agrochemicals or
agricultural or industrial pollutants.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to ensure favourable safe and healthy
working conditions for peasants and other people working in rural areas, and shall in
particular designate appropriate competent authorities respons ible and establish
mechanisms for intersectoral coordination for the implementation of policies and
enforcement of national laws and regulations on occupational safety and health in
agriculture, the agro-industry and fisheries, provide for corrective measures and
appropriate penalties, and establish and support adequat e and appropriate systems of
inspection for rural workplaces.
4.

States shall take all measures necessary to ensure:

(a) The prevention of risks to health and safety derived from technologies,
chemicals and agricultural practices, including through their prohibition and restriction;

10/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

(b) An appropriate national system or any other system approved by the
competent authority establishing specific criteria for the importation, classification,
packaging, distribution, labelling and use of chemicals used in a griculture, and for
their prohibition or restriction;
(c) That those who produce, import, provide, sell, transfer, store or dispose of
chemicals used in agriculture comply with national or other recognized safety and
health standards, and provide adequate and appropriate information to users in the
appropriate official language or languages of the country and, on request, to the
competent authority;
(d) That there is a suitable system for the safe collection, recycling and
disposal of chemical waste, obsolete chemicals and empty containers of chemicals so
as to avoid their use for other purposes and to eliminate or minimize the risks to safety
and health and to the environment;
(e) The development and implementation of educational and public awareness
programmes on the health and environmental effects of chemicals commonly used in
rural areas, and on alternatives to them.
Article 15
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to adequate food
and the fundamental right to be free from hunger. This includes the right to produce
food and the right to adequate nutrition, which guarantee the possibility of enjoying
the highest degree of physical, emotional and intellectual development.
2.
States shall ensure that peasants and other people working in rural areas enjoy
physical and economic access at all times to sufficient and adequate food that is
produced and consumed sustainably and equitably, respecting their cultures,
preserving access to food for future generations, and that ensures a physically and
mentally fulfilling and dignified life for them, individually and/or collectively,
responding to their needs.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to combat malnutrition in rural children,
including within the framework of primary health care through, inter alia, the
application of readily available technology and the provision of adequate nutritious
food and by ensuring that women have adequate nutrition during pregnancy and
lactation. States shall also ensure that all segments of society, in particular parents
and children, are informed, have access to nutritional education and are supported in
the use of basic knowledge on child nutrition and the advantages of breastfeeding.
4.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to determine
their own food and agriculture systems, recognized by many States and regions as the
right to food sovereignty. This includes the right to participate in decision-making
processes on food and agriculture policy and the right to healthy and adequate food
produced through ecologically sound and sustainable methods that respect their
cultures.
5.
States shall formulate, in partnership with peasants and other people working in
rural areas, public policies at the local, national, regional and international levels to
advance and protect the right to adequate food, food security and food sovereignty
and sustainable and equitable food systems that promote and protect the rights
contained in the present Declaration. States shall establish mechanisms to ensure the
coherence of their agricultural, economic, social, cultural and development policies
with the realization of the rights contained in the present Declaration.

18-22260

11/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Article 16
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to an adequate
standard of living for themselves and their families and to facilitated access to the
means of production necessary to achieve them, including production tools, technical
assistance, credit, insurance and other financial services. They also have the right to
engage freely, individually and/or collectively, in association with others or as a
community, in traditional ways of farming, fishing, livestock rearing and forestry and
to develop community-based commercialization systems.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to favour the access of peasants and other
people working in rural areas to the means of transportation and the processing,
drying and storage facilities necessary for selling their products on local, national and
regional markets at prices that guarantee them a decent income and livelihood.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to strengthen and support local, national
and regional markets in ways that facilitate and ensure that peasants and other people
working in rural areas have full and equitable access and participation in these
markets to sell their products at prices that allow them and their families to attain an
adequate standard of living.
4.
States shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that their rural development,
agricultural, environmental, trade and investment policies and programmes contribute
effectively to protecting and strengthening local livelihood options and to the
transition to sustainable modes of agricultural production. States shall stimulate
sustainable production, including agroecological and organic production, whenever
possible, and facilitate direct farmer-to-consumer sales.
5.
States shall take appropriate measures to strengthen the resilience of peasants
and other people working in rural areas against natural disasters and other severe
disruptions, such as market failures.
6.
States shall take appropriate measures to ensure fair wages and equal
remuneration for work of equal value, without distinction of any kind.
Article 17
1.
Peasants and other people living in rural areas have the right to land,
individually and/or collectively, in accordance with article 28 of the present
Declaration, including the right to have access to, sustainably use and manage land
and the water bodies, coastal seas, fisheries, pastures and forests therein, to achieve
an adequate standard of living, to have a place to live in security, peace and dignity
and to develop their cultures.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to remove and prohibit all forms of
discrimination relating to the right to land, including those resulting from change of
marital status, lack of legal capacity or lack of access to economic resources.
3.
States shall take appropriate measures to provide legal recognition for land
tenure rights, including customary land tenure rights not currently protected by law,
recognizing the existence of different models and systems. States shall protect
legitimate tenure and ensure that peasants and other people working in rural areas are
not arbitrarily or unlawfully evicted and that their rights are not otherwise
extinguished or infringed. States shall recognize and protect the natural commons and
their related systems of collective use and management.
4.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to be protected
against arbitrary and unlawful displacement from their land or place of habitual
residence, or from other natural resources used in their activities and necessary for
12/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

the enjoyment of adequate living conditions. States shall incorporate protections
against displacement into domestic legislation that are consistent with international
human rights and humanitarian law. States shall prohibit arbitrary and unlawful forced
eviction, the destruction of agricultural areas and the confiscation or expropriation of
land and other natural resources, including as a punitive measure or as a means or
method of war.
5.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas who have been arbitrarily or
unlawfully deprived of their lands have the right, individually and/or collectively, in
association with others or as a community, to return to their land of which they were
arbitrarily or unlawfully deprived, including in cases of natural disasters and/or armed
conflict, and to have restored their access to the natural resources used in their
activities and necessary for the enjoyment of adequate living conditions, whenever
possible, or to receive just, fair and lawful compensation when their return is not
possible.
6.
Where appropriate, States shall take appropriate measures to carry out agrarian
reforms in order to facilitate the broad and equitable access to land and other natural
resources necessary to ensure that peasants and other people working in rural areas
enjoy adequate living conditions, and to limit excessive concentration and control of
land, taking into account its social function. Landless peasants, young people, small scale fishers and other rural workers should be given priority in the allocation of
public lands, fisheries and forests.
7.
States shall take measures aimed at the conservation and sustainable use of land
and other natural resources used in their production, including through agroecology,
and ensure the conditions for the regeneration of biological and other natural
capacities and cycles.
Article 18
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to the
conservation and protection of the environment and the productive capacity of their
lands, and of the resources that they use and manage.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to ensure that peasants and other people
working in rural areas enjoy, without discrimination, a safe, clean and healthy
environment.
3.
States shall comply with their respective international obligations to combat
climate change. Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to
contribute to the design and implementation of national and local climate change
adaptation and mitigation policies, including through the use of practices and
traditional knowledge.
4.
States shall take effective measures to ensure that no hazardous material,
substance or waste is stored or disposed of on the land of peasants and other people
working in rural areas, and shall cooperate to address the threats to the enjoyment of
their rights that result from transboundary environmental harm.
5.
States shall protect peasants and other people working in rural areas against
abuses by non-State actors, including by enforcing environmental laws that
contribute, directly or indirectly, to the protection of the rights of peasants or other
people working in rural areas.

18-22260

13/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Article 19
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to seeds, in
accordance with article 28 of the present Declaration, including:
(a) The right to the protection of traditional knowledge relevant to plant
genetic resources for food and agriculture;
(b) The right to equitably participate in sharing the benefits arising from the
utilization of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture;
(c) The right to participate in the making of decisions on matters relating to
the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture;
(d) The right to save, use, exchange and sell their farm-saved seed or
propagating material.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to maintain,
control, protect and develop their own seeds and traditional knowledge.
3.
States shall take measures to respect, protect and fulfil the right to seeds of
peasants and other people working in rural areas.
4.
States shall ensure that seeds of sufficient quality and quantity are available to
peasants at the most suitable time for planting and at an affordable price.
5.
States shall recognize the rights of peasants to rely either on their own seeds or
on other locally available seeds of their choice and to decide on the crops and species
that they wish to grow.
6.
States shall take appropriate measures to support peasant seed systems and
promote the use of peasant seeds and agrobiodiversity.
7.
States shall take appropriate measures to ensure that agricultural research and
development integrates the needs of peasants and other people working in rural areas
and to ensure their active participation in the definition of priorities and the
undertaking of research and development, taking into account their experience, and
increase investment in research and the development of orphan crops and seeds that
respond to the needs of peasants and other people working in rural areas.
8.
States shall ensure that seed policies, plant variety protection and other
intellectual property laws, certification schemes and seed marketing laws respect and
take into account the rights, needs and realities of peasants and other people working
in rural areas.
Article 20
1.
States shall take appropriate measures, in accordance with their relevant
international obligations, to prevent the depletion and ensure the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity in order to promote and protect the full enjoyment of
the rights of peasants and other people working in rural areas.
2.
States shall take appropriate measures to promote and protect the traditional
knowledge, innovation and practices of peasants and other people working in rural
areas, including traditional agrarian, pastoral, forestry, fisheries, livestock and
agroecological systems relevant to the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity.
3.
States shall prevent risks of violation of the rights of peasants and other people
working in rural areas arising from the development, handling, transport, use, transfer
or release of any living modified organisms.

14/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Article 21
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the human rights to safe
and clean drinking water and to sanitation, which are essential for the full enjoyment
of life and all human rights and human dignity. These rights include water supply
systems and sanitation facilities that are of good quality, affordable and physically
accessible, and non-discriminatory and acceptable in cultural and gender terms.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to water for
personal and domestic use, farming, fishing and livestock keeping and for securing
other water-related livelihoods, ensuring the conservation, restoration and sustainable
use of water. They have the right to equitable access to water and water management
systems, and to be free from arbitrary disconnections or the contamination of water
supplies.
3.
States shall respect, protect and ensure access to water, including in customary
and community-based water management systems, on a non-discriminatory basis, and
shall take measures to guarantee affordable water for personal, domestic and
productive uses, and improved sanitation, in particular for rural wo men and girls and
persons belonging to disadvantaged or marginalized groups, such as nomadic
pastoralists, workers on plantations, all migrants regardless of their migration status
and persons living in irregular or informal settlements. States shall promo te
appropriate and affordable technologies, including irrigation technology, and
technologies for the reuse of treated wastewater and for water collection and storage.
4.
States shall protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains,
forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes, from overuse and contamination by
harmful substances, in particular by industrial effluent and concentrated minerals and
chemicals that result in slow and fast poisoning.
5.
States shall prevent third parties from impairing the enjoyment of the right to
water of peasants and other people working in rural areas. States shall prioritize water
for human needs before other uses, promoting its conservation, restoration and
sustainable use.
Article 22
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to social security,
including social insurance.
2.
States shall, according to their national circumstances, take appropriate steps to
promote the enjoyment of the right to social security of all migran t workers in rural
areas.
3.
States shall recognize the rights of peasants and other people working in rural
areas to social security, including social insurance, and, in accordance with national
circumstances, should establish or maintain their social protection floors comprising
basic social security guarantees. The guarantees should ensure at a minimum that,
over the life cycle, all in need have access to essential health care and to basic income
security, which together secure effective access to goods and services defined as
necessary at the national level.
4.
Basic social security guarantees should be established by law. Impartial,
transparent, effective, accessible and affordable grievance and appeal procedures
should also be specified. Systems should be in place to enhance compliance with
national legal frameworks.

18-22260

15/17

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

Article 23
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. They also have the
right to have access, without any discrimination, to all social and health services.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to use and protect
their traditional medicines and to maintain their health practices, including access to
and conservation of their plants, animals and minerals for medicinal use.
3.
States shall guarantee access to health facilities, goods and services in rural
areas on a non-discriminatory basis, especially for groups in vulnerable situations,
access to essential medicines, immunization against major infectious diseases,
reproductive health, information concerning the main health problems affecting the
community, including methods of preventing and controlling them, maternal and child
health care, as well as training for health personnel, including education on health
and human rights.
Article 24
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to adequate
housing. They have the right to sustain a secure home and community in which to live
in peace and dignity, and the right to non-discrimination in this context.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to be protected
against forced eviction from their home, harassment and other threats.
3.
States shall not, arbitrarily or unlawfully, either temporarily or permanently,
remove peasants or other people working in rural areas against their will from the
homes or land that they occupy without providing or affording access to appropriate
forms of legal or other protection. When eviction is unavoidable, the State must
provide or ensure fair and just compensation for any material or other losses.
Article 25
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to adequate
training suited to the specific agroecological, sociocultural and economic environments
in which they find themselves. Issues covered by training programmes should include,
but not be limited to, improving productivity, marketing and the ability to cope with
pests, pathogens, system shocks, the effects of chemicals, climate change and
weather-related events.
2.
All children of peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right
to education in accordance with their culture and with all the rights contained in
human rights instruments.
3.
States shall encourage equitable and participatory farmer-scientist partnerships,
such as farmer field schools, participatory plant breeding and plant and animal health
clinics, to respond more appropriately to the immediate and emerging challenges that
peasants and other people working in rural areas face.
4.
States shall invest in providing training, market information and advisory
services at the farm level.
Article 26
1.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right to enjoy the ir
own culture and to pursue freely their cultural development, without interference or
any form of discrimination. They also have the right to maintain, express, control,
protect and develop their traditional and local knowledge, such as ways of life,
16/17

18-22260

United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants
and Other People Working in Rural Areas

A/RES/73/165

methods of production or technology, or customs and tradition. No one may invoke
cultural rights to infringe upon the human rights guaranteed by international law or
to limit their scope.
2.
Peasants and other people working in rural areas have the right, in dividually
and/or collectively, in association with others or as a community, to express their local
customs, languages, culture, religions, literature and art, in conformity with
international human rights standards.
3.
States shall respect, and take measures to recognize and protect, the rights of
peasants and other people working in rural areas relating to their traditional
knowledge and eliminate discrimination against the traditional knowledge, practices
and technologies of peasants and other people working in rural areas.
Article 27
1.
The specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system
and other intergovernmental organizations, including international and regional
financial organizations, shall contribute to the full realization of the present
Declaration, including through the mobilization of, inter alia, development assistance
and cooperation. Ways and means of ensuring the participation of peasants and other
people working in rural areas on issues affecting them shall be considered.
2.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies, funds and programmes, and
other intergovernmental organizations, including international and regional financial
organizations, shall promote respect for and the full application of the pre sent
Declaration and follow up on its effectiveness.
Article 28
1.
Nothing in the present Declaration may be construed as diminishing, impairing
or nullifying the rights that peasants and other people working in rural areas and
indigenous peoples currently have or may acquire in the future.
2.
The human rights and fundamental freedoms of all, without discrimination of
any kind, shall be respected in the exercise of the rights enunciated in the present
Declaration. The exercise of the rights set forth in the present Declaration shall be
subject only to such limitations as are determined by law and that are compliant with
international human rights obligations. Any such limitations shall be
non-discriminatory and necessary solely for the purpose of securing due recognition
and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for meeting the just and most
compelling requirements of a democratic society.

18-22260

17/17
