S/2021/93

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2021
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 6 November 2020 (S/2020/1089).

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
On 22 November 2020, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait issued a
statement announcing that, through DNA testing conducted in Kuwait and Iraq,
human remains, recovered in Iraq, had been identified conclusively as belonging to
seven Kuwaiti nationals missing since 1991. On 10 January 2021, the Ministry issued
a subsequent statement announcing the conclusive DNA identification of further
human remains, also recovered in Iraq, as belonging to 13 Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals missing since 1991. The 20 sets of human remains had been exhumed from
a grave site in Samawah, Muthanna Governorate, in March 2019 and transferred from
Iraq to Kuwait in August 2019 for DNA identification. In both statements, the
Ministry released the names of the missing persons, confirming that it had informed
the victims’ families. The Ministry expressed its appreciation to the Government of
Iraq, the members of the Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their efforts, which had contributed to the
identification of the remains of the 20 Kuwaiti and third -country nationals missing
since 1991.
3.
Meanwhile, Kuwaiti forensic experts and identification specialists continued to
perform the complex identification process for the remaining human remains
exhumed from grave sites in Samawah in March 2019 and January 2020, which were
handed over by Iraq to Kuwait in August 2019 and September 2020, respectivel y. The
process requires the reassembly of the commingled human remains, as well as
subsequent DNA extraction and analysis. The DNA results will be matched against
the Kuwait database of missing persons to conclude the identification process.

21-00859 (E)

020221

*2100859*

S/2021/93

4.
On 10 December, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
Electoral Assistance met the Ambassador of Kuwait to Iraq, Salem al -Zamanan, to
review the file of missing Kuwaiti persons and Kuwaiti property. They welcomed the
Security Council press statement of 24 November on ongoing cooperation between
Iraq and Kuwait in the search for missing Kuwaiti and third -country nationals. The
Ambassador noted that Kuwait is continuing the DNA identification process for the
human remains found in Samawah.
5.
The 114th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee and the fiftieth session of the
Tripartite Commission were held in Kuwait and Baghdad on 12 and 14 January 2021,
respectively, with some participants attending virtually and others in person. During
the meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the Kuwaiti representative thanked Iraq
for the recent transfer of 20 sets of human remains found in Samawah in January 2020
and handed over to Kuwait on 16 September 2020. He expressed his appreciation to
UNAMI for the use of its air assets to transfer the remains from Iraq to Kuwait. With
regard to the remains found in March 2019 and transferred to Kuwait in August 2019,
the Kuwaiti representative explained that, owing to their fragmented state, the
identification process had taken longer than initially expected. He underlined that the
successful identification of the remains of the 20 Kuwaiti and third -country nationals
missing since 1991, announced by Kuwait on 22 November and 10 January, was the
result of joint efforts, citing the Ministry of Defence of Iraq team’s proactive
exploration of the sites in Samawah.
6.
The Iraqi representative, for his part, conveyed his condolences to the families
of the 20 identified missing Kuwaiti persons. He provided an update on potential
burial sites in Samawah, Khamisiyah, Karbala’ and Salman Pak in Iraq. Owing to
restrictions related to coronavirus disease (COVID-19), no new excavations were
carried out during the reporting period. He stated that Iraq was ready to conduct
another visit to the Karbala’ K3 site once the health situation improved and proposed
to focus first on narrowing down the search area, using additional information
provided by the United States of America. He noted that the Ministry of Defence of
Iraq, which had carried out a field survey at the Khamisiyah site, was planning to
restore contact with a principal witness in a renewed effort to identify areas for
potential excavation.
7.
ICRC continues to work with the Tripartite Commission, including with regard
to the analysis of satellite imagery from the 1990s in relation to the K3 and
Khamisiyah sites.
8.
With regard to potential burial sites in Kuwait, a potential witness came forward,
claiming to have information on the Kuwait naval base site. Iraq and Kuwait began
to examine the potential source of information during the reporting period.
9.
The Tripartite Commission renewed the mandate of the Technical Subcommittee
during its fiftieth session, reaffirming ongoing and full support for the file and the
official observer role of UNAMI. The Commission confirmed the formal closure of
the case files of 20 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals missing since 1991,
corresponding to the human remains identified on the basis of conclusive DNA tests.
During its meeting, the Commission adopted general guidelines for the transfer of
human remains between Iraq and Kuwait, which had been drafted by ICRC in 2019.
The guidelines include a section on public communication, which had been agreed
upon by the Technical Subcommittee at its 114th meeting as a binding annex to the
protocols for the transfer of human remains of 2003.
10. Planned UNAMI training for staff of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the use
of ground-penetrating radar in the search for burial sites was again postponed owing
to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated movement restrictions.

2/3

21-00859

S/2021/93

11. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq reiterated its commitment to broadcasting calls
for witnesses through the media on a quarterly basis, inviting those with information
on missing Kuwaiti persons and missing Kuwaiti property to come forward.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
12. Owing to constraints imposed by the ongoing pandemic, there were no
significant developments during the reporting period on th e return of Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. The transfer of previously located Kuwaiti
property items, including microfilm and scientific books, remained postponed owing
to COVID-19-related restrictions on movement.

IV. Observations
13. The identification of the human remains of 20 missing Kuwaiti and third country nationals represents significant progress with regard to the important
humanitarian file 16 years after the previous identification was made. I extend my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims, who waited almost three decades
for this conclusion. The historic breakthrough was made possible through long standing cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait, with the strong support of the
Tripartite Commission and ICRC. Despite the multiple challenges facing Iraq, the
sustained investigative work conducted by that country’s Ministry of Defence, which
exemplifies the commitment of the Government of Iraq to the search for missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, is bearing fruit. It is my hope that the meticulous
and persistent efforts of the Kuwaiti forensic teams will yield further positive
identifications of human remains in order to bring some relief to the families of
Kuwaiti persons still missing.
14. I commend the members of the Tripartite Commission and the Technical
Subcommittee for their valuable contributions to moving the important humanitarian
dossier forward. All partners must now capitalize on the momentum of recent
successes and continue to make progress in the search for missing persons.
15. On the issue of missing Kuwaiti property, including that country’s national
archives, the efforts of Iraq in 2020 to locate such property were encouraging, and I
renew my call for its swift handover to Kuwait as soon a s conditions permit. I
encourage the Government of Iraq to reinvigorate its search for the missing Kuwait
national archives specifically, given their high historical importance, drawing on
specialist expertise as appropriate.
16. My Special Representative for Iraq, my Deputy Special Representative and
UNAMI staff remain committed to promoting further progress on the file, working
closely with the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait, ICRC and other partners. I wish to
express my sincere appreciation to Alice Walpole for her dedicated service since 2017
to the United Nations in Iraq, including her efforts to advance the important Iraq Kuwait file successfully.

21-00859

3/3
