UNITED NATIONS

UN

SECURITY COUNCIL

Mb

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR.

2447th

MEETING:

NEW

27 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2447)
Adoption of the agenda

. . . . . ..y............................

.. ... .. .. ... ... ... . ... .. ... ... .. .. ... ... ... .. ..

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

.

S/PV.2447

_.,

(

__

;
!

.’

._

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Seer&y Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
SecuriZy Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2447th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 27 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the. following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a
place at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2447)
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma
piace at the Council table.

of the agenda

took a

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439th to 2444th and 2446th meetings], I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon,
the Gambia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique,
the Niger, Nigeria, Panama,
Qatar, Romania,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 5760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
The meeting was called to order at 12 noon.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Fe situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

At the invitation of thP President, Mr. Zarif(AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria). Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola). Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr. Joseph (Australia),
Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr.
A&bade (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. llucco (Chile),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr.
Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. AI-Ashtal (Democratic -Yemen).
Mr. Khaiil (Egypt) Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Davin
(Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. Ott (G&man Democratic
Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr,
Kaba (Guinea), Mr. R&z (Hungary), Mr. Rao (India), Mr.
Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr.
Kuro& (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya), Mr. Traore (Mali), Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico),
Mr. Erdenechuham (Mongolia), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Me
rocco), Mr. Chissano (Mozambique), Mr. Oumarou (Niger),
Mr. Boltikor (Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama), Mr. Jamal
(Qatar), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal),

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maudave (Mauri:
tius) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.
1

Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone), Mr.
It was so decided
A&n (Somalia), Mr. von Schimding (South Africa), Mr.
Fonsekir (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic),
10. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Owiny , Members of the Council have before them document
S/15795. which contained the text of a letter dated 26
(Uganda), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr.
Bassole (Upper
Volta), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela).
May 1983 from the representative of Panama addressed
-Mr. Le Kim Chung (viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov (Yugoshzvi~)
to the President of the Council [S/157953.
and Mr, Goma (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber.
11. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Pakistan, Mr. YaqubKhan, whom I warmly welcome.
5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
12. Mr. YAQUB-KHAN
(Pakistan): Mr. President, it
have received a letter from the representative of Malaysia
gives me great pleasure to have the opportunity
of
in which he requests to be invited to take part in the
addressing the Council while you are presiding over it.
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordOur two countries have a long tradition of friendly and
ance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
co-operative relationships which we deeply cherish.
of the Council, to invite him to participate in the discussion without the- right to vote, pursuant to the relevant
13. I feel confident that with the benefit of your widely
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
acknowledged qualities of statesmanship and diplomatic
rules of procedure.
skill, the Council will be able to take important decisions
to ensure earlier independence for Namibia. Let me avail
At the invitation of the President, Tan Sri Zainal Abidin
myself of this opportunity to express our appreciation
(Malaysia) took the place reservedfor him at the side of the
also to Mr. Umba di Lutete who guided the work of the
Council chamber.
Council earlier during this month with great distinction
and success. At the same time, I wish to pay a warm
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
tribute to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick for her valuable contrishould like to inform members of the Council that I have
bution to the work of the Council during her presidency
received a letter dated 26 May from the representatives of
last month.
Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe [S/15799], which reads as
follows:
14. I am participating in this important debate in compliance with the mandate entrusted to me and to several
of my other colleagues by the Seventh Conference of
“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned CounCouncil, have the honour to request that the Security
tries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983. I also
Council extend an invitation, under the provisions of
do so in order to give expression to the abiding commitrule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr.
ment of the people and the Government of Pakistan to
Johnstone F. Makatini, representative of the African
the cause of Namibian independence. Being a country
National ‘Congress of South Africa (ANC) to particiwhich has experienced the sufferings of colonial subjugapate in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled
tion, Pakistan is dedicated to the cause of decolonization
‘The situation in Namibia’.”
,
and the struggle of peoples for self-determination
and
independence. It is, therefore, a matter of pride for us to
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
be able to make a contribution to the advancement of the
agrees to this request.
cause of Namibian independence. We are willing to make
every endeavour within the limits of our capacity and our
It was so decided
resources to bring this noble objective closer to
realization.
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should also like to inform the members of the Council
15. I should like to take this opportunity to pay a richly
that I have received a letter dated 26 May from the repredeserved tribute to SWAPO, which, under the leadership
sentatives of Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe [S/Z5800J,
of Mr. Sam Nujoma, has brilliantly led the people of
which reads as follows:
Namibia in their heroic struggle for the liberation of their
country. Their struggle is just and its triumph inevitable.
“We, the undersigned members of the Securitv
Council, have the honour to request that the Securiti
Council extend an invitation, under the provisions of
16. The United Nations assumed direct responsibility
rule 39 of its provisionai rules of procedure, to Mr.
for the independence of Namibia when the General
Lesaoana S.. Makhanda, representative of the Pan
Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the
African% Congress of Azania (PAC), to participate in
Territory in 1966 [resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
the Council’s consideration of the item entitled-‘The
I%a. Soon after, the Council became involved with the
situation in Namibia*.”
process of Namibian independence and in March 1969
adopted resolution 264 (1969) which recognized the ter9. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
mination of South Africa’s Mandate, described the conagrees to this request.
tinued presence of South Africa in Namibia as illegal,
2

and called upon the Pretoria regime to withdraw immediately its administration
from Namibia. In the following
years, the Council, while firmly maintaining that South
Africa’s administration
of Namibia was illegal, rejected
all attempts by South Africa to alter the status of the
Territory or to impose on it a settlement of its choosing
or to call in question Namibia’s unity and territorial
integrity.
17. The endeavours of the Council to promote the independence of Namibia further matured in its resolution
385 (1976) which demanded that South Africa withdraw
its illegal administration
from the Territory and transfer
power to the Namibian people and called for free elections in Namibia under the supervision and control of
the United Nations. On the basis of this resolution, the
then five Western members of the Council worked out a
proposal for the peaceful settlement of the situation in
Namibia [s/226363. Subsequently, the Council endorsed
this settlement plan in its resolution 435 (1978), which
was accepted both by South Africa and by SWAPO. The
resolution also envisaged the establishment of a United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) for Namibia.
18. The settlement plan embodied in resolution 435
(1978) enjoyed universal acceptance and raised hopes for
an early solution of the Namibian question that would
bring to a close the dark chapter of colonial subjugation.
Regrettably, these hopes proved to be ephemeral.
19. Soon after the adoption of the plan, South Africa
resorted to deceitful manoeuvres aimed at frustrating its
implementation.
The real intentions of the Pretoria
regime became starkly evident at the pm-implementation
meetings held at Geneva in January 1981 where South
Africa refused to discuss a date for the implementation
of
the settlement plan and accused the United Nations of
partiality. Thereafter, it raised unwarranted demands relating to constitutional arrangements and electoral procedures clearly designed to impede the process of independence of Namibia.
20. The Pretoria regime further stepped up its unreasonable demands by linking the progress on Namibian independence to the presence of Cuban troops in Angola. It is
not difficult to recognize this entirely irrelevant condition
for what is: a transparent machination devised to prolong
South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and to delay
the independence of the Territory.

economic exploitation of their land. At the same time, it
has escalated acts of armed aggression and destabilization
against the neighbouring States. Lesotho and Mozambique have been the latest targets of Pretoria’s wanton
raids in which scores of innocent people were massacred
and valuable property destroyed.
23. The question arises why a regime, universally condemned for its inhuman policies and practices, continues
to defy the will of the international
community. The
answer to this question lies in South Africa’s insolent
reliance on the good will and tolerance of some of the
members of the Western contact group who have openly
acquiesced in Pretoria’s intransigence and obstructionist
attitude towards Namibia’s independence. The protection
available to South Africa, such as demonstrated by the
triple veto exercised to prevent mandatory sanctions
against it when the Council met in April 1981, has emboldened South Africa to continue its occupation of Namibia
and its aggression against the African States. Yet another
factor that has compounded South Africa’s arrogance is
its growing military strength, which has become the principal vehicle of its terrorism and aggression in the region.
24. The concern of the States Members of the United
Nations over the delay in Namibia’s independence, their
indignation at South Africa’s intransigence and their dissatisfaction with the lack of progress in the implementation of the United Nations settlement plan has been
repeatedly expressed with clarity and with firmness in the
United Nations. The position was reafftrmed by the
Heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries
at New Delhi last March. These countries have consistently maintained the following.
25. First, the only basis for negotiation for the solution
of the Namibian question is the settlement plan approved
in Council resolution 435 (1978). This plan must be implemented without delay.
26. Secondly, the Namibian question is a question of
decolonization. It must not be linked with any aspect of
East-West confrontation,
specifically, the presence of
Cuban troops in Angola, which is an entirely extraneous
issue. We appreciate the position taken by France in this
regard and have also noted that the statement made in
the Council by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the Western contact group [2#39th meeting]
refrained from raising this question.

21. The Pretoria regime has been deservedly ostracized
by the international community as a lawless entity which
has imposed the inhuman apartheid system in South
Africa and is determined to maintain its colonial stranglehold over Namibia in order to continue its plunder of the
Territory’s rich natural resources and its policy of aggressive militarism against the neighbouring front-line States.

27. Thirdly, stepped-up aggression by South Africa is a
clear proof of unwillingness to abandon its illegal hold
on Namibia. Determined action rather than a policy of
appeasement is the appropriate prescription for the settlement of the Namibian question. This was the conclusion reached at the International Conference in Support
of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris in April.’

22. As the fate of the United Nations settlement plan
continues to hang in the balance, South Africa has intensified its ruthless repression of the Namibian people and the

28. Even if the role of the Western contact group in the
evolution of the settlement plan is acknowledged, the
ambivalent position taken by some of its members since

the ill-fated pre-implementation
meeting of 1981 at Geneva has created doubts about its will and capacity to
pursue faithfully the implementation
of the plan. The
members of the group have manifested excessive deference to South Africa’s interests; even outright support
for the latter’s unreasonable demands has not been lacking. Mr. Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, has strongly
maintained that the group has lost contact with the letter
and spirit of resolution 435 (1978) and that its recent
endeavours appear to be a mere rescue operation for
Pretoria.

(1978) that the Council will be able to discharge its responsibility towards Namibia.
33. The negotiations on Namibia’s independence cannot
be allowed to become a protracted process. The struggle
for Namibia’s independence has entered a decisive phase
where firm and meaningful action by the Council can
alone bring early success. The persistence of the current
impasse would lead only to .more bloodshed and to a
widening of the conflict, which would entail grave consequences for regional and global peace and security. Any
further delay in securing Namibia’s independence would
deepen the pervasive sense of frustration and mistrust
which provides the seed-bed for conflicts and crises amicting many parts of the world.

29. It is a matter of great regret that the Western contact group has not been able to fulfil the expectations
which its formation five years ago aroused. We are aware
of the complexity of the situation and of the obstacles to
be overcome on the path to Namibian independence. We
do not believe for a moment, however, that these obstacles are insurmountable.
The continuing sterility of the
contact group’s efforts has caused the erosion of its
credibility.

34. The participation in these meetings of the Council of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs from a large number of
countries of various regions of the world underlines international concern over Namibia’s fate and the gravity of
the situation created by South Africa’s continued stranglehold on the Territory. We hope that the Council will be
able to take decisions that will be instrumental in bringing
about the early fulfilment of the collective commitment to
independence for Namibia.

30. In these circumstances, the Council must re-assume
its responsibility for the implementation
of the settlement
plan. Given purposeful co-operation among the Council’s
members, that implementation
should not take long to
materialize. The Secretary-General’s report [S/15776],
which has explained the developments in the negotiating
process with great clarity, points to the encouraging progress already made in securing a large measure of agreement on modalities to be employed in the implementation
of the plan. According to the Secretary-General, as far as
the United Nations is concerned, the only outstanding
issues are the choice of the electoral system and the settlement of some final problems relating to UNTAG and its
composition. Furthermore, SWAPO, the sole authentic
representative of the Namibian people, has reaffirmed its
readiness to sign a cease-fm agreement and to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in order to ensure the smooth
and peaceful transition of Namibia to independence. This
assurance was reiterated in unequivocal terms by Mr.
Nujoma at the 2439th meeting in his important statement
before the Council.

35. Mr. LIANG
Yufan (China) (interprerution from
Chinese): First of all, Sir, allow me to welcome warmly
your participating in and presiding over these important
meetings of the Council. We all admire the skilful
manner in which you have guided our deliberations in
the past few days.
36. We have listened carefully to the statements of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of many African and other
third-world countries, as well as to those of Mr. Nujoma,
the President of SWAP0 and other representatives. I
wish, in the name of the Chinese delegation, to welcome
warmly the participation of the distinguished Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and of Mr. Nujoma in the meetings
of the Council and to express deep appreciation for their
positive and valuable contributions to our deliberations.
37. The, Council has resumed its consideration of the
situation in Namibia at the request of the African Group
and the Non-Aligned Movement. That is entirely necessary. The non-implementation
of Council resolution 435
(1978) and the continued stalling of the plan for the independence of Namibia have aroused strong dissatisfaction
and indignation among African countries and peoples as
well as serious concern in the international community.
The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi, in
March [see S/IS675 and Corr, I and 2, annex, sect. I,
para. 493 and the International Conference in Support of
the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
held in Paris in April,2 both adopted solemn declarations
calling on the Council to take vigorous measures to
ensure the prompt implementation
of the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia affirmed in resolution 435 (1978). This justified demand has been reiterated
by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and representatives

31. I wish to take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his admirable
and untiring efforts in the search for a settlement of the
Namibian question, which reflect his firm commitment to
the cause of Namibian
independence. His persistent
endeavours, which have served to sustain the hope of the
international community for the success of the negotiating process, deserve the highest praise.
32. The Council must now define a time-frame within
which the Secretary-General should make contact with
the parties concerned in order to finalize the arrangements for Namibia’s transition to independence. If efforts
to ensure the implementation
of the United Nations plan
continue to be thwarted by South Africa, it will be only by
taking appropriate measures, such as those envisaged
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to secure South Africa’s compliance with resolution 435
4

who have spoken in the past few days;?+md should by no
means be ignored by the Council. There should be no
further continuation of the situation in which the Council
takes no decision after considering an issue or fails to
enforce a decision it has adopted.

“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
on Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the region as a whole. The
delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense
of frustration and mistrust, with all that that implies
for peace and security in the region.‘* [ibid, para. 16.1

38. On the eve of the Council’s consideration of the matter, the Secretary-General submitted a further report concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia [S/15774. This is a concise report reflecting the
actual situation. The Chinese delegation wishes to join
many other delegations in expressing appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his great efforts in pressing for the
implementation
of the United Nations plan.

43. It should be stressed that the South African authorities would not have been so truculent and intransigent
had it not been for the connivance and support on the
part of a super-Power. That super-Power, in order to
maintain its vested interests in the region, embraces the
South African authorities as an “ally” and pursues a socalled constructive engagement policy towards it, and prevents the Council from imposing any sanctions on South
Africa. Moreover, it has colluded with South Africa by
linking Namibian independence with the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. This unreasonable linkage
has seriously hampered the implementation
of the United
Nations plan. As the Secretary-General points out in his
report, these issues “were neither raised nor envisaged at
the time when resolution 435 (1978) was adopted or in the
subsequent negotiations under United Nations auspices.
These issues now apparently constitute the main reason
for the delay in the implementation
of the United Nations
plan” [ibid, para. 291.

39. Nearly five years have elapsed since the Council
adopted resolution 435 (1978), and yet this solemn resolution is still no more than a piece of paper. Why is that?
Evidently, the responsibility does not tie with SWAP0 or
the front-line African States, which, on the contrary, have
made unremitting efforts towards the independence of the
plan and whose reasonableness and constructive attitude
have been highly appraised by the .intemational
community.
40. The crux of the problem lies with the total lack of
good faith on the part of the racist Fegime of South Africa
to solve the question of Namibia, and that explains why
resolution 435 (1978) remains unimplemented thus far. In
the past few years, that r&ime has resorted to tricks of all
kinds, endlessly raising extraneous issues in the course of
the negotiations and putting one obstacle after another in
the way of the implementation
of the resolution. In the
meantime, it has stepped up the brutal suppression of the
Namibian
people’s struggle for independence in an
attempt to break the armed forces led by SWAPO. On the
other hand, it has intensified its efforts to foster puppet
forces on behalf of an “internal settlement”. It has,
moreover, repeatedly launched large-scale military invasions, or carried out .sabotage or subversive activities,
against neighbouring African States. Even now it is
occupying a part of southern Angola.

44. It is only natural that the linkage has met with severe
condemnation from the Namibian people and African
nations and with the strong censure of the international
community. Even its allies have refused to endorse the
linkage.
45. The Chinese delegation supports the position of.
SWAP0 and the front-line African States on this question. We oppose the linkage between Namibian independence and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from ,Angola.
Independence for Namibia is an inalienable right of the
Namibian people; it is a problem of decolonization. It
has nothing to do with the question of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola. The two different issues
should not be linked together. As regards the so-called
regional security arrangement, it is common knowledge
that none of the independent African States adjacent to
South Africa constitutes a threat to the security of South
Africa. On the contrary, it is South Africa, by its constant invasion and subversion, that is threatening and
undermining its neighbours and disrupting the peace and
stability of southern Africa. Therefore, the so-called
regional security arrangement is nothing more than an
ill<oncealed device to sustain Pretoria’s racist and colonialist rule, and also to preserve its own vested interests. It
is our view that the five Western Powers should take a
stand conducive to the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978), rather than doing anything that smacks of condoning South Africa’s stalling tactics.

.41. Just a few days ago, the racist r&ime struck again,
and this time it launched a savage air raid on Maputo, the
capital of Mozambique,
flagrantly violating the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country. This is
another serious crime committed by the South African
authorities against the African people. The Chinese delegation hereby voices its utmost indignation and strong
condemnation of this outrage.
42. The South African authorities have done all this in
order to perpetuate their illegal occupation of and colonial rule over Namibia so that they may continue permanently to appropriate and plunder the rich natural
resources of the Territory and to oppress and exploit the
Namibian people. Hence, the South African authorities
are not only the culprits undermining peace and stability
in southern Africa but also a menace to world peace and
security. As the Secretary-General correctly points out in
his report:

46. The Chinese Government
and people will, as
always, firmly support the just struggle of the Namibian
people led by SWAP0 and that of the African front-line
5

States and we shall provide them with assistance within
the limits of our capability. We are of the view that the
Council should fulfil its responsibility by accepting the
justified demand voiced by many African and other
third-world countries during the meetings of the last few
days, and by taking effective measures for the prompt
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) so as to speed
up Namibian
independence. We believe the Council
should: first, again strongly condemn the South African
authorities for continuing theirillegal occupation of Namibia in defiance of United Nations resolutions, and
demand that they implement
Council resolution 435
(1978) unconditionally;
should they continue to procrastinate or obstruct the implementation
of the resolution,
appropriate actions against them should be considered
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
secondly, reaffhm resolution 435 (1978) as the sole basis
for the settlement of the Namibian question and reject
any linkage between Namibian
independence and
extraneous issues such as the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola; thirdly, authorize the SecretaryGeneral to take effective steps to expedite the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), and request him to report
to the Council within a specified time; fourthly, call on
the international community to render stronger support
and assistance, politically,
morally and materially, to
SWAP0 and the African front-line States.

ple of Namibia. The mandate for this mission derives
from’ the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March, which decided that, in the light of the
prolonged delay in implementing Council resolution 435
(1978), an urgent meeting of.the Council was now called
for. [See S/15675 and Corr. I and 2, annex, sect. 4 para.
49.1 That decision, fully endorsed by over 100 States
Members of the United Nations and recently approved at
the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris in
April,2 was taken with all due sense of responsibility.
There were two basic reasons for that decision to request
an urgent meeting of this Council.
52. First, for nearly two decades now-since both the
General Assembly and the Security Council first voted to
terminate racist South Africa’s Mandate in Namibiaracist South Africa has refused to withdraw from the Territory, in open and arrogant defiance of the United
Nations. Throughout this period, every effort to reach a
peaceful settlement of the Namibian question has been
spumed by the racist regime of South Africa. Racist
South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia
represents an open challenge to the authority of the Council, which clearly calls for punitive measures.
53. Secondly, in its desperate effort to cling to Namibia,
the racist regime of South Africa has plunged the whole of
the southern African region into a defacto state of war by
its increased and irresponsible armed attacks on the neighbouring front-line States. The primary aim of these unprovoked military attacks, which the racist regime of South
Africa has sought to justify on grounds of hot pursuit, is
simply to intimidate and destabilize those States, in the
misguided and mistaken belief that they will abandon
their support for Namibia and for its sole authentic and
legitimate representative, SWAPO. The southern African
region is now embroiled in an undeclared war with very
ruinous consequences for the fragile economies of those
States.

47. Countries want indeuendence, nations want liberation and the people want progress-&is
is an irresistible
trend of history. Namibia-the
largest remaining colony
on earth-will
one day join the international community
as a new independent State. Any attempt to obstruct the
decolonization of Namibia is doomed to failure.
48. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
I;re&z): The
next speaker is Mr. Bolokor, the Minister of State for
External Affairs of Nigeria. I welcome him and invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
49. Mr. BOLOKOR (Nigeria): Let me begin my statement, Sir, by extending to you iny warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of May. Given your previous experience as
Zaire’s Ambassador to the United Nations, before your
elevation to the well-deserved position of Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zaire, and the outstanding contribution which you made to the United Nations while serving
here, I have absolutely no doubts. that you will acquit
yourself creditably in your exalted position as President of
this most important body. It is also appropriate that these
crucial and important meetings of the Council on Namibia should take place under the presidency of an African State Member of the United Nations.

54. Racist South Africa is clearly in breach of the purposes and principles of the United Nations as enshrined
in Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Its
aggressive and expansionist policies, which are amply
demonstrated by the incessant wave of murderous military attacks on its neighbours and the wanton destruction of life and property brought about by those attacks,
now require a prompt- and effective response from the
Council.

50. I should also like to extend, through you, our gratitude to your colleagues in the Council for affording us
this opportunity to participate in the Council’s deliberations on this occasion.

55. International peace and security have been gravely
endangered by those unprovoked
and irresponsible
armed attacks by racist South Africa on its neighbours. It
is the Council which has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Charter empowers it to act, and failure to do so can only
further damage and undermine the authority of the
Council and the United Nations system as a whole.
Africa expects firm and decisive action from the Council.

5 1. The objective of these meetings and our mission here
is ‘to seek justice and freedom for the long-suffering peo-

56. The tragedy which has for several decades now
been unfolding on the world stage is, indeed, a calamity.
6

-

abject surrender to the international outcasts whose primary objective remains the destruction of the United
Nations and of world peace and order.

First, owing to a tit of absent-mindedness, Namibia was
taken from a rapacious German colonial administration
and handed over to .the Boers of South Africa, whose
penchant for brutality is unparalleled in the annals of mankind. Then, at the end ofthe Second World War, the United
Nations-in
an equally mistaken and ill-considered
manner-extended
racist South Africa’s Mandate over the
Territory at a time when the obnoxious racist doctrine of
the Boer-s had begun to rear its ugly head.

61. We, in concert with the front-line States and SWAPO,
have tried as best we can to co-operate fully with the s&
called contact group to resolve all outstanding coristitutional and other problems relating to the United Nations
plan for Namibian independence on the basis of resolution
435 (1978). Since the Geneva talks, we have for our part
discharged fully our obligations as responsible Members of
the United Nations in seeking a negotiated and peaceful
settlement of the Namibian question. In entering into negotiations with the so-called contact group, we acted in good
faith and in the belief that a negotiated settlement is preferable to the bloody conflict in Namibia. At every stage of
those delicate and difficult negotiations we were given assurances by the Western group of five that the parameters of
those negotiations were the provisions of resolution 435
(1978) and the independence of Namibia. As far as we are
concerned, the negotiations have been completed. We are
not prepared to enter into any discussion with the contact
group on any matters outside the scope of the Namibia
independence plan. The contact group, by not publicly
repudiating the United States position on linkage, has damaged beyond repair its moral credibility on these matters.

57. Is it any wonder,then, that the Boers-who contributed little or nothing to the war effort, but who were immediately rewarded with the spoils of the war-should
immediately extend their abhorrent and inhuman practices
to the mandated Territory of Namibia? Equally, is it any
wonder that they should proceed to an unprecedented
plundering of the natural resources of that Territory7
Would we now have to contend with racist South Africa’s
effrontery and its brazen attempts to hold on to Namibia
today, had the Boers been called to order before now? By
failing to act to protect the interests of the oppressed people
of Namibia and by covertly-and, in some cases, overtlyconniving at racist South Africa’s oppressive policies in
Namibia, the Western Powers bear a heavy moral responsibility for the untold hardship, suffering and brutality to
which the people of Namibia continue to be subjected by the
South African racists.

62. In this connection, I should like to commend the
Secretary-General for his forthright report in which he
states that:

58. Let me recall that, in 1978, the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978) as the basis for Namibia’s independence
by an overwhelming majority. Racist South Africa also
announced its acceptance of the plan publicly. The peace
plan embodied in that resolution was the result of prolonged and very difftcult negotiations, in which SWAP0
made many concessions, often under pressure from African
States. There were no corresponding concessions by racist
South Africa. Africa nevertheless felt that the overriding
factor and consideration must be Namibia’s speedy and
uninterrupted transition to independence. We believe, as we
do today, that resolution 435 (1978) provided an honourable way out of this tragic problem.

“In the course of the period under review . . . it
became increasingly clear that other issues were becoming a factor in the negotiations on Namibia. These
issues, which are outside the scope of resolution 435
(1978), had not been raised or envisaged in previous
negotiations on that question.” [S/15776, para. 11.1
63. This is the crux of the matter: the independence of
Namibia is being sacrificed on the altar of mistaken strategic perceptions by the United States. This is a most
regrettable and unfortunate position which does nothing
to enhance the so-called strategic interests of the United
States in Africa. In fact, we reject any notion or idea that
any Powers have any strategic interests in Africa which
warrant the delay and obstruction
of Namibia’s
independence.

59. But what happened at the Geneva pre-implementation meeting in 1981? Racist South Africa reneged
on its commitment to the peace plan in a most despicable
and treacherous manner.
60. Of course, racist South Africa, in reneging on the
Namibia independence plan, did not act alone. In fact, it
clearly did so in response to the encouragement and sup
port of the new Administration
in Washington which, on
assuming oftice, publicly declared that some aspects of
resolution 435 (1978) needed to be renegotiated. Soon
after that, friendly visits were exchanged at the offtcial
level by Washington and Pretoria, including military
exchanges and collaboration. It was soon explained to the
world that Washington had taken up a policy that it calls
constructive engagement with the racist r&me of South
Africa, which had already been castigated by the whole of
the international
community
as an outlaw. There is
nothing constructive about United States policy in southem Africa, nor is it even an engagement. It is a policy of

64. Let me repeat what I have said on another occasion
on this all-important
question. We do not seek confrontation with any Power. We want peace in our continent,
but not peace at any price, and we shall never give up the
struggle for the liberation of Namibia. Together with the
rest of the international community, we in Nigeria will
continue to support SWAP0 and the people of Namibia
fully in their legitimate and just struggle for freedom.
Nothing will deter us from this honourable commitment.
65. In conclusion, let me appeal once again to all the
members of the Council to act swiftly while there is still
time to save Africa and the world from a ghastly war.
The Council is fully empowered to act. It is the ultimate
7

-

76. That is why my delegation can see only advantages
in having the Council, at the conclusion of our debate,
give the Secretary-General a mandate that would enable
him to resume contact with all the parties concerned to
ensure the effective implementation
of resolution 435
(1978).

defender of the oppressed, the weak and the enslaved. It
is the Council which has primary responsibility for international peace and security. It should act now, for it may
be too late tomorrow.
66.

Mr. de La BARRE

de NANTEUIL

(France) (inrer-

pretation j?om French): Allow me to say how pleased and
77. Looking beyond the near future, we should already
be reflecting on the problems that will remain once the
United Nations settlement plan is implemented in Namibia. Here I have in mind the security and development
of the region, to which the Secretary-General referred in
the last paragraphs of his report.

honoured we are at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our
work during this debate to which my country attaches
particular importance.
67. I should also like to welcome the presence in this
chamber of many Ministers for Foreign Affairs, especially the Ministers of the front-line countries.

78. In this connection, I should like to refer to the two
suggestions made one month ago at the Paris Conference
by the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, for they
directly concern the United Nations and, in particular, in
respect of the first suggestion, the Security Council. Mr.
Cheysson, referring first of all to the problem of security,
said the following

68. My delegation has listened very attentively to their
statements. We wish to pay a tribute to their spirit of
compromise and to the high ideals expressed in their
views.
69. Lastly, I should like to say to the President of
SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, how touched my delegation
was by the terms in which he spoke of my country’s
position on .the question of Namibia.
70.

This debate is not only important,

“France does not underestimate the legitimate concern of each country of southern Africa to ensure its
security. However, we are surprised that there are some
who are concerned only with the security of the strongest, richest and best armed State of the region, while we
feel that the threat is greatest for the weakest, most
disadvantaged and least well-armed countries. . . .

it is also timely.

71. It is important because the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, have a special and even a
unique responsibility towards Namibia and its people.

“The desire to ensure the present and future security
of each State of the region (I am thinking of Namibia) is
legitimate and must be satisfied. . . ; for each country, and
particularly for Namibia, to decide alone and in full
sovereignty what it feels should be done to strengthen
and ensure its security. France is prepared to support
the actions of the Security Council to ensure strict
respect in the area for the rights and commitments of
each country, and even to endorse situations which are
recognized in the region in so far as one or more countries of that region freely proposes such a step or the
Council decides on such a step. This of course cannot
be considered in the case of Namibia until the day
when, independent and provided with a representative
Government, the new State seeks the support of the
international community to protect the international
status it has freely accorded itself.

72. It is timely because the constructive negotiations
that extended from the autumn of 1981 to the autumn of
1982 did not result, as everyone was hoping, in the rapid
implementation
of the settlement plan. It is therefore legitimate and fortunate that the Council today is taking
stock of what has been accomplished and is reflecting on
the ways in which it can reinitiate its action and that of
the Secretary-General.
73. I shall not refer to the past. Others before me have
done so, especially the Secretary-General in his remarkable report [S/257763. My delegation particularly values
its lucidity and frankness. We fully endorse the analysis
contained in it and all its conclusions.
74. In connection with the present situation, France’s
position is known to everyone here. It was defined in the
clearest way by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Claude Cheysson, one month ago in Paris, at the Intemational Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence.3

“The second. disturbing . . . problem of the future
which must be considered at the present stage is that of
the development of the peoples of southern Africa,
who have been most severely afIected by the years and
decades of disturbances; occupation and war. Significant development assistance has already been provided
by France, directly and through the intermediary of the
European Community . . .

75. Our position has not changed since then and will
not change. It can be expressed in a few words: Namibia’s accession to independence and the implementation of Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978)
cannot be impeded by external considerations. Those
resolutions, which commit all Members of the United
Nations, are complete in themselves. They must be implemented fully, as adopted, without conditions
or
prerequisites.

“This course must be resolutely continued. I therefore suggest that in support of the settlement plan for
Namibia, the United Nations should envisage a reconstruction plan covering several years to which the principal donors of aid, States, agencies and institutions,
8

would undertake to contribute; This proposal must
apply also to the countries most seriously affected by
the deplorable and unjust prolongation of the occupation of Namibia; we are thinkmg in particular of
Angola which has not known one day of peace since
its independence and has been the object of murderous raids, serious destruction and even partial occupation because its people came out in solidarity with the
neighbouring people of Namibia.

resolutions on the question .of Namibia and made considerable efforts to resolve the matter, once and for all, in a
just manner.

“It is appropriate to discuss all these matters at the
present stage. The United Nations has a role to play in
this consideration and this preparation. However
nothing can or should be done without a formal proposal by the country or group of countries concerned.
Above all, nothing should delay the settlement in Namibia according to the terms . . . of the Security Council resolution . . .*’ *

85. However, all these decisions and resolutions continue to be defiantly ignored by the racist regime in South
Africa and to this very day Namibia remains in a state of
illegal occupation with the situation daily becoming
worse.

84. Five years ago the Council adopted the well-known
resolution 435 (1978), which, in the opinion of the overwhelming majority of the world community, should have
served as the foundation for a peaceful settlement of the
question of Namibia.

86. The Pretoria rdgime is constantly escalating its military potential and its presence .in Namibia. According to
some data, the strength of the South African force in
Namibia is 100,000, that is, one member of the punitive
expeditionary force for every 12 Namibians. The policy of,
Namibianization
of the war is being continued by the “racists, and the so-called South-West Africa Territorial
Force has been operating in Namibia since 1980. Also, the
racists in Namibia are served by thousands of mercenaries’
recruited from former Southern Rbodesian troops and
from certain Western countries. They are there for only
one purpose: to make it impossible for SWAPO, the sole
legitimate representative of the. people of Namibia, to
come to power and to make it possible for them to continue to plunder the rich natural resources of that
country.

79. Bearing in mind the security problems that I have
just mentioned, I cannot conclude without referring to
the deadly air raid by South Africa against Mozambique.
As soon as my Government was informed of that attack
it published the following communiqu6:
“France condemns the South African raid against
Mozambique.
Nothing can justify this aggr&sion
against the independent State and friendly Republic of
Mozambique.
France reaffirms its condemnation of
the system of apartheid, which, through its violation of
human rights engenders a deplorable cycle of violence
and reprisals.”

87. South Africa’s purposes are also served by the continuing policy of cruel repression, arrests, imprisonment
without trial, torture and the mass slaughter of the peaceful inhabitants of the country.

80. Today a sinister chain of events seems imminent.
Frustrations are mounting. Despair is deepening. More
and more lives are being lost. Soon the violence may
become widespread. While we are still on the brink, my
country makes another solemn appeal, above all, to
South Africa: nothing will be resolved by force, either in
Namibia or elsewhere. In that Territory and outside it,
the time for peace has arrived.

88. A particular threat to peace and security not only in
the region but in the world as a whole results from the fact
that the Pretoria regime has turned Namibia into a military springboard for aggressive sorties against the frontline States in pursuance of its increasingly obvious desire
to destabilize those States. It continues to commit acts of
aggression against southern Angola, which has been occupied for more than a year now, not to mention the completely unprovoked raid recently carried out on the
capital of Mozambique. Mongolia strongly condemns this
new barbaric act of aggression, which has caused destruction and the death of peaceful inhabitants of that country,
emphasizing once again the seriousness of the situation in
this region and the need to restrain these fanatical racists.

81. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
82. Mr. ERDENECHULUUN
(Mongolia) (interpretation from Russian): Allow me first, Sir, to congratulate
you on assuming the responsible post of President of the
Council and to express the conviction of our delegation
that your active and wise leadership will promote a constructive discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
I should like to convey the gratitude of my delegation to
you and all the other members of the Council for having
given us this opportunity to set forth the position of the
Government of the Mongolian People’s Republic on the
question of Namibia.

89. The position of Mongolia on the question of Na!
mibia is well known. Our solidarity with the peoples that
are struggling for their freedom, independence and legitimate national rights and our support for their struggle
stem essentially from the fundamental and intrinsic essence of our foreign policy. A message dated 27 May from
the Chairman of the Presidium of the People’s Great Khural
of the Mongolian
People’s Republic, Mr. Tsedenbal,
and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr, Batmonh, to the leaders of the Organization of African Unity

83. Seventeen years have passed since the United
Nations first assumed direct responsibility for bringing
Namibia to full independence. During that period, the
United Nations has adopted numerous decisions and
9

J

(OAU) on the twentieth anniversary of African Liberation Day, expresses firm support for the struggle for the
African peoples against imperialism,
colonialism, neocolonialism and racism, and for the cause of peace,
national independence and social progress. It also
expresses our conviction that the imperialist efforts to
undermine and disunite the OAU will be firmly rebuffed.

dence to Namibia. That is also referred to in the Paris
Declaration on Namibia adopted at the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence.’
95. The international community expects decisive action
from the Council. It should now fulfil its responsibility
without any further delay. Mongolia will support any
efforts in that connection to establish a definite timeframe for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978).

90. The Government and people of Mongolia are constant in their support of the struggle of the people of
Namibia, under the militant leadership of SWAPO, for
their inalienable right to national independence, .freedom
and self-determination.
We firmly condemn the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist regime of
South Africa and the policy of delay and subterfuge
pursued by the racists and their overseas protectors.

96. At the same time, we continue to believe that it is
high time comprehensive mandatory sanctions were
imposed against the racist regime in South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
97. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Upper Volta,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

91. We categorically reject the attempts of Pretoria and
its allies to link or to draw a parallel between the granting
of independence to Namibia and the question of withdrawing Cuban troops from Angola. It is patently
absurd to assert that there is any link whatsoever
between. those two matters. A limited contingent of
Cuban forces is in Angola at the official request of the
legitimate Government of Angola in view of the threat
that exists to the independence and sovereignty of that
newly formed State. If any troops are to be withdrawn
from Angola, it should be the South African racist forces
which still continue to occupy part of that country.

98. Mr. BASSOLE (Upper Volta) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, I should like to thank you and,
through you, the other members of the Council for having
granted my delegation’s request to be allowed to participate in this debate, thus giving my country, the Upper
Volta, an opportunity to make its modest contribution in
the search for a solution to the problem now before us.
99. First of all, I should like to perform the agreeable
duty of conveying to Mr. Sam Nujoma and, through him,
to SWAP0 and all its militants, the brotherly greetings of
the people of the Upper Volta, its People’s Salvation Council and its President, Mr. Jean-Baptiste Ouedraogo.

92. It is more than time for specific steps to be taken to
settle the Namibian problem. It is perfectly obvious now
that the notorious racist plans for an internal settlement
and the spurious efforts of the so-called contact group
will yield no positive results. The purpose of those
manoeuvres is quite obvious: to delay any solution of the
Namibian problem for as long as possible.

100. I wish to assure you, Sir, that it is a genuine pleasure for me to congratulate you on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Your
outstanding qualities as an experienced diplomat and
statesman committed to dialogue are, I am convinced, a
guarantee that the work of this Council will proceed smoothly, and lead us to hope that there will be a
successful conclusion to these debates.

93. That is indicated by the unambiguous statements
that have been made by the representatives of South
Africa and by Western representatives. In particular,
after agreement was reached during his visit to Washington in December last on the emplacement on the territory of South Africa of cruise missiles of the Tomahawk
type which can carry nuclear warheads, Mr. Botha
stated: “This will make it possible -for us to intimidate
not only neighbouring States but all African States.*’ The
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Luns, also stated: “South Africa should be
given responsibility for directly protecting Western interests in Africa.” It could hardly be put,more plainly than
that.

101. I also wish to take this opportunity to convey to
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United
States, my delegation’s gratitude for the competence and
sense of responsibility she demonstrated in guiding the
work of the Council during the month of April.
102. It is more than 15 years since the General Assembly
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
assumed direct responsibility for the Territory. When it
adopted, on 27 October 1966, resolution 2145 (XXI), in
which it stated its conviction that the administration
of
the Territory of Namibia by South Africa had been conducted in a manner contrary to the Mandate conferred
upon it by the League of Nations in December 1920, to
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the General Assembly was
indeed -right. This was recognized and confirmed by the

94. Mongolia regards as very important and timely the
initiative of the non-aligned countries in asking that the
Council be convened immediately to consider the question of further steps to implement the plan to bring Namibia to complete independence, which would mean that
the Council would be discharging its major responsibility
for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). That
initiative reflects the considerable alarm felt by the w.orld
public concerning the state of affairs in the southern part
of Africa, particularly on the matter of granting indepen10

I

Council itself when it adopted resolution 264 (1969) in
order to remind South Africa that its Mandate over Namibia had been terminated and to inform the Pretoria
regime that therefore the time had come for it to withdraw its administration
from the Territory. However,
nothing was changed as a result of that, and it was then
necessary to request an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice, which was. handed down on 21
June 1971.5

negotiations, as well as the search for solutions for implementing the settlement pian, should take place, as in the
past, -exclusively within the framework of the United
Nations.
111. In that way, -and in that way alone, the efforts
made to arrive at a just, lasting and equitable solution to
the Namibian
problem will no longer be unilateral,.
because we must note that, thus far, of the two parties ‘
directly concerned with the problem, SWAP0 alone has
shown its constant goodwill and readiness. I wish to pay
a tribute to SWAP0 for its flexibility and its sense of
restraint, which has been evident to all of us throughout
the negotiations.

103. The failure of all these steps to produce any results
shows clearly that South Africa defies. the international
community and scorns the resolutions and decisions of
our Organization.
104. Thus, each day we move farther away from those
resolutions and decisions, allowing South Africa to
believe that it can continue to ignore them when it is not
defying them.

112. Strengthening the role of the Secretary-General
would not in’itself, however, suffice to open the way to
implementing
the settlement plan. My delegation is fully
aware that the determination
of the’council, guarantor
of international peace and security, united and strong,
will contribute a great deal. Furthermore, its credibility is
at stake. May it be even more aware of this and act in
such a way as not.to disappoint the hopes placed in it.

105. We owe South Africa’s refusal to comply to the’
complicity of certain Western countries whose immediate
economic interests are given precedence over the noble
cause of the Namibian people and neutralize all political
will. It is precisely the political will of those countries
that we need to put an end to the intractibility
of the
racist regime of Pretoria, to the shameful exploitation of
Namibia and the suffering of the Namibian people whose
only fault is that of aspiring, as all other peoples do, to
the exercise of their inalienable
right to self-determination, freedom and independence.

113. Hence, in our view, the results of the Council’s
deliberations at the end of these meetings will have two
important aspects: to reaffim the will of the Council to
assume its full responsibilities, whose importance. everyone is aware of, and. to open the way for breaking the
deadlock in which the Council now finds itself and which
involves a threat to international peace and security.

106. Instead of that political will, what are we offered7
Some want us to rely-on a contact group whose action
falls far short of what we were entitled to expect. Others
want us to establish a link between the independence of
Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola, a free, independent and sovereign country.

114. It is also for the Council, through its relevant decisions, to affirm its determination
to support and
strengthen the role of the Secretary-General.
115. In conclusion, I wish to pay a particular tribute to’
the United Nations Council for Namibia for the dedication and seriousness with which it assumes its dillicult
responsibilities. I wish to assure it that the co-operation of
the Upper Volta will not be lacking until the triumph of
the just cause of the Namibian people.

107. We are pleased to note that the international community reacted negatively to the question of linkage,
because what they are really trying to do by that unacceptable amalgam is to force us further away each day from
the implementation
of the settlement plan and make us
forget Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). At
times it would seem that common sense is not the world’s
best distributed asset.

116. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Fkmch):
Before adjourning this morning’s meeting I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received a
letter dated 26 May from the representatives of France,
the United Kingdom and the United States [S/15794,
which reads as follows:

108. My delegation feels that we have no miracle cure
to foil these Machiavellian
attempts.
109. The courage, determination
and foresight with
which the Secretary-General determined, from the very
beginning of his term of offrce, to tackle the problem of
Namibia, gives my delegation reason to believe that the
time has come to strengthen his role even more, in order
to ensure that Namibia is placed, or rather, is placed once
again under the sole responsibility of the United Nations.
My delegation wishes to congratulate him on the objective and realistic report [itid] that he submitted to us at
the beginning of these meetings.

“We have the honaur to refer to the messages
addressed on 24 May to you and to the representatives
of Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany,
the United Kingdom and the United States by Mr. L.
J. Barnes and Mr. J. G. A. Diergaardt, requesting the
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
situation in Namibia. In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council in inviting persons whom it
considers competent for the purpose to supply it with
information, we request that, in the course of the current discussion of the Council concerning the situation
in Namibia, an invitation under rule 39 of the provi-

110. We believe, like many previous speakers at these
meetings, that, in order to save time and be effective, the

,

11
___--

-~

sional rules of procedure be extended to Mr. Barnes
and Mr. Diergaardt. We would, of course, similarly
support applications from other persons competent for
the purpose who request the opportunity to speak at
the meeting in order to supply the Council with information on this matter.”
117. In accordance with &request
in the letter I have
just read out, I intended to put this proposal to the vote.
But following consultations with the members of the
Council, it is my understanding that no one insists upon
a vote on this matter.
118. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, with respect to the letter that you have just
read out, I wish to say, on behalf of my Government and
of our contact group colleagues who are members of the
Council, that we believe certain issues of principle are
involved. The first concerns the implementation
of the
Council’s own provisional rules of procedure, in this case
rule 39, which provides that persons competent to provide information or otherwise assist in the examination
of a matter before the Council may be given the opportunity to speak. The second concerns the responsibility of
the Council to reflect in its own practices the principles of
fairness, openness and evenhandedness which are central
to the purposes of the United Nations.

119. The members of the contact group believe it to be
important that the Council, which by its previous decisions has engaged itself to seek the holding of free and
fair elections in Namibia, provide the opportunity to
those who will be parties to those elections to present
their views; simply that the Council hear them and listen
to them.
120. That, Mr. President, is why we have made this
request, through you, to the members of the Council.
After further consultations, however, and in the light of
all relevant circumstances, we do not at this time insist
that the question be put to the vote.
The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.
NOTES
’ See Report of the Intemationd Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April I983
(AKONF.120/13),
part three.
2 Ibid., para. 193.
’ See Report of the International

Conference
in Support of the Stncgg/e of the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),
’ Ibid.. paras.

annex
42-46.

II, sect. A. 3.

5 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Aftica in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, Z.C, J. Reports 1971. p. 16.

:

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United Nations publications
world. Consult yourbookstore
COMMENT

NATIONS

PUBLICATiONS

may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

L’NIES

&s publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dipobiraires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
g : Kations L’nics.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

KIOJIYYMTb

M3lliWHX

Mara3mie
nponance
COMO

M3LLAHMR

OPI-AHM3AUMM

OF%ELIMHEHHbIX

HAIlMfi

HauHR MOXHO
KyllHTb
B KHliXGHblX
SliWa311Ha\
paRoHax Miipa. HaBonlaTe cnpaBxn 06 ti3naB:tnx B Batuext KHII-~~0x1
HUH nuUiiiTe no anpecy: OpraHH3auex
OGaenuBeBHbrx
Haunfi,
Cel;unr
no
WitaHNR,
HbKdOpK
WnH >KeHeBa.

OPGlHH3aUHH
H aretfTflBax
BO Bcex

CONSEGUIR

06?&nHHeHHblX

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIilAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estiin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccihn de Venras.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-March

1991-2.050
