S/PV.7137

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7137th meeting

Friday, 14 March 2014, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2014/153)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/157)

14-26482 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426482*

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region (S/2014/153)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/157)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mrs. Robinson,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from London.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/153, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2014/157, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

2/14

14/03/2014

Mr. Kobler (spoke in French): I would like to start
by congratulating Luxembourg on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March.
Two months ago, I briefed the Council on how the
hopes that arose in 2013 had began to materialize to
the benefit of the Congolese people (see S/PV.7094).
Today, I am here to seek the Council’s support for
another renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in order to bring
the Mission to an end.
This meeting provides an excellent opportunity
to demonstrate the effectiveness of MONUSCO, in
particular its military component. We have achieved
a great deal since 2013. The defeat of the militants of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the joint operations
against the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) and securing the liberated areas are all
contributing to the restoration of pockets of stability
in order to gradually re-establish State authority in the
eastern part of the country. We must now consolidate
the gains achieved, while continuing to secure the areas
where the armed groups are still active. That means
preventing any backsliding by establishing safeguards.
It is now up to us to robustly maintain the peace with
conviction and perseverance.
(spoke in English)
There is a new momentum, and we must build on
that. Our robust protection stance and the hard-won
stability are the foundation upon which peace can be
built. At the outset, let me describe two events that
symbolize where we stand. The first is a good barometer
of the progress made, and the second illustrates that
much remains to be done to bring peace and security to
conflict-affected areas.
The Amani music and dance festival for peace,
initially scheduled for September 2013, eventually
took place in February, thanks to the return of peace
to Goma. The festival was a perfect illustration of how
culture is capable of bringing people together in peace.
More than 11,000 Congolese and Rwandans sang and
danced together.
After the festival, I visited the so-called triangle
of death in Katanga. I saw some of the 80 burned and

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

deserted villages. Mayi-Mayi Bakata Katanga groups
have been systematically burning down villages and
terrorizing the population. More than 400,000 people
have been displaced so far. I saw children just separated
from those armed groups, their eyes glazed and empty,
their parents killed. They had no home to return to.
I decided to reinforce our presence in Katanga. Still,
Katanga, like the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
is a real paradox. It is very rich but also is troubled by
extreme poverty.
Those two events illustrate the hope and the
desperation, the chances and the challenges, the past
and the future of the people of the Congo.
On the eve of the adoption of a new mandate,
MONUSCO’s overriding priorities remain the same.
Security and protection will be our first priority,
followed by the stabilization of conflict-affected areas
and, thirdly, support for the reform processes and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. MONUSCO cannot stay in the Congo
forever. With the Council’s help, we must speedily and
consistently work together with our Congolese partners
to bring about sustainable peace and start planning to
phase out the Mission. The move of much of our civilian
personnel to the east is a first step.
Thanks to intelligence gathered from different
sources, including unarmed unmanned aviation
systems, or the so-called unmanned aerial vehicles,
ongoing sweeping operations have become better
targeted against the FDLR. We have been very clear
to them: surrender now or you will face the full Force
Intervention Brigade. The Government, too, has
stepped up its efforts to put an end to the threat that
the FDLR poses to the population. I am confident that
it will not stop until they have laid down their weapons.
Together, we have continued our military operations
against the FDLR.
After the ADF attacks in December, during which
21 civilians were killed, including 11 babies and young
children, the Congolese army launched large-scale
operations against ADF positions. With the support of
the Force, the Congolese army destroyed the main ADF
headquarters and cleared their main axes and routes
and is now undertaking operations to flush out the
remaining pockets of ADF resistance.
To bring our Mission to a good end, the Force,
however, has to modernize. Fourteen years of a static

S/PV.7137

approach to the protection of civilians has proven
insufficient. The Force needs to be robust, flexible,
versatile, highly mobile and well trained — and fully
able to deploy across the whole of the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, holding key areas
and operating deep in the most inaccessible areas. We
need a more active presence in Ituri, South Kivu and
Katanga.
If we are to enhance our ability to effectively deal
with armed groups, the Force as a whole has to tirelessly
pursue them. To that end, the Force is reducing part
of its long-term static side and operating bases and
is focusing on the use of mobile forces. The recent
redeployment of Egyptian special forces to Katanga and
the Uruguayan reaction to the attack of Cheka on Pinga
in January demonstrated how a proactive approach can
deter attacks on civilians and how all Force components
and units can work together in a combined approach.
Our motto says it all — One Mandate, One Mission,
One Force.
The use of force is not a means in itself, however.
It is guided by one important principle: politics first.
We always strive for a peaceful and voluntary solution.
The use of force alone will not achieve sustainable
results if not embedded in a political framework. The
military success over the M-23 will not be durable if
the Nairobi Declarations are not implemented and the
ex-combatants now in Uganda and Rwanda not speedily
integrated into society. I welcome the recently adopted
amnesty law, which rightly precludes perpetrators of
gross human rights violations.
However, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to take concrete steps
rapidly to ensure implementation of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Plan. I urge both the international community and the
Government to find solutions as to the structure and
financing of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. I cannot overestimate
the importance of adequate civilian follow-up actions;
without them, the military gains will prove to be
ephemeral. Given that we cannot tolerate any rollback
or undermining of what has been achieved so far, a
failure to rapidly implement the DDR Plan would be a
serious setback. We cannot allow that to happen.
Since my last briefing to the Security Council, sexual
violence against young girls and women has continued
to be a problem. The Mission maintains zero tolerance

14-264823/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for sexual terrorism, and MONUSCO, together with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, will publish a thematic report on
the fight against impunity for sexual violence in the
coming days. We remain engaged in fighting impunity.
The trial of those suspected of involvement in the
Minova case resumed after interruption. The military
court has so far heard testimony from 60 victims of
rape and other human rights violations. In support of
the Congolese military justice, MONUSCO continued
to provide technical and logistical support.
There is also zero tolerance for recruiting child
soldiers. Since mid-December, 268 children have
been removed from the ranks of armed groups that
surrendered to the Congolese army. The youngest was
a boy of 10 years of age.
Our second priority — the stabilization of
freed areas — should lead to the restoration of State
authority. The concept of “islands of stability” was a
direct answer to quickly embed State authority in postconflict territories. In my last briefing, I could not
report that children were going to school or that the
administration was functioning in areas liberated from
the M-23. Now I can.
I am pleased to report that in Kiwanja Rutshuru the
advances have been quite impressive. Police units have
been deployed, supported by the United Nations police
with tents, rations and fuel. The territorial administrator
and civil servants have returned, and MONUSCO and
the country team are developing projects to rehabilitate
police, justice and administrative buildings. The prison
of Rutshuru has reopened, and its personnel were
trained by MONUSCO.
Ownership is crucial. That is why I am glad that the
North Kivu authorities identified seven additional pilot
projects to turn into islands of stability. But, despite
the progress, daunting difficulties remain to be dealt
with before we can speak of delivery of full basic public
services to people in the region. Although hampered by
poor logistics and irregular payment of salary to civil
servants, the local Government needs to be practical
and focus on what can make a difference to the people.
To better support the Government where it is most
needed, the Mission is undergoing a transformation
into a field mission. We move to the east. Two thirds
of all substantive staff in Kinshasa are being deployed
to reinforce existing field offices in support of our
operations in the east. We have established a permanent

4/14

14/03/2014

civilian presence in Kiwanja, and that will be replicated
in other areas. MONUSCO moves nearer to the very
people it means to assist. The reconfiguration is not
meant to prolong MONUSCO’s stay in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On the contrary, it is the first
step to an inevitable exit.
Our third priority is encouraging the implementation
of key reforms in the context of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. Continued robust military
operations by the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, followed
by stabilization efforts, need to be accompanied by
consistent reform efforts on the part of the Government.
In support of the Government’s reform plans, I have
set up a coordination group at the ambassadorial level
in Kinshasa aimed at harmonization of the positions of
the donor community. That coordination group looks at
four areas of overarching concern for the United Nations
and international partners in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo — DDR, elections, security sector reform
(SSR) and stabilization. Our messages are clear. DDR
of former fighters has to happen now. Preparations for
the elections have to start now. Concrete progress on
SSR has to be delivered now.
I strongly encourage the Government to accelerate
implementation of key reforms, and I urge donors to
assist in financing those reforms. I am particularly
concerned by the slow pace of security sector reform
despite President Kabila’s emphasis in his address to
the nation on 23 October 2013 that it was the priority
of priorities. We need the Congolese army’s rapid
reaction force to ultimately take over from the Force
Intervention Brigade. Early advances in police reform
and justice reform have also suffered a setback because
of insufficient budgetary provisions. In the long term,
that prevents us from addressing impunity and poor
governance.
On the electoral front, the Independent National
Electoral Commission presented the National Assembly
with a draft road map calling for local, urban and
municipal elections in early 2015. It is important that
its adoption be conducted in a transparent and inclusive
manner. Through our good offices we will continue to
promote an inclusive dialogue with a view to creating
an environment conducive to the holding of credible
elections. Respect for the constitutional provisions
regarding the elections, in terms of both procedure and
calendar, must be upheld.

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I appeal to the international community to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on its path to
democratic rule. The Council’s support is crucial to
safeguarding proper democratic principles. Its support
is crucial to guaranteeing a vote for every Congolese. Its
support is crucial to avoid the errors of the past. I also
call upon the opposition to participate constructively,
and I urge all political parties to sign the Code of
Conduct.
I remain concerned, however, by recent political
developments that prevent all political forces from
freely moving and campaigning. I therefore urge the
Government to respect fundamental rights, such as
freedom of speech, expression and assembly, and
extend them to all political forces, as provided for by the
Congolese Constitution. I have instituted an electoral
incidents task force to closely monitor the situation; it
will report regularly.
On 24 February, we celebrated the first anniversary
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mary
Robinson, with whom I continue to enjoy an excellent
relationship, will go further into detail on the
implementation of the national commitments.
After decades of conflict between neighbouring
countries, contacts at all levels of the region’s
Governments indicate a new dynamic in the region.
Mutual trust is fragile. Confidence-building takes time.
Still, investment in crossborder transport infrastructure
and economic cooperation will pave the way to regional
prosperity.
First, I wish to thank the donor community for
its financial contribution in helping us upgrade the
Goma airport. Turning Goma into an economic hub
will boost economic development and foster regional
cooperation. I leave it to Special Envoy Mary Robinson
to elaborate on the current initiatives to promote private
entrepreneurship.
Secondly, the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be a source of prosperity,
not poverty. I welcome the Government’s intention to
increase public revenues from natural resources. The
legalization and regulation of the exportation and
exploitation of minerals is addressing the root causes
of the conflict.
Despite many difficulties, I sense a spirit of
dynamism and hope. That is certainly not a guarantee

S/PV.7137

for success. That spirit, however, places an obligation
for all of us in MONUSCO and in the country team to
grasp the opportunity — maybe for the first time in
many years — to reach a durable solution.
However, peace has a price tag. MONUSCO will
reduce its budget. Over 300 posts will be cut. I am
the first to criticize inefficiencies, reduce duplication,
fine-tune management structures. Solid work, however,
needs solid resources.
(spoke in French)
On the eve of the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate,
we look to the future hopefully but realistically. I am
confident that when the songs of the Congolese youth
have replaced the sound of bullets, prosperity will be
around the corner.
I would like to thank all of the United Nations staff
for their daily commitment, in increasingly difficult
circumstances, to working for a lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. More specifically,
on the twelfth anniversary of Radio Okapi, allow me to
express my enormous gratitude to the station’s entire
staff for their work and commitment. Radio Okapi is
a radio station unlike any other. It has become part
of daily life for the Congolese and is often their only
source of information. Through the airwaves it helps to
unify Congolese society.
I thank you, Madam President, and the members of
the Security Council once again for your support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Kobler
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: Thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council today
from London and for the strong support the Council has
given to efforts to bring durable peace and stability to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
One year after the signing of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, I remain convinced that
it offers the best prospects and hope for security and
for the improvement of the living conditions of the
people in the region, who continue to bear the brunt of
armed violence and aggression. Indeed, in the last year,
hope has risen with the defeat of the rebel Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) followed by the conclusion of the
Kampala Dialogue Declarations between the parties.

14-264825/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC), supported by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its Force
Intervention Brigade, are pursuing its efforts to rid the
east of the country of the armed groups.
Furthermore, despite numerous challenges, hope
for dialogue, trust and regional cooperation — the basis
for peace and security — have appeared stronger in the
past year. By collaborating on the regional benchmarks
and building consensus on the plan of action for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, countries of the Great Lakes region have
been able to show the possibilities of the framework
of hope, and that durable peace and security for the
region can be within grasp if the current momentum
is sustained. I should, however, stress that the situation
in the eastern parat of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region remains quite precarious and will
require actions at several levels to sustain the current
momentum and to achieve meaningful results.
A good way to sustain the current momentum and
to ensure that the framework of hope delivers on its
promises is to align international actions with emerging
positive regional dynamics that reinforce the objectives
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Angola’s current chairmanship of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) offers
a good opportunity and holds significant prospects for
advancing the cause of peace and stability in the region.
At the latest Summit of the International Conference
on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in
the Great Lakes Region, held in Luanda in January,
President Dos Santos shared a vision for his tenure
that complements the objectives of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The President initiated
a political dialogue with Presidents Kagame, Kabila,
Museveni and Zuma on illegal armed groups such as the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
and the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), during which
they agreed on a plan to tackle the sources of insecurity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
It was agreed, inter alia, that the military chiefs of staff
of the five countries involved in the dialogue would
come together and examine ways to support the plans
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address the
FDLR.

6/14

14/03/2014

I believe that a regional plan borne out of dialogue
holds good prospects, and I am strongly encouraging
the political leadership of President Dos Santos to
ensure coherence and to be a rallying point for the
coordination of efforts in the region. My several
meetings with President Dos Santos have been very
encouraging, and I firmly believe that much progress
can be achieved by Angola’s leadership of the ICGLR
in the next two years.
As I was saying earlier, the FARDC, supported
by MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade,
are making significant progress in their operations
against the ADF. Operations have now started against
the FDLR, as the Council has heard. Those are indeed
important developments. However, I believe they should
take into account the regional plan and the steps agreed
in Luanda and align efforts for optimum results. It is
my sincere hope that robust operations against FDLR
elements who refuse to surrender will be vigorously
sustained and concluded speedily. Those who surrender
and who have not been involved in the genocide or
other serious crimes should have the option to return to
Rwanda in dignity through the established processes.
President Kabila’s commitments in Luanda to
address the FDLR threat in a comprehensive manner
by the end of the year and his Government’s ultimatum
on 24 February to the FDLR, as well as the recent
actions by the FARDC, supported by MONUSCO and
the Force Intervention Brigade, are very encouraging
signs. Tackling the FDLR presence in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should indeed
go a long way to address Rwanda’s concerns and ease
tensions in the region. It would form the building blocks
for trust and mutual confidence, with multiplier effects
to facilitate regional economic and social cooperation.
It would also facilitate efforts for the full restoration
of State authority in the Kivu regions of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As we move into the second year of implementation,
it is equally important that we fast-track the social
and economic aspects of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. As I have always said, peace
cannot take root without tangible evidence on the
ground that jobs and businesses are able to flourish,
with people feeling a difference in their lives.
Following the endorsement by the regional
oversight mechanism of the convening of a private
sector investment conference for the region, I have been

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

working, together with my team, with the ICGLR, the
African Union (AU), the European Union, the World
Bank, United Nations agencies and with a number of
Member States to hold the conference before the end
of this year. The conference will promote a shared
understanding of the role of the private sector in
advancing the economic pillar of the Framework,
inspire actionable policy recommendations for the
consideration of decision makers and create a venue
for public and private stakeholders of the signatory
countries to identify business and investment
opportunities. It will also create a space for business
leaders to forge relationships, expand their professional
networks and share experiences.
My Office will convene the conference jointly
with the ICGLR, the Southern African Development
Community and the African Union, in close consultation
with other United Nations agencies, countries of
the region and with the support of the bilateral and
multilateral institutions.
The social and economic pillars of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework also recorded
some achievements with the establishment of the
Women’s Platform for the Framework, which I had the
privilege to help launch on 28 January in Addis Ababa,
during the AU summit. The ICGLR opened the regional
training facility on sexual and gender-based violence in
Kampala, on 16 February, for the training of security
personnel in the region. Collaboration is ongoing with
the ICGLR and other partners to operationalize those
important mechanisms.
My recent interactions with civil society
organizations from across the region — which took
place in Addis Ababa on the margins of the African
Union January Summit and in follow-up meetings, both
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and lately in
The Hague, during the meeting of the International
Contact Group — have clearly revealed the readiness
of that critical group to play an active role in the
implementation of the Framework. I look to Council
members to lend their support to all of those initiatives,
which would directly impact the lives of the people of
the region.
Related progress has been achieved at national
level, as well since the endorsement of the plan of
action for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. I commend President
Kabila and the Government of the Democratic Republic

S/PV.7137

of the Congo for promulgating the amnesty law, in
line with the Kampala Dialogue Declarations, which
formally ended the conflict with the M-23. I think we
must all recognize that it was not an easy step for a
Government to take and that it was a sign of leadership
that the Government was determined that it had to be
part of the process.
The amnesty, as we know, will not be extended to
those responsible for serious crimes and human rights
violations. However, more actions are required to
follow up, particularly on the repatriation from Uganda
and Rwanda of former M-23 combatants and the
beginning of an effective disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process for eligible members.
During my recent visit in the region, I raised the
issue of the former M-23 combatants with the relevant
authorities. I am glad that some progress is being made
in relation to DDR and that there are active discussions
with international partners. But this is a critical issue
on which more progress is needed, as my colleague and
friend Martin Kobler has emphasized.
I continue to be engaged with Ugandan Minister
of Defence Kiyonga, the ICGLR and the national
oversight mechanism in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to fast track the establishment of the followup mechanism, as agreed under the Kampala Dialogue
Declarations.
Meanwhile, several critical issues remain that
require urgent attention. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, more needs to be done to consolidate
State authority throughout the country, reform the
security sector — again, I agree with Martin Kobler
that this has to be more of a priority, particularly with
regard to the army — and promote good governance,
reconciliation, tolerance and democratization. While
efforts are ongoing to align various national plans with
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, for
optimal results the Democratic Republic of the Congo
national oversight mechanism needs to be further
strengthened to efficiently carry out its mandate.
During my recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I was pleased to learn from both Prime
Minister Matata Ponyo Mapon and the Coordinator of
the national oversight mechanism, François Mwamba,
that support to the mechanism and coordination with
the Government was improving.
Despite the modest progress recorded in the
past year, we still have a long way to go to achieve

14-264827/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the objectives of the Framework. The security and
humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains fragile. I
would say it remains unacceptable, because there is still
not the security needed by women and their families
in particular. We must therefore find the means and
courage to address all underlying causes of conflicts,
promote reconciliation and tackle the obstacles that
impede the voluntary return of refugees in safety and in
dignity. Furthermore, efforts should be geared towards
working with the region to build trust, without which
economic and social cooperation cannot thrive.
While efforts should remain focused on stabilizing
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we must equally be mindful of the impact of
developments in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, also signatories to the Framework and
neighbours to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I am very concerned — as I know members of the
Council are — about continuing reports of gross
violations of human rights in those countries and the
prevailing security situation.
Recently, at a breakfast in Kinshasa on 3 March,
I met Catherine Samba-Panza, interim President of
the Central African Republic. We spoke at length. She
informed me of the urgent need for additional capacity
to be provided by the United Nations to support
peacekeeping in her country and requested that I bring
this dire need to the attention of members of the Council
today.
In addition, and in a way that I think requires our
attention, the growing tensions in another signatory
country, Burundi, are also quite worrisome. I will
travel to Bujumbura on 19 March to engage with the
Government and stakeholders, in close coordination
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga.
Before travelling to Burundi, I will be in Goma, on
18 March, one year to the day from when my mandate
started, for an announcement and press conference
about the “peace one day”, 21 September, which will
be celebrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
this year. It will be an opportunity for the world to take
stock, in a sense, of both the progress and the needs in
that country.
In the coming months, certain courses of actions
will be critical if further meaningful progress is to be
achieved in the implementation of the Framework. At

8/14

14/03/2014

the national level, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to quickly implement
the provisions of the Kampala Dialogue Declarations,
including the administrative and technical steps to
facilitate the repatriation of the almost 2,000 former
M-23 combatants who fled to Rwanda and Uganda last
year. Further delay in that process could be costly to
peace and regional stability.
The national DDR programme also needs to gain
immediate traction. It remains stalled due to the lack
of an agreed approach and an agreed funding plan
with international partners. Concrete actions in fair
and independent courts would also be required against
those who have committed serious violations of human
rights and international crimes. I welcome the proposal
for the establishment of mixed courts.
While it is important to hold Member States
accountable for the implementation of their
commitments and to provide support in that regard, we
must not fail to be guided by the fact that achieving
peace and stability in the region will be an incremental
process. The region will therefore require time, as well
as dedicated support, to achieve the objectives of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. More
important, international engagements and messaging
to Member States must be strong, constant, well
coordinated and coherent to achieve the desired results.
Despite the other pressures on members of the
Council — and I know they are very real — I would
plead for the continuation of the strong support that
members have shown for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region.
In the coming months, with the kind support of
the Council, I intend to continue my engagements with
President Dos Santos and Foreign Minister Chikoti
to seek further collaboration in the political dialogue
among leaders of the region on sensitive issues. It is my
sincere hope that, beginning with the ongoing dialogue
on illegal armed groups, the process will develop to
include dialogue on other critical issues that would
otherwise severely limit the achievement of the goals
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I
shall also continue my efforts with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and will support
the ICGLR secretariat’s efforts to ensure the effective
implementation and follow-up of the Kampala Dialogue
Declarations.

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Of course, I will continue to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler, with whom, as he has also said, I have an
excellent relationship. We work very closely together,
and I think that is a strength. We both understand the
need to complement each other, but also to work very
closely together.
I will also work increasingly with civil society,
including women’s groups, and with international
partners, including the team of envoys, with whom
I also have an excellent relationship, to assist the
Government in accelerating the implementation of key
national reforms, including security sector reform,
the consolidation of State authority throughout the
country, national reconciliation and democratization,
particularly as we approach the next election cycle.
Let me conclude with a personal word regarding
a special memorial event that is imminent — the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide that occurred
in Rwanda. As I said to the Council during my first
briefing as Special Envoy, in May 2013 (see S/PV.6960),
I recall vividly my first visit to Rwanda after that tragic
event, and the images of the atrocities remain indelible
in my mind. As we commemorate the genocide, I
would like to encourage all of us to reflect deeply on
the lessons learned from the past work together, to
ensure that the succeeding years — the next 20 years
and well beyond — in the Great Lakes region of Africa
will be characterized by tolerance, peace, stability and
development.
The President (spoke in
Mrs. Robinson for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Robinson
for taking the time to brief us today on the reports
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/157 and S/204/153,
respectively) and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
As the Secretary-General’s reports highlight,
despite the positive developments of late 2013, it is clear
that the momentum has slowed, with limited progress
on both the political and military fronts. We are looking
at a volatile security situation in not only the east, but

S/PV.7137

throughout the country. Negative forces are still on the
rampage, killing and maiming, raping young girls and
women, recruiting children and displacing thousands
of civilians.
The seriousness and scale of the killings and
violations that continue in Katanga and in areas formerly
occupied by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in North
Kivu are deeply troubling. A major reason for that is the
culture of impunity that continues to prevail throughout
the country. All perpetrators — whether from the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), which has committed 18 per cent of crimes
reported in 2013, or any other armed group — must be
brought to justice and held accountable for their crimes.
There is no doubt that the next few months will
be critical. We need to take a serious look at how
resolution 2098 (2013) is being implemented, especially
in the neutralization of negative armed groups, the
consolidation of the peace process and the protection of
civilians in liberated areas.
We welcome mention in the reports presented by
the briefers of the fact that some members of some
armed groups have peacefully surrendered, and indeed
we applaud the FARDC, supported by MONUSCO,
for attacking and destroying a number of Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) camps. The resumption of
the Minova trial is another positive development, and
we look forward to a conclusive prosecution that can set
a precedent for future cases. The recently promulgated
amnesty law, adopted as per the Kampala Declarations,
is also a positive step in national reconciliation, but
one that will require measurable actions. We urge
MONUSCO and the international community to closely
monitor its implementation.
However, those positive developments should not
obscure the fact that one of the oldest armed groups
remains at large. As always, for the past 20 years, the
problem that we have is the posture of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations peacekeepers, currently MONUSCO,
towards the threat posed by the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the genocidal
forces responsible for the genocide against the Tutsi.
Throughout the last quarter of 2013, we were told that
the FDLR were next on the list of negative forces to
be eliminated. What therefore happened between when
that promise was made and the next briefing? No one
knows. There is no accountability.

14-264829/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

At our most recent meeting on MONUSCO, the
military operation plan presented to the Security
Council was that the FARDC was to go after the ADF.
They did so, and we applaud them. Following that, we
were told that MONUSCO was to focus its resources
on the FDLR. Nothing happened. Only a week or two
before this briefing did we hear the news that there was
a military operation against the FDLR.
The threat of the FDLR persists, despite the mandate
of MONUSCO, which was given extra offensive
capabilities after the deployment of the Intervention
Brigade, and MONUSCO’s failure to commit to fighting
that force remains evident.
Once again, it is high time we see a change of
attitude on the part of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards the FDLR. Rwanda has
for several years expressed legitimate concerns about
the lack of political will of that Government to tackle
the threat of the FDLR. Various Security Council
reports have detailed evidence of all kinds of support
given to the FDLR by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Rwanda has provided even more.
The continuous excuses given by MONUSCO,
again and again, when it comes to conducting
military operations against the FDLR are disturbing.
While it is not making excuses about the lack of
intelligence — which Rwanda has shared with
MONUSCO — it is engaged in propaganda operations
to hoodwink the Security Council about military
operations with the FARDC against the FDLR. On
9 March 2014, the MONUSCO Force Intervention
Brigade, jointly with the FARDC, raided the FDLR’s
illegal road block along the Kalengera-Tongo road.
Reliable information revealed that Colonel Ramadan,
the acting FARDC commander of the eighth military
region, leaked information of the impending Brigade
attack on the FDLR, thus undermining the operation.
Let me just add that it is not only Rwanda
expressing frustration over inaction against negative
forces. The countries of the region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) have
expressed frustration over the lack of political will by
MONUSCO to address the threats of armed groups in
the Great Lakes region.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
host to domestic and foreign armed groups, particularly
the M-23, the FDLR and the Allied Democratic Forces/
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda. As a

10/14

14/03/2014

result, the ICGLR came up with detailed mechanisms
to address the situation, including political and military
measures. Some of those mechanisms have been taken
over by the United Nations, including the Intervention
Brigade under MONUSCO — and yet the major threat
posed by the FDLR has not been tackled. That was
again the subject of the ICGLR Summit held in Luanda
on 15 January 2014, where the chiefs of defence staffs
of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Uganda and South Africa were again tasked
with assessing the situation and coming up with new
mechanisms to eradicate the FDLR.
On the current situation regarding the FDLR, let me
briefly share some updates with the Council on FDLR
activities. The FDLR’s strength is estimated at 3,640,
with infantry and integral weapons. That strength
is likely to increase, due to ongoing recruitment and
training. Currently, the FDLR is engaged in the
following activities.
First, it is enhancing collaboration with FARDC,
especially at the operational level. That has enabled
the FDLR to refit, re-arm, share intelligence and have
freedom of action and free passage for infiltration
and terror attacks in Rwanda. From July 2013 to date,
42 FDLR infiltrators and terror elements have been
arrested and are undergoing prosecution in Rwandan
courts.
Secondly, on the mobilization, recruitment, training
and establishment of terror networks in Rwanda, those
activities are facilitated by provision of safe passage
and logistics by the FARDC.
Thirdly, the recent claim by MONUSCO that
the FDLR is located in populated areas is just a
sheer lie. Instead, the outfit has most of its units in
Virunga National Park, in North Kivu province. It
also maintains its dispositions in unpopulated areas of
Mwenga and Uvira territories in South Kivu, involved
in illegal mining and taxation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to sustain the war
effort.
I would also like to discuss a different issue,
M-23 ex-combatants. While the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/157) suggests that consultations on the
unresolved issue of the ex-combatants in Rwanda are
ongoing, we remind the Council that those combatants
have been in Rwanda since March 2013 — almost a
year. The Government of Rwanda has done everything
required by international law to contain that group,

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

including relocating them to Ngoma district in Eastern
Province, approximately 250 kilometres from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo border. But despite
our repeated calls for the international community to
assume responsibility, not much has been done. Some
contacts were initiated in December, but they were not
really that much.
I will not dwell much on the report on the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework (S/2014/153),
since the implementation of the Framework will be
discussed on 27 March in Nairobi.
As we have said previously, next month marks the
twentieth commemoration of the genocide against the
Tutsi. There could be no greater symbol of justice for
its victims than the defeat and eradication of the FDLR
once and for all. It is a virulent genocidal force that has
been allowed to terrorize the region for the past two
decades.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to express how honoured we are
to see you presiding over the Security Council today.
You represent Luxembourg, a country with which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo enjoys a long
relationship marked by mutual esteem and respect. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor, the representative of Lithuania, and
to congratulate her for the commitment and skill with
which she headed the Council during the past month.
I should also like to convey to the Security Council
the gratitude of the people and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the United
Nations efforts to uphold the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country and to ensure its peace and
stability.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, whose interest in working to
consolidate peace in my country led to his personal
involvement in bringing together the leaders of the
Great Lakes region and Southern Africa for the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
That agreement was concluded in Addis Ababa on
24 February 2013.

S/PV.7137

My delegation has taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2014/153), as
well as the Secretary-General’s report on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/157), which
the Council is currently discussing.
My delegation is pleased to note that the two
reports both acknowledge the efforts of my country
in the implementation of its commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. For the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the implementation
of the Framework — which for the first time lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in the east of the
country and for peaceful cohabitation between it and
its neighbours, especially those of the east — should
be emphasized. That Framework and resolution 2098
(2013), which reinforces the Framework, represent major
innovations, both in stemming the crisis that has been
rampant in the Great Lakes region since the mid-1990s
and in the traditional United Nations peacekeeping
doctrine. For the long-suffering people of the region,
the Framework and the resolution are striking proof of
the determination of the international community to
help find a definitive solution to the instability that has
lasted far too long and has cost my country greatly.
From that perspective, my delegation would like to
endorse the appeal launched by the Heads of State and
Government of the signatory countries of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework at the high-level
meeting of the regional oversight Mmechanism, which
took place in Addis Ababa on 31 January 2014, in which
they called upon the countries of the region to cooperate
and undertake necessary measures to neutralize armed
groups; to combat impunity for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, conflict-related sexual violence and
other gross violations of human rights; and to undertake
appropriate actions against those persons subject to the
United Nations sanctions regime.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
determined to assume its share of responsibility so that
peace and concord return to the region. To that effect,
as soon as the Framework was signed, the Congolese
Government undertook to fulfil its obligations. It is
pursuing its efforts to conclude security sector reform.
Reforming the structures and staffs of the army, the
security services and the police; recruiting Congolese
youth from all provinces of the country into the defence

14-2648211/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

forces; reopening military academies; and training,
with help from bilateral partners, of special forces
and support units, with the primary goal of making
operational the rapid-reaction force — all those concrete
actions have already begun and the Government will
bolster them so as to make the defence of our territory
more effective and to better guarantee the authority of
the State.
As stressed by the Secretary-General in his
two reports, the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, promulgated
on 11 February 2014 the law on amnesty for rebellion,
war and political crimes committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between 18 February 2006 and
20 December 2013.
One month ago, after his statement before the
Lower Chamber of Parliament, the Chair of the
Independent National Electoral Commission met with
political parties and groups. That meeting, which
marked the launch of the 2014-2016 electoral cycle, led
to the unanimous adoption of the new Code of Conduct
for political parties and candidates. As of 10 February,
the Code had been signed by 233 political parties.
Within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
I wish to recall that on 26 December 2013 the
Council of Ministers adopted the third national plan
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The identification of combatants from armed groups
in North Kivu, regrouped into the Bweremana and
Kanyaruchinya sites, has been completed. Those who
are eligible under the plan will be consistently evacuated
to triage centres for DDR operations. Meanwhile,
the evacuation to the Kitona triage centre of BakataKatanga ex-combatants who fulfil the conditions
continues.

14/03/2014

forcible disarmament of all national and foreign armed
groups still active throughout the country who refused
to respond to the offer of voluntary disarmament.
In the area of operations, the pursuit of rebels who
rejected the DDR programme began with the launch of
the campaign to restore peace to the east by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) on 16 January. Operations are progressing
satisfactorily against the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) in North Kivu and in the southern part of that
province, and against the Rwandese rebels of the FDLR
in South Kivu.
In that vein, Mr. Martin Kobler recently welcomed
the FARDC operations against the FDLR and the
armed groups and announced the support and close
engagement of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) with the Congolese army
to neutralize the FDLR. As the spokesperson of the
Government said during a press conference on 7 March,
Mr. Kobler has also requested, in a communiqué to the
FDLR rebels, that they immediately stop supporting
their leaders who are being prosecuted, or expect to be
forcibly disarmed.
Along those same lines — to take up the idea
expressed on 26 February before the American Senate
by the Special Envoy of the United States of America for
the Great Lakes Region — if the countries sheltering the
defeated elements of the M-23 fail to hand them over to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and international
justice, they will have the great responsibility, in line
with the provisions of the Framework, to ensure that
those individuals do not resume their hostile activities.

Furthermore, as my country’s President announced
in his address to the nation on 31 December, the
decentralization process will soon start with the
establishment of the new Government, against the
background of the gradual establishment of new
provinces, the devolution of central Government
financial services to the provinces and the establishment
of the national stabilization fund.

With regard to the support of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the FDLR,
which the Ambassador of Rwanda has just spoken
of, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during
a previous Council meeting (see S/PV.7107), made
the Council aware of the Government’s efforts in the
pursuit it had already conducted with the Government
of Rwanda. Subsequently, those efforts were continued
by my Government alone, and then with the help of
MONUSCO. As we have already told the Council,
those efforts were interrupted after the M-23 rebellion.

The Council will recall that, after the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the President,
the Supreme Commander of the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo, ordered the

As I have just said, now that the M-23 rebellion
has been put down, it was the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that asked the Council to establish the
Intervention Brigade. The Brigade was established at

12/14

14-26482

14/03/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the request of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and on it the Council conferred the mandate to eradicate
all the opposition forces in the region, as well as the
various armed groups. That task — as I have said, and
Mr. Kobler is present — has begun.
As we have always said, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not interested
in supporting the FDLR. The FDLR has been present
in Rwanda since the Rwandan genocide. The Council
knows well that the FDLR did not come to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at our country’s
request. It was because the Democratic Republic of
the Congo wanted to be hospitable by welcoming the
Rwandan people who were fleeing the genocide. That
is how those responsible for the genocide came to the
country.
Today the problem has become a problem of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is constantly
having to deal with it. It is certainly the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that is suffering because the
FDLR, since coming to our country, has been killing
the Congolese. Congolese women are being raped.
Congolese villages are being burned. We are the ones
suffering from the FDLR. Unless one is cynical, can one
believe that a Government whose people are suffering
from such acts can support those criminals? No, one
cannot. I said that the last time to the Ambassador of
Rwanda, who, as the Council, knows, continues to talk
about the genocide, soon to be commemorated. But he
should not be cynical about the Congolese people, who
are suffering.
In the eastern part of my country, we have lost
more than 6 million people, who have died. As I said
here last time, if the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was not involved in the Rwandan genocide, could
Rwanda not help us regarding the 6 million people who
have died in the east? One should not make fun of the
Congolese people because the Congolese Government
has no reason to support the FDLR. We have no interest
in supporting it.
Mr. Kobler works in the region. He can attest to
that. Yesterday, as the Council knows, when the experts
presented the report here, what were the accusations
of the Rwandan representative? In condemning the
experts’ report he was also criticizing MONUSCO.
He said that MONUSCO was also cooperating with
the FDLR. I believe that to be in bad faith, because
Rwanda supports that element, which allows it to carry

S/PV.7137

on destabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is a pretext, and he knows that today, if the Council
removes that pretext there will no longer be any reason
to be in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
carry out such activities there. I therefore appeal to
the international community and all Security Council
members to help us to resolve the situation, in which
my country is truly innocent. We cannot tolerate being
accused here without grounds.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be undertaken in the spirit of paragraphs
9, 10, 11 and 12 of resolution 2098 (2013), of 28 March
2013, by which the Security Council decided to extend
and complete, through the Force Intervention Brigade,
the mission it had been given to neutralize armed
groups, as set out sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 12 of
the resolution, which would allow it to reduce the threat
posed by armed groups to State authority and civilian
security in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and prepare the way for stabilization activities.
To that end, I congratulate MONUSCO, its
Intervention Brigade and the countries contributing
troops to it for the quality of the work done throughout
the first term now coming to a close. The work of the
Intervention Brigade, working side by side with the
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
led to the defeat of M-23, was very much appreciated by
the Congolese people.
For my Government, the second mandate of the
Intervention Brigade, which will soon begin, should
bring success to the efforts already undertaken to
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and throughout the Great Lakes region. In the words
of President Kabila Kabange on the occasion of the
signing of the Framework Agreement,
“It is time, high time, that we guarantee our
people the right to life and sustained enjoyment of
the most precious good which they expect from their
leaders, namely, peace — not the peace of bayonets,
and still less the peace of cemeteries, whose essence
is artificial and ephemeral, but the peace that arises
from the recognition of a shared destiny, the will
to live together and responsibly address problems,
and respect for rules and principles, especially
those that we have just subscribed again by signing
the Framework agreement.

14-2648213/14

S/PV.7137

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

“That peace is admittedly demanding, but it is
the only one able to withstand the ravages of time
and the vagaries of history. It is not possible without
the sincerity of the actors, and it can only be built
in the context of truth. The truth is that, though
it has been repeatedly assaulted, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a country that loves peace,
has always respected the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all its neighbours. And it always will
be thus.”
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the presence among us of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler,
and thank him for the dynamism that he has impressed
upon MONUSCO’s activities in the field of operations.
I also wish to express our gratitude to Her Excellency
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for her
commitment and efforts towards restoring a lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
throughout the Great Lakes region.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Rwanda has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I will not
waste your time, Madam President. I have just a small
rectification to make here. You will understand why,
Madam. I am Rwandan. I would not say it otherwise.
I would like to tell my dear colleague, the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, that we are not going to celebrate the Rwandan
genocide. I know that ours is not the language of Molière

14/14

14/03/2014

and Voltaire, but what we are going to do on 7 April
is commemorate the genocide perpetrated against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. I wanted to make that rectification.
We are not going to celebrate. That is all.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Democratic Republic of the Congo has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of Congo) (spoke in French): I appreciate the
rectification that the representative of Rwanda has
just made. It is a commemoration in which we will all
participate, because what his country experienced was
sad and we cannot accept it.
I would also like to take this opportunity to say we
do not have a culture of impunity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I think that what we say at this
tabledeserves a minimum of respect because it is said
in the name of the authorities of our countries. I had
already said it last time — the Ambassador of Rwanda
should learn to respect other countries, to respect us, to
respect the authorities of my country.
We will therefore no longer accept that type of
language. As I just said, as a member of the Security
Council, he should not say or do certain things. He has
no right to that. In response to everything he just said,
which offends my country, I invite him to have respect
for my country and for the authorities of my country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

14-26482
