UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2547th

MEETING:

~~ui.sl+
15 JUNE

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/2547).

. .... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/16596 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2547
.

‘

,b,{‘::

,.

,

r

I
r,‘;:

NOTE
Symbok of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.’
:

;
:_.
::
:_:_
:
::
:
::::
:
::

2547th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 15 June 1984, at 11 a.m.
President:

Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

of

appropriate moment I shall invite Mr. Ertekiin to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.

3. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of item 2 of the agenda. Members of the Council
have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the
period 1 December 1983 to 31 May 1984 [S/Z6596 and
Add.2 and 21. Members also have before them a draft
resolution [S/26622], which has been prepared in the
course of the Council’s consultations.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2547)

4. i; is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolu-,
tion to the vote now. There being no objection, it is so
decided.

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus .(S/16596 and
Add.1 and 2).
The meeting

A vote was taken by show of hands.

was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
Adoption

The draft resolution
lution 5.5j (1984)].

was adomed unanimouslv _*freso-

of the agenda
5. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): Pakistan voted in
favour of Security Council resolution 553 (1984), which
extends the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
until 15 December 1984 because we wished to underscore once again
the importance that we attach to the United Nations
peace-keeping role and to the need for the continued
presence of a United Nations force in Cyprus to facilitate a settlement of the Cyprus question.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/16596 and Add.1 and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

6. However, our position on the contents of the resolution remains the same, as stated in our explanation of
vote at the time of the adoption of Council resolution
544 (1983) on 15 December 1983 [2503rd meeting].
7. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (T,urkey) took places at the Council table.

8. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you warmly on your assumption
of the high oflice of the presidency of the Security
Council and to express our deep appreciation to you
for your leadership. I commend you on the skilful
and tactful manner in which you have conducted the
consultations on the draft resolution which has just
been adopted, renewing the mandate of UNFICYP
for
another period of six months. I would be remiss if
I were not to add a word of great satisfaction regarding
the traditionally
close relations existing between

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that in the
course of the Council’s consultations members of the
Council agreed that an invitation should be extended to
Mr. Necati M. Ertekiin in accordance with rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall take it that the Council decides to
invite Mr. Ertekiin in accordande with rule 39. At the
1

.

Cyprus and the United Kingdom, both bilaterally
as well as in the framework of the family of Commonwealth.

on the Cyprus problem in this body, as well as in the
General Assembly and other competent international
forums, reflect the inhuman expulsion of 200,000 people from their ancestral homes and lands, the humanitarian problems of hundreds of missing and enclaved
persons, the inadmissible policy of importing settlers
from the mainland of Turkey, the actions against the
identity of Cyprus as a single coherent unit and, recently, the purported secessionand other illegal actions
or threats of actions.

9. I should like also to express deep appreciation to
your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for his valuable contribution to tackling the different tasks of the Council during
the month of May. I wish particularly to congratulate
him on the impeccable manner in which he carried out
the duties of the presidency of the Council when the
question of Cyprus was before this forum.

15. The renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP is,
therefore, also a reminder that ail these injustices and
breaches of the Charter and international law are still
continuing. United Nations resolutions-especially the
unanimously adopted General Assembly resolution
3212(XXIX), later unanimously endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 365 (1974)-remain unimplemented, and as a result the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus are still
being violated. The Turkish occupation troops have not
been withdrawn, and the refugees have not been allowed to return to their homes and lands, as is provided
for by the aforementioned resolutions.

10. I wish to thank the members of this body for their
decision to renew the UNFICYP mandate, made necessary under the circumstances by the continuing occupation and escalating actions by Turkey aiming at the
dismemberment of my country, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, of international law and
of all relevant United Nations resolutions. We warmly
welcome this renewal. We believe that any interference
with the status and the freedom of deployment of
UNFICYP will have grave consequences for Cyprus,
for the region and for world peace and security.
11. Further, I wish on this occasion to reiterate our
assurances of full co-operation and respect to the
Secretary-General and to thank him for his tireless
efforts in pursuing the cause of peace and justice in
Cyprus in accordance with his mandate and the principles of the Charter. We rely upon his statesmanship and
unswerving dedication to these lofty principles and to
the purposes of the United Nations for ajust solution of
our problem. A special tribute is due to Mr. Hugo Gobbi
for the exemplary manner in which he and his deputy
Mr. Holger pursue their difficult mission as Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Cyprus.

:.:.
_‘_
:.
.-.
::
_‘_
:_

. ,
:.
. -.
:.
:.
,

:.

16. Thus, cherished principles and noble ideals are
being put to a severe test in Cyprus. The principle of
non-use of force in international relations, as provided
for by Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, has been
violated. The principle of the inviolability of the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity
of States is blatantly ignored by Turkey. The human
rights of the people in that beautiful and historic island
are suppressed under the yoke of the Turkish occupation troops, whose urgent and immediate withdrawal
should be effected without any further delay. Freedom
of movement and unimpeded intermingling of our people, which is indispensable in an interdependent world,
has been replaced by a policy of forced segregation on
the basis of strict ethnic and racial criteria, a situation
so reminiscent of the system of apartheid. The policy,
imposed to serve the political aims of partition and
annexation of the occupied part of Cyprus to mainland
Turkey, is being carried out in a United Nations era,
before the eyes of a world community which has repeatedly declared its condemnation of such policies.
Yet the perpetrators of these actions find it possible to
continue and even to escalate them.

12. I should also like to commend the valuable
contribution made by the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Brian Urquhart, and his able colleagues in the
Secretariat, Mr. Sherry and Mr. Picco, and to thank
them for their long years of assistance and co-operation. My Government’s deep appreciation goes also to
the Commander of UNFICYP, Major-General Guenther Greindl, and to his officers and men, for the efftcient and dedicated manner in which they are carrying
out their duties.
13. Last but not least, we express our warm feelings
of gratitude to the friendly Governments which,
through voluntary contributions of personnel and
funds, made it possible for UNFICYP to continue rendering its most valuable peace-keeping services in my
country.

17. How is this made possible? And why is yet
another renewal of the mandate of UNFICYPneeded?
The answer is obvious. Turkey is disregarding and violating all provisions of United Nations resolutions on
Cyprus, even the very resolution-General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX)-in
favour of which Turkey
itself voted, a resolution which was later unanimously
endorsed and rendered mandatory by this Council. This
behaviour is, of course, unacceptable and condemnable. However, the fact that theUnited Nations does not
seem to be in a position either to prevent this grave
injustice or to enforce its many mandatory Security
Council resolutions on Cyprus is the crux of the

14. By adopting last month its landmark resolution
550 (1984), the Security Council has once again recognized the question of Cyprus as a grave international
problem of invasion, aggression, continuing occupation
and massive violation by Turkey of the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of our people. The debates
2

problem, which goes beyond the island of Cyprus and
encompassesthe rest of mankind, thus endangering the
very basis of the Organization, and especially the Security Council, whose primary responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security.
18. It has been argued-perhaps rightly-that the lack
of unanimity on the part of the permanent members of
the Security Council has been and continues to be one
of the main reasons for the Council’s failure to respond
effectively to cases of aggression or other breaches of
the peace. Furthermore, this argument is frequently
invoked to explain the failure of the Council to take
action for the implementation of its mandatory resolutions and thereby to give substance and meaning to the
relevant provisions of the Charter.
19. Yes, I should say that the lack of unanimity among
the permanent members of the Council has been and
continues to be a main obstacle. But what about the
case of Cyprus? The Council unanimously adopted its
resolution 365 (1974) endorsing the unanimously
adopted General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
and as recently as November last it also adopted resolution 541(1983) with the support, and positive vote, of all
the permanent members. On 11May this year the Council strongly pronounced itself again by adopting resolution 550 (1984).
20. What justification or ground for reluctance to act
as warranted could be invoked in the case of Cyprus,
when we have repeated, unanimously adopted resolutions of the Security Council and the overwhelming
support of the membership of the United Nations? In all
honesty, I can think of none, unless one takes the
defeatist approach that the United Nations is a debating
society whose decisions are of no consequence, an
approach which my Government strongly and completely rejects.
21. The tragedy of Cyprus personifies the plight of
the small and militarily weak States, which by choice
and necessity have placed in the United Nations their
hopes for peace and security. Their security should
be of special concern to the United Nations. The small
States, by being vulnerable, present a challenge to,
and accentuate the responsibility of, the Organization,
testing its usefulness and its ability to fulfil its primary
mission.
22. Ifthe United Nations continues to allow its resolutions to be contemptuously disregarded, it will sustain
still more serious set-backs, and its prestige and very
usefulness will be further eroded. The credibility of the
United Nations depends on whether the world Organization lives up to the commitments of the Charter by
taking effective action when the situation warrants.
23. The question of Cyprus is a situation in which
effective action by the Security Council is necessary
and warranted. If such action is taken, the trend of our
being at the mercy of aggressive States will change, and

the world will become indeed a peaceful and secure
place in which to live.
24. Regrettably, this is not the present situation, and
as a result in my country one third of the total population, uprooted from their ancestral homes and lands,
wake up each morning in temporary housing or refugee
camps, yearning to return to their towns and villages.
Each day one can witness refugees longingly looking
from afar at their beloved homes and lands in the occupied part of Cyprus. They are separated against their
will from people and places they hold dear. They feel
bitter at the injustice perpetrated against them for a
decade. Their frustration grows even stronger because
of the illegal actions taken to change the demographic
character of their homeland and because of the lack of
urgent and effective steps to stop and reverse these
actions, which constitute a crime against humanity.
25. The occupied areas of Cyprus have been heavily
colonized by the importation of an alien population
numbering in the thousands, in furtherance of Ankara’s
plans to change the demographic .structure of Cyprus
and incorporate it into mainland Turkey. These colonizers are usurping the homes and lands of the uprooted
indigenous population, lands and properties acquired
by sweat and tears. Already 40,000 to 50,000 of them
have been settled in the occupied areas. The evidence
of their presence is staggering, and no double talk or
evasive tactics by the representative of Turkey will hide
their presence. In the words of the late Turkish Cypriot
Vice-President Fazil Kiictik, the settlers have turned
a paradise island into hell.
26. Only a few days after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 550 (1984) Turkey and its agents in
the occupied area have, as attested to by the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Council, renewed their pursuit
offairs accomplis in an attempt to effect the dismemberment of the Republic of Cyprus. By striking continuous blows at the unity of our people, so cherished by
Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike, Ankara vainly continues its efforts to break the historic links which traditionally bind them together-links forged by common
destiny and homeland.
27. Every day new steps are taken aimed at destroying the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Cyprus and at converting the
occupied part into a province of Turkey. The Council is
aware that after the illegal declaration of 15November
1983, Ankara, in avain attempt to give this bogus entity
a semblance of legitimacy, exchanged so-called ambassadors on 18 April this year. Furthermore, it contemplates the holding in the near future of a so-called referendum for the adoption of a “constitution” and the
holding of “elections”, the latter aimed at furthering
Mr, Denktag’s ambition to perpetuate his stranglehold
on the “presidency” in the occupied areas.
28.: This so-called State has no territory other than the
areas militarily occupied by Turkey, which constitute

:,:.
:
i
.
f !I
_‘.
_‘.
:.:.
-.

.-_

:

.,
_’
-.

._
::
_.,‘,

an integral and inseparable part of the Republic of Cyprus, the latter having de jure jurisdiction
over it, as
recognized by international law, and as reaffirmed by a
host of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The indigenous people, who constitute 80 per
cent of the population of those areas, have been forcibly
uprooted by the Turkish troops and replaced by Anatolian settlers, the latter having been illegally given
Cypriot citizenship and the homes of the uprooted.
29. How could the offspring of such actions be recognized as a State? How can any State Member of the
United Nations have any relations with an entity which
is the outcome of aggression and usurpation? Naturally, the so-called declaration of independence of that
area was condemned in Security Council resolutions.
541(1983) and 550 (1984). The Council considered that
declaration illegal and invalid and demanded its withdrawal.
30. The Turkish actions during the period under review further to colonize the Varosha area should be of
special concern to the members of the Council, especially in the light of paragraph 5 of resolution 550 (1984),
adopted only last month. This resolution should be fully
and scrupulously implemented
in all its aspects.
3 1. The Secretary-General,
in paragraph 26 of his report of 1 June 1984 [S/26596], gives an account of the
unheeded representations made by UNFICYP
to the
Turkish side regarding the latter’s illegal actions for
further settlement of Varosha, and in paragraph 60 the
Secretary-General
states:
“I am therefore disturbed by evidence that the status
quo is being tampered with in the north-western part
of Varosha. I have conveyed my concern about this
development to the party involved.”
It is worth noting that the Secretary-General
words “is being tampered with”,, meaning
continuing right now.

uses the
that it is

32. It is also worth remembering that even while the
Security Council was meeting in May to consider the’
complaint of Cyprus on the exchange of “ambassadors”, Turkey was proceeding with the settlement of
Varosha. Furthermore,
Turkey, in utter disregard of
resolution 550 (1984) and in ‘violation of its paragraph 3
-which
calls on all States not to recognize the purported State of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and further calls upon them not to facilitate or
in any way assist the aforesaid secessionist entity-is
playing host ,to Mr. Denktag, ‘in a so-called offtcial
‘.
visit.
33. I say to members of the Council that this Turkish
attitude and such contempt and arrogance prove more
clearly than ever that the problem of Cyprus, which you
are so diligently considering and on which you have
repeatedly pronounced yourselves, grave as it may be
for the people of Cyprus, is as much our problem as it is
yours. You decide, Turkey rejects; you call, Turkey

turns a deaf ear; you adopt resolutions, Turkey flouts
them and tears them up in the face of this organ.
34. The insincerity of Ankara and of Mr. Denktas is
colossal. On the one hand they pay lip service to the
need for separate negotiations, and on the other, by
their deeds and policies, they seek to destroy the agreed
pattern for a solution, based on United Nations resolutions and the high-level agreements. In other words, as
an eminent impartial connoisseur of the Cyprus problem put it, they want to create such an extremity that
there would be nothing left to negotiate about short of
asking the Government of Cyprus to submit and accept
the partition and destruction of the Republic.
35. The decision to.renew the mandate of UNFICYP,
welcome as it is, serves one aspect of the mission of the
United Nations in Cyprus, namely, peace-keeping. The
other aspect, peace-making, could not and.should not,
be overlooked. The two are tied together. What are the
prospects for peace-making?
36. I have already covered the numerous violations of
United Nations resolutions by Turkey and the faits
aqqmplis which outrightly undermine the efforts of the
Secretary-General
to bring forth positive results in the
mission of good offices. It follows that unless there
is withdrawal, reversal and remedy for these illegal
actions, the Secretary-General
unfortunately
cannot
bring forth the desired results. The hands of the Secretary-General should therefore be freed, not from those
resolutions upon which his actions are of necessity
based, but from all violations of these mandatory resolutions.
37. To this end, there must be full and effective involvement by the Council and by those Governments
which are in a position to influence Turkey to comply
with the world verdict, as embodied in the Council’s
resolutions,
especially resolutions
365 (1974), 367
(1975), 541(1983) and 550 (1984). The need for decisive,
effective action was stressed eloquently and in illustrative terms by the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, during his address before
the Council on 3 May 1984 [253Zst meeting].
:
38.. In spite of the negative repercussions emanating
from the non-implementation
of Article 43 of the Charter, the Security Council still.has immense moral and
other power ,to wield and should pressure violators to
comply with its decisions. This power should be decisively exerted upon unrepentant aggressors.
39. Beyond this, certain countries, by virtue of their
relations with Turkey-and because of their power, can
constructively use their influence on Ankara. This we
consider imperative.
40. The compelling need for putting an end to the
policies of Ankara and of Mr. DenktaS aimed at the
destruction of the Republic of Cyprus and the blowingup of all bridges of co-operation between Greek Cy-

priots and Turkish Cypriots is increasingly echoed by
the moderate Turkish Cypriot leaders and the rank and
file of the Turkish Cypriot community.

47. Most regrettably, the situation in the Republic of
Cyprus has been constantly deteriorating
since the
Turkish aggression of 1974 because of the continuing
Turkish military occupation of part of the territory of
the Republic and because of other related secessionist
actions which have led the Council recently to adopt
resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (1984). My Government
has on many occasions expressed its views before the
Council and the General Assembly concerning the continuing violation by Turkey in the Republic of Cyprus of
all norms of international law and of numerous resolutions of the United Nations. Most recently, when the
Council discussed the problem of Cyprus extensively
[253Zst to 2539th meetings] before adopting resolution
550 (1984), I expressed the view of my Government that
the sole party responsible for the prolongation of the
Cyprus crisis was Turkey, which fully controls a part of
the territory of the Republic through its force of occupation. I then dealt with the most substantive aspects of
the problem of Cyprus. It would be redundant indeed if
I were to reiterate again the views then expressed.

41. I should like to conclude my statement by addressing a fervent plea to the Secretary-General.
My
Government and the people of Cyprus have pinned high
hopes and expectations on Mr. Perez de Cuellar. We
know his special affinity with Cyprus. We are aware of
his statesmanship and vision. And we also know full
well how frustrating his peace-making role is. But still
we trust and believe that with his stamina and dedication to his mission of peace and with the vast moral
power of his office, the Secretary-General
can lead us
to a solution of the Cyprus crisis based on United
Nations resolutions and the high-level agreements.
42. For our part,.we have never despaired and have
always hoped that the other side would realize the need
for the creation of those conditions that would contribute to the solution of the Cyprus problem. We have
always extended a hand of co-operation and we shall
continue to contribute and respond positively to every
effort in the search for a just solution of our problem.

48. I shall therefore confine myself to stating that my
Government .subscribes to every effort aimed at the
restoration of the exercise of the sovereign authority of
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus over the
entire territory of the Republic and at the safeguarding
of its independence, unity and territorial integrity. This,
in our view, can be achieved through the withdrawal of
the Turkish forces of occupation from the Republic and
the establishment of a democratic constitutional system
providing for equal rights for all the people of Cyprus
while credibly guaranteeing the legitimate rights of the
Turkish Cypriot community,
which, along .with other
minority communities
such as the Armenians and the
Maronites, constitutes 20 per cent of the population of
the Republic of Cyprus. In the view of my Government,
no just and viable solution can be reached if the demographic realities in the Republic are disregarded.

43. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite him to make his statement.
44. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and through you the other members of
the Council for having acceded to my request, under the,
Charter, to participate in this debate. Allow me also to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I take this opportunity to express to you our appreciation of your efforts
during the Council’s informal consultations and our
confidence that you are going to guide its deliberations
with wisdom and skill. This is guaranteed not only by
your personal talent, but also by the fact that you represent a country with very long experience of involvement in world affairs. It would be remiss of me not to
express on this occasion our appreciation also of the
customarily exemplary manner in which the outgoing
President, Mr. Troyanovsky;
conducted the work of
the Council during the month of May.

49. At this point I think it fitting to stress the constructive and moderate approach of the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus, which has exhausted its inventiveness in trying to find formulas for a genuine compromise. The Government of Greece lends its full support
to President Kyprianou and his Government in their
struggle for the restoration of the Government’s
sovereign rights over the entire territory of the Republic
and to their pursuit of a viable solution to this problem.

45. We welcome the renewal of the mandate of
UNFICYP
by a unanimous vote of the Council. My
Government is genuinely convinced that the presence
and functioning of this international
Force in the territory of the Republic of Cyprus is one of the most
important factors of peace and stability in an area where
the situation continues to be unsettled, despite numerous resolutions of the United Nations.

50. Greece is a small and peace-loving country. We
wish to see freedom and peace restored in the Republic
of Cyprus as soon as possible, for any further delay
with regard to a settlement might lead to an ominous
shrinking of the options for a peaceful solution, a
development which my Government, for its part, will
spare no effort to prevent from.happening.

46. Along with the renewal of the mandate of the
Force, the resolution just adopted reaffirms the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offtces. The terms of
reference of that mission are well defined in resolutions
367 (1975), 541 (1983) and 550 (1984) of the Council.
That mission of the Secretary-General,
as defined by
the above-mentioned
resolutions, has the full support
of my Government.

51. It is in this spirit that we wish the Secretary-General success in the delicate initiative he is about to
launch in an endeavourto help the parties find ajust and
viable solution to the problem of Cyprus for the benefit
5

,‘.
..
I._
:_
:.:.
1::
v’.
:.:.
:.:.
:.::.:.
:.:.
:.:.
:.:.
_-_
:..-...
.-.
:.:.
--a
__

-.
:
:
.:

of all the people of the Republic. However, past experience of consistent Turkish intransigence and violations of the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus
makes it imperative for us to follow the developments
with extreme caution. Unfortunately,
our repeated
frustration calls for guarded attitudes. We have borne
witness so often to dramatic announcements
by the
Turkish side of proposals and gestures never implemented and serving only to create a temporarily
favourable impression that we are particularly mistrustful
of utterances made with pomp and circumstance, designed only to mislead the people for a while and then
consigned to oblivion. Only recently, promises of cooperation were given by the Turks to the SecretaryGeneral only to be followed by the declaration of the
pseudo-State. Commitments
were undertaken to transfer Famagusta to the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force, while the plans to start colonization of the city
were already apparently final. We are indeed concemed; please allow me, with all due respect, to submit
that the Council should share this concern.

debate on behalf of the Turkish people of Cyprus, an
equal co-founder partner in the independence and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus established in 1960
and one of the two parties most directly concerned with
the Cyprus dispute.
57. The Secretary-General
has recommended to the
Council, in paragraph 62 of his report of 1 June 1984
[S/16596] on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
that “it extend the mandate of UNFLCYP for a further
period of six months”, ending 15 December 1984. This
is the issue the Council was to decide in this debate, and
it has now been decided.
58. We are pleased to observe that the Secretary-General’s report, which covers the period 1 December 1983
to 31 May 19&l-notwithstanding
the fact that it embodies certain points, such as the use of certain titles
and nomenclature, on which we have reservations and
with regard to which we shall convey our views to him
in writing in due course-contains
the following three
constructive factors.

52. We believe that it is not rhetorical firecrackers and
declarations of intent that count, but intentions proper,
supported by sound, tangible evidence. I am certain
that the Government of Cyprus is looking forward to
seeing such evidence and that it will respond positively
if and when it is presented.

59. First, there is the Secretary-General’s
clear
statement in paragraph 49 that the current mission of
good offices he is pursuing is that entrusted to him by
the Security Council in its resolution 367 (1975), and the
view expressed in paragraph 59 that he can only pursue
his good offices “with the co-operation and support of
those concerned”. The Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus wholly supports the mission of good offices of
the Secretary-General
and shares the view that he can
continue only on the basis of Council resolution 367
(1975).

53. In the light of these sad realities, we are fully
conscious of the highly difficult task assigned to the
Secretary-General.
Our wishes to him, therefore, are
warm and sincere. I should like on this occasion, on
behalf of my Government, to thank the eminently distinguished Secretary-General,
Seiior Ptrez de Cutllar,
for his deep devotion to the cause of Cyprus, a devotion
which is not only genuine but which has been tested
repeatedly against many adversities. We express the
hope that he may find the stamina to continue in his
endeavours.
54. On this occasion, I should also like before concluding to express our gratitude to the Governments of
the countries contributing
contingents to the United
Nations Force, as well as to those countries which are
helping with financial contributions.
Our appreciation
goes also to the Commander of the Force, Major-General Greindl, and to the officers and men of the Force in
Cyprus, as well as to the Secretariat staff, for their
dedication to their most important mission.

60. Secondly, in paragraph 59 of his report the Secretary-General refers to “the agreed basis” for a settlement and asks the parties concerned to proceed without further delay “to seek a solution on that basis”.
It will be recalled that the mutually agreed basis and
existing framework on which negotiations were held
and on. which they should be resumed are mentioned
in the two agreements reached at the DenktagMakarios summit meeting of 12 February 1977 [see
S/22323, par+ 51 and at the DenktaS-Kyprianou
summit meeting of 19 May 1979 [see S/Z3369, para. 511, as
well as in the opening statement of the Secretary-General of 9 August 1980 [S/14100, annex] and the United
Nations “evaluation”
paper submitted on 18 November 1981.

55. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Necati M. Ertekiin, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

61. Thirdly, and still in paragraph 59 of his report, the
Secretary-General
confirms that the search for a solution should be “aimed at the establishment of a federal
state”, which is, after all, what was agreed at the two
summit meetings of 1977 and 1979.

56. Mr. ERTEKUN:
This being the first time I have
been accorded the privilege and pleasure of addressing
this body, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
and through you the other members of the Council for
having given me the opportunity to participate in this

62. I shall now proceed to the question of the renewal
of the mandate of UNFICYP.
The Turkish Cypriot
side-which,
in accordance with established practice,
as one of the parties concerned must be consulted and
the concurrence of which is required for the extension
6

of the mandate of UNFICYP-would
have been prepared to give its consent to the recommended extension, provided such an extension were carried out in a
legal and constitutional
manner. In order for the extension of the mandate, in both the north and the south, to
have had a sound legal basis, it would have been necessary to delete the reference in the Security Council
resolution just adopted to a “Government
of Cyprus”.
There is at present no legal and constitutional
single
joint “Government
of Cyprus” which is capable of
speaking for both the northern and southern parts of
Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot Administration,
which is
composed of only the Greek Cypriot wing of the joint,
bi-national
partnership Republic of 1960 and which
exercises jurisdiction
only in southern Cyprus, cannot,
in law or in fact, be accepted as the “Government
of the
whole of Cyprus”.

ment l-822/79 on the subject on behalf of the Committee
on External Economic Relations, said, “The situation
at the moment in Cyprus is that effectively there exist
two separate countries on the one island; there are no
legal links between the Turkish community
and the
Cyprus Government”,
that is to say, the Greek Cypriot
Administration
in south Cyprus.
67. It is thus abundantly clear that ever since the
Greek Cypriot aggression against the Turkish Cypriot
people in 1963 there has existed in Cyprus-and
in the
absence of a mutually agreed final political settlement
there will continue to exist-two
separate political
entities. Following the events of July and August 1974,
these two Administrations
gained further autonomy
and equality, and they have been exercising control and
authority over their respective areas ever since. Consequently, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is
the sole competent authority which can speak for and
represent the Turkish Cypriot partners of the 1960
Republic of Cyprus and the northern part of the island.

63. The existence of two separate Administrations
in
Cyprus was unequivocally
recognized by the three
guaranteeing Powers-Turkey,
Greece and the United
Kingdom-in
the Geneva Declaration of 30 July 1974
[see S/21398], and the principle of the equality of the
two sides was also acknowledged by resolutions of
the United Nations-paragraph
4 of General Assembly
resolutions 3212 (XXIX),
of 1 November
1974, for
example.

68. Events following the Greek Cypriot decision to
leave the negotiating table in April 1983, and to have
instead recourse to the General Assembly, which resulted in Assembly resolution 37/253 of 13 May 1983,
have shown that the main obstacle in the way of a
peaceful and just negotiated settlement was the continued wrongful recognition
of the Greek Cypriot
Administration
as the legitimate “Government
of Cyprus”. It will be recalled that the Turkish Cypriot
side, therefore, had no alternative last December but to
reject in toto Security Council resolution 544 (1983),
which contained a paragraph using the expression
“Government
of Cyprus” as being synonymous with
the Greek Cypriot Administration
in south Cyprus.

64. It is also significant that in paragraph 5 the Geneva
Declaration states that the Foreign Ministers of the
three guaranteeing Powers had “agreed that negotiations, as provided for in resolution 353 (1974) of the
Security Council, should be carried on with the least
possible delay to secure”, inter alia, “the re-establishment of constitutional
government in Cyprus”. This
shows that the three Foreign Ministers were clearly of
the opinion that until “constitutional
government in
Cyprus” had been “re-established”,
no such “constitutional government”
in Cyprus existed and that,
therefore, the Greek Cypriot Administration
in south
Cyprus was not then and cannot now be that “constitutional government”,
which, in the words of the
Geneva Declaration, the intercommunal
negotiations
have been seeking to “re-establish”.

69. It will be observed that the resolution which has
just been adopted is an updated version of resolution
544 (1983) and similarly refers to the “Government
of
Cyprus”. In these circumstances, we are again left with
no alternative but to reject in foto the present resolution
for the same reasons.
70. Had it not been for the inclusion of the unfortunate
reference to the “Government
of Cyprus”, as meaning
the Greek Cypriot Administration
in south Cyprus, in
resolution 544 (1983) and the present resolution, we
would have given our consent on each occasion, and
thus the legality of the presence of UNFICYP
in both
parts of Cyprus would not have been put in doubt, with
unfortunate consequences and legal problems for all
concerned.

65. This logical, legal and factual view was also
expressed by a former British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. David Owen, in the House of Commons in 1976
when he was a Minister of State in the Foreign Office,
when he said, “We must bring the Turkish and Greek
Cypriot communities together and forge again a proper
Government of Cyprus, capable of speaking for all the
people”. That is from Hansard, 22 December 1976,
column 658.

71. I should now like to comment
pects of the present resolution.

66. Similar views have also been expressed, for example, in the European Parliament. When the Transitional
Protocol to the Agreement establishing an Association
between the European Economic Community and the
Republic of Cyprus was being debated in the European
Parliament in the spring of 1980, Mr. Seal, the rapporteur, in presenting his report contained in docu-

on some other as-

72. First of all, with regard to the reference in the
fourth preambular paragraph to “other relevant resolutions” , I wish to emphasize that there are a number of
resolutions which have been rejected in toto by the
Turkish Cypriot side, while there are others which have
been accepted subject to reservations.
7

73. Secondly, with regard to paragraph 2, while the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus fully supports the
mission of good offices of the Secretary-General,
I should like to point out that this mission, as stated in
the Secretary-General’s
current report, can only continue on the basis of paragraph 6 of Security Council
resolution 367 (1975).

the Greek Cypriot people, as agreed at the summit
meetings of 1977 and 1979, was confirmed, in no uncertain terms, in paragraph 22 of our Declaration of Independence of 15 November 1983, where it was pointed
out that:
“The proclamation
of the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus will not hinder the two equal peoples and their administration
from establishing a new
partnership within the framework of a genuine federation; on the contrary, such a proclamation
can
facilitate efforts in this direction by fulfilling the necessary requisites for,the establishment of a federation.” [S/16148, annex, Enclosure I, para. 22 (b).]

74. Finally, I wish to draw the attention of the Council
to the fact that the expression “present mandate”,
referred to at the ,end of paragraph 3,. is now over
20 years old and was designed to meet the specific
needs of the situation prevailing at that time, 20 years
ago. The circumstances on the island have changed
considerably since 4 March 1964, and we think it is
now necessary to review the mandate in order to meet
present-day requirements.

78. This being so, any formalities or steps stemming
from the Declaration of Independence are obviously
domestic and internal matters, and I feel that our intentions and energies, rather than being directed at these
internal affairs, should instead be focused and concen-,
trated on ways and means of contributing to the efforts
of the Secretary-General,
within his mission of good
offices, to proceed, in his words, “without further
delay to seek a solution” on the mutually agreed basis
aimed at the establishment of a federal State.

75. I would emphasize once again that the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus is desirous of a peaceful
and just solution of the Cyprus problem, through direct
negotiations between the two peoples of Cyprus on an
equal footing, and wishes to support the mission of
good oflices of the Secretary-General
entrusted to him
by Security Council resolution 367 (1975). Furthermore, bearing in mind the positive fact&contained
in
the Secretary-General’s
current report to the Council,
to which I have already referred, and in the belief that
direct negotiations within the framework of the mutually agreed basis can be resumed on an equal footing,
the Turkish Cypriot side, notwithstanding
its unavoidable rejection of the present resolution for the reasons
explained, is nevertheless prepared to accept the presence of UNFICYP
on the territory of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus on the same basis as that
stated in December 1983. Thus, our present position
continues to be that the principle, the scope, the modalities and the procedures of co-operation between the
authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
and UNFICYP
shall be based only on decisions which
shall be taken solely by the Government of the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus. This remains the position of our Government.

79. As regards the Greek Cypriot allegations .conceming Varosha-which
are also contained in a letter
from the Greek Cypriot representative to the SecretaryGeneral and circulated as document S/l 66 12 of 11 June
198And
the way in which Varosha has been made a
propaganda issue by the Greek Cypriot side, suffice it
to say that the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
has no intention to alter the existing status quo of the
Varosha area. Various allegations concerning Varosha
which have been made were discussed in detail in
Nicosia recently with the Secretary-General’s
Acting
Special Representative,
and our position was clearly
explained to him then.
80. Allegations still continue to be made about occupation of certain houses, which in any event are outside
the area of settlement offered to the Greek Cypriots in
our proposals of 5 August 1981, the area delineated in
those proposals. Thus, I made inquiries from Nicosia.
last night, and I received categorical information to the
effect that the 13 houses alleged to have been repaired
are at present not ,occupied by anybody.

76. I do not wish to contribute to the creation of an
atmosphere that would not be conducive to the resumption of direct negotiations between the two sides on an
equal footing, under the auspices of the Secretary-General in exercise of the mission of good offtces entrusted
to him by the Council in 1975, by entering into polemics
with the Greek Cypriot representative and by trying to
reply to all his by now all-too-familiar
unfounded ahegations, particularly on those matters which are outside
the scope of the issue of the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP,
which is what is on the agenda of the Council today. I propose to reply later on to those allegations
we may consider worthy of reply or observation by way
of a written communication
which could be circulated
as a United Nations document.

81. Furthermore, with regard to certain trespassers in
certain parts of the Savoy Hotel, I had informed the
Acting Special Representative
in Nicosia that our
authorities were taking legal proceedings to have them
evicted. It has been confirmed this morning by -our
authorities that those shops which were occupied by
trespassers have now been evacuated in accordance
with the legal action taken by the authorities.
82. It will be recalled, while on the subject of Varosha, that in the various offers which the Turkish Cypriot
side has made with regard to the opening of the “Varosha area” for settlement by Greek ,Cypriots-the
most

77. I should like to point out that the desire of the
Turkish Cypriot people to establish a federation with
8

recent proposals being those of 17 November 1983,
made by Mr. Denktas here in the Security Council
[249&h meeting],
2 January 1984 [S/16246, annex]
and 18 April 1984 [S/26519, annex ZVJ, as well as in
the Secretary-General’s
five-point ideas of 16 March
1984 [see S/16519, para. Z4]-the “Varosha area” is
defined as that area which is “delineated”
in the Turkish Cypriot “proposals of 5 August 1981”. And I am
glad to note that the Secretary-General himself, in conveying his five-point ideas on 16 March, referred to the
Varosha area as the area delineated in the Turkish
Cypriot proposals of 5 August 1981. This was noted
in paragraph 14 of the Secretary-General’s
report of
1 May 1984 [S/16519].

republic as agreed at the summit meetings of 1977 and
1979.
87. In conclusion, I should like to inform the Council
that in the joint press communique’ issued yesterday at
the end of the visit to Turkey of President Denktas it
was stated:
“The two Presidents, restating that their common
cause in Cyprus is directed at a noble objective,
reaffirmed their desire for firmly safeguarding the
existence and all the legitimate rights and interests of
the Turkish Cypriot people in security, and for the
creation of durable conditions ‘of peace in Cyprus
through the achievement of a bi-zonal, bicommunal
federal settlement by means of direct negotiations.”

83. Before concluding,
I should like ‘to take this
opportunity,
first of all, to express our profound
appreciation for the untiring efforts of the SecretaryGeneral. His first-hand knowledge of the Cyprus dispute and his total dedication to a negotiated and
peaceful solution of the conflict instil in us trust and
confidence in his person ai well as in his good offices
mission, to which we reiterate our complete support
and unstinted co-operation.

88. The PRESIDENT:
resentative of Turkey,

The next speaker is the repon whom I now call.

89. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
[interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, permit me, at the very outset’
of my statement; to welcome you as President of the
Security Council for the month of June. Your distinguished diplomatic qualities are so well known and so
obvious that there is hardly any need to pay you cornpliments on this score. As was only to be expected, you
conducted the normal consultations with a great deal of
tact, enlivened from time to time with touches of typically British humour. Furthermore, it is my particular
pleasure at seeing the presidential seat of the Council
occupied by the representative of a country with which
my own country has been allied for 45 years and with
which we share a community of major interests and a
perennial mutual political orientation. I should like to
thank Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich
Troyanovsky, the distinguished representative of the Soviet Union, who
conducted the proceedings of the Council skilfully and
wisely during the course of a particularly
‘difftcult
period.

84. I should also like to convey our sincere thanks and
appreciation to Mr. Hugo Gobbi, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, for the long and valuable.
services he has rendered since he ‘was first appointed
Special Representative
in May of 1980, and we wish
him every success in his present post in Madrid. Our
sincere thanks and appreciation go to the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus,
Mr. James Holger, for the skilful and understanding
way in which he has been carrying out his duties
in Cyprus. Our thanks go also to the Commander of
UNFICYP,
Major-General
Guenther Greindl, and the
men under his command, for the manner in which they
have been carrying out their duties. Last but not least,
I should like to convey our warm appreciation and
thanks to all the members of theUnited Nations Secretariat who ‘are tirelessly ‘dealing with the question of
Cyprus.

90. We have before us today the’ report ‘of the
Secretary-General
dated 1 June 1984 [S/26596] and its
addenda of today’s date. That report is noteworthy
because, first, it demonstrates irrefutably that an almost perfect peace has reigned in Cyprus throughout
the period covered. That fact should be highlighted to
remind us of the dangerous turbulence which prevailedin the period when UNFICYP
was sent to the island by
the Security Council. Every one, in our view, should
give thought to the true reasons why finally weapons
have been silent in Cyprus‘for the past 10 years.

85. It will be seen from the general tenor of my address today that my Government is determined to find a
just and peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem and
wishes to support the efforts of the Secretary-General
in exercise of his mission of good offices which the
Council entrusted to him by paragraph 6 of its resolution 367 (1975). It gives me, therefore, great pleasure to
be able to inform the members of the Council that I have
this very morning presented to the Secretary-General a
comprehensive set of new proposals designed to bring
about an agreed settlement of the Cyprus question.’

91. Another important matter that should be stressed
in this report is the insistence with which the SecretaryGeneral makes the point that the final solution should
lead to a federation between the two communities
in
Cyprus. That is a principle which’ my Government
wholeheartedly
endorses. It is’ important
that the
Secretary-General
has deemed fit to recall this point at
this time, because federation still remains the ultimate
goal of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. My

86. For its part, the Turkish Cypriot side remains
committed to the principle of a negotiated and peaceful
settlement of the Cyprus problem. We hope that our
new proposals will pave the way‘to’a resumption of the
negotiations on an equal footing and, in due course, to
the establishment
of a bi-national,. bi-ional federal
9

Government feels that attention should be focused not
on acts which fall exclusively within the competence of
this Republic, but on the real and realistic possibilities
likely to bring the two communities together in an understanding on a federal solution.
92. The Secretary-General reiterates in his report
that his good offrce’s mission entrusted to him by the
Security Council is based on paragraph 6 of resolution
366 (1975). That is a reaffirmation which is encouraging
to my Government, because no other basis can be
imagined for the efforts of the Secretary-General to
continue and for the intercommunal negotiations to be
resumed. Those negotiations are the only way to bring
the two communities to an understanding on a bi-communal, bi-zonal and non-aligned federation.
93. The Secretary-General also made a point of repeating that the mutually agreed-upon basis for those
negotiations remains unchanged. That basis is not and
cannot be anything other than the two high-level
agreements of 1977 and 1979, the opening statement
of the Secretary-General of 9 August 1980 and the
“evaluation” document of the United Nations of
18November 1981. The four elements of that mutually
agreed-upon basis constitute an indivisible whole, and
it is in the interest of no one to depart therefrom because it is the only basis for ajust and lasting solution to
the Cyprus problem.
94. My Government believes that the’secretary-General, by his most recent report, has made a notable
contribution to the search for a negotiated settlement. It
is therefore in order to help the Secretary-General in his
efforts that the Government of the Republic of Northem Cyprus has just submitted to him this morning a
series of proposals of vital importance. In order to
ensure the success of this dkmarche, those proposals
are under the seal of diplomatic confidentiality. My
Government wholeheartedly supports this series of
proposals and very much hopes that it will be studied
with the utmost care.

obstacles if the third preambular paragraph had been
omitted.
97. Since the end of 1963there has been no “Govemment of Cyprus”. The Government of Cyprus was the
state system of the Republic of Cyprus, based upon an
association on an equal footing of the two sovereign
communities of the island which had jointly exercised
their right to selfdetermination by consenting mutually
to the creation by international treaty of the Republic of
Cyprus, on the basis of the inalterable Basic Articles of
its Constitution. Those Basic Articles were translated
into terms of international law by treaties of the same
date, 16 August 1960. Those treaties in their turn
formed an integral part of its constitutional order.
98. Those fundamental provisions were totally and
.entirely eliminated by the Greek Cypriot community
with the assistanceof Greece, and the most elementary
rights of the Turkish Cypriots were permanently
violated, until Turkey, in response to the appeal of the
Turkish community, came to rescue them from
subjugation and extermination. The Government of Cyprus, therefore, does not exist. The group which claims
that title is authorized to represent only the Greek
Cypriot community. It has no jurisdiction over the
Turkish population of the island or over the territory in
which the Turkish Cypriot community enjoys perfect
security.
99. The Turkish Cypriot community is not a minority;
it has never been one. As long as Greece and the Greek
Cypriot community do not get this basic truth into
their heads, there will be no final solution in Cyprus. It
should also be recalled that the high-level agreements of
1977and 1979consider the Turkish Cypriot community
as an equal partner with the Greek Cypriot community.
100. Events have given ample proof that the major
obstacle to a final solution to the Cyprus problem is
indeed this illegal and illegitimate claim by the Greek
community to a monopoly on the Cypriot State and the
blindness of other States in refusing to recognize the
illegality and illegitimacy of this situation, even disregarding the principles of the inviolability of international treaties and the primacy of the rule of law.

95. At this time we must be serious and turn towards
the future. That is why I shall refrain from replying to
the customary remarks made by the representatives of
the Greek Cypriot Administration and of Greece.

101. It was to challenge this flagrant injustice that the
Turkish community established itself asan independent
republic, not in order to secede from the Republic of
Cyprus, but to make the point that it is only on an equal
footing that the two communities can work together to
restore and restructure that Republic on a federal, binational and bi-zonal basis.

96. Unfortunately, I am not in a position to state
that resolution 553 (1984), which the Council has just
adopted this morning, measures up to the report of the
Secretary-General. That resolution not only refers, in
its fourth preambular paragraph, to provisions which
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and Turkey
have never accepted, but it also prolongs in its
operative part a mandate which radical changes have
rendered practically archaic within the context of the
operations of the Force, and it is also based on supposed authorization by a so-called governmental entity
which has no actual or juridical existence. Furthermore, as precedent has shown, the mandate of the
Force could have been prolonged without any juridical

102. It is therefore impossible for the Turkish community of Cyprus to accept resolutions which disregard
justice and law. That is why the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus, through its representative, has just
rejected resolution 553 (1984) in toto. In consequence,
Turkey too rejects it in tore.
10

103. However, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
has just stated, in order to meet the wishes of the
Secretary-General,
who in his report has expressed the
view that the maintenance of UNFICYP
in the island
continues to be necessary in order to create there the
conditions most favourable to the search for a settlement, his Government will continue to, accept the
presence of the Force in the island and to co-operate
with it. Mr. Ertekiin also reiterated that

is a clear waiver in paragraph 5, a clause of a more
general interpretative
nature, which reads, “Without
any prejudice to the conclusions to be drawn from this
situation”.
108. So, in our view, it is erroneous both factually and
legally to try to draw from this Declaration any conclusion to the effect that the signatory parties had it in
mind to eliminate the Government of Cyprus.
109. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Cyprus, who has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.

“the principle, the scope, the modalities and the
procedures of the co-operation between the authorities of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and
UNFICYP
shall be based only on the decisions
which shall be taken solely by the Government of
the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” [supru.
paru. 751.

110. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): As I have done
in previous meetings, I shall reply only to the representative of Turkey, who, in fact, made both statements.
I would only say to Mr. Ertekiin that I am glad to see
him and that I. beg him to convey to Mr. Nail Atalay, my
compatriot, good wishes for a speedy recovery.

The Government of Turkey supports that statement
and also confirms that contacts between the Turkish
authorities in Cyprus and UNFICYP
will continue to
be conducted on the basis of that Turkish Cypriot
statement.

111. The allegations which the Turkish side rehashed
today have been dealt with at previous meetings of the
Council. Fully and exhaustively scrutinized as recently
as last month, these statements by the occupier of our
homes and lands were found to be distortions and
outright falsehoods. As a result, the Council, by its
resolution 550 (1984) of last May, condemned Turkey,
branded its actions in Cyprus illegal and demanded
rectification by the withdrawal of all secessionist and
partitionist faits accomplis.

104. In conclusion,
I should like to express our
appreciation to Major-General Guenther Greindl, Commander of the Force, and to the officers, non-commissioned officers and men of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
105. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Greece, who has asked to speak.

of
112. When it reverts again to these same arguments,
Turkey vainly believes that the memory of Council
members has waned and that, thus, something still may
rub off if they continue to repeat these allegations. They
tell the Council again that we do not exist. That Ankara
contests the legality of my Government is neither news
nor a bother to us. Why should it be?

106. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I shall be very brief;
my intervention is on a point of clarification rather than
in exercise of my right of reply. The Turkish side has
repeatedly maintained
before the Council that the
famous Geneva Declaration on Cyprus of 30 July 1974
[see S/12398], which was signed by the Foreign Ministers of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, has
the effect of eliminating the Government of Cyprus. As
the representative of a Government which signed the
Declaration, I should like in no uncertain terms to reject
that interpretation.

113. The United Nations, for the past 10 years, has
been giving replies of silence to this absurd Turkish
claim. It has simply disregarded it. In spite of the boast
of the aggressor that the victim is dead, we are here,
duly recognized by the whole world, and pointing an
accusing finger at Ankara. We have not disappeared as
Turkey would have wished. We admit that we are going
through some trying times, but we shall do more than
survive. In the 7,000-year history of our country we
have seen conquerors come and conquerors go from
our island. Turkey, being an unwanted alien element,
will go too, iike all the others. As for us, we feel that
being conquered does not mean defeat. We are down,
but as the Council has repeatedly witnessed here, we
are not out.

107. That interpretation
of the legal and factual
elements of the Geneva Declaration,
in our view,
stretches the imagination
to its limits. What was the
Geneva Declaration on Cyprus? It was actually a ceasefire agreement. The Declaration states in paragraph 2
that
“The three Foreign Ministers declared that in
order to stabilize the situation, the areas in the Republic of Cyprus controlled by opposing armed forces on 30 July 1974 at 2200 hours (Geneva time)
should not be extended”.

114. We possess the indomitable spirit of the one who
is wronged, the determination
of the defender of what
little-though
precious-we have inherited, the strong,
unshakeable belief that justice ultimately
prevails.
And, by God, we shall overcome these difficult times
for our people, the Turkish Cypriot community
in-

It was a cease-fire agreement; it did not deal with substantive matters. It was an agreement signed under the
duress of the advancing forces of the aggressor. There
11

eluded. For the Turkish community
of Cyprus is as
much under occupation as the rest of our people. For
us-1 repeat, and I shall always proclaim-this
community is a precious and inseparable part of our people
and of our country. Centuries-old bonds of history and
a common homeland and destiny bind this community
to the rest of our people. To Turkey, however, and to
some of its agents in the occupied areas, our Turkish
community is, to quote them, “an inseparable part of
the Turkish nation”, indisputable evidence of the annexationist aims of Ankara and of the sinister role
played by its troops in the occupied areas.

Who is the culprit? At whom is the accusing finger
pointing? I would rather let the Secretary-General
reply, through his report of 10 June 1965, in which he
says “the hardships suffered by the Turkish Cypriot
population are the direct result of the leadership’s selfisolation policy, imposed by force on the rank and tile”
[see S/6426, para. ZO6].
118. The PRESIDENT:
There being no further speakers, the Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

115. My colleague, Mr. Dountas of Greece, referred
very cogently to the GenevaDeclaration.
Yes, there are
two main communities in Cyprus. Yes, the constitution
was bicommunal, not bi-zonal or binational, as we have
heard recently. But the existence of these communities
does not in any way pre-empt the existence of the
Government of Cyprus, either at the time or thereafter.
The legality of the Government has been consistently
and exclusively recognized by all international
organizations and in all United Nations resolutions, including
Security Council resolution 553 (1984), which has just
been adopted.

Report of the Secretary-General
work of the Organization

on the

119. The PRESIDENT:
As this is the last meeting of
the Security Council to take place before the end of the
period covered in the annual report of the Security
Council submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, it
has been agreed that I should place on record the fact
that since 16 June 1983 the members of the Council
have been engaged in consultations of the whole in
connection with the issues raised in the annual reports
of the Secretary-General
to the thirty-seventh
and
thirty-eighth sessions of the General Assembly, during
which they have explored possible ways and means of
enhancing the effectiveness of the Council in accordance with the powers entrusted to it under the Charter.
These far-ranging consultations are being pursued in
private on a continuing basis. The Council presented an
interim account of the progress of its work in the note
by its President circulated as document S/15971 of
12 September 1983.

116. The Turkish side invokes-when
it suits it-the
1960 Constitution. It invokes what it considers to be in
its interests and compatible with its ideology of partition, while in the same breath it disregards and rejects
the Constitution,
the very authority upon which it
relies. I ask the representative of Turkey again: does he
recognize, does he accept, the 1960 Constitution?
117. The Turkish representative again, in his usual
fashion, referred to hardships of the Turkish Cypriot
community. But who is to blame for these hardships?

The meeting

12

rose at 1.25 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may br obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNXES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous
aupris de votre libraite ou adresser-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gentve.
fiAK

COMO

IlOJlY‘IHTh

CONSEGUIR

H3JIAHIfH

OP~AHW3AI~Wi

PUBLICACIONES

Ofi?>E;lUHEHHbIX

DE LAS NACiONES

HAUHA

UNiDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas disttibuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Jattuar),

1993-2.050
