United Nations

S/PV.6511

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6511

th meeting
Friday, 8 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Edokpa
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution
1936 (2010) (S/2011/213)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-29308 (E)

*1129308*

S/PV.6511

demands are addressed, the political and democratic
gains made thus far may seem hollow to many ordinary
Iraqis, and this will be no easy task for the Government
of Iraq.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Second report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1936
(2010) (S/2011/213)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ad Melkert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/213, which contains the second
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6
of resolution 1936 (2010).
I now give the floor to Mr. Ad Melkert.
Mr. Melkert: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the situation
in Iraq. As indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/213), while notable progress was
made during the past four months, particularly with the
formation of a new national partnership Government,
many challenges remain.
The unfolding events in the region to which Iraq
belongs and the persistent calls for change are of major
significance. While Iraq has made remarkable strides in
its democratic transition in recent years, which
included the adoption of a Constitution, credible
national elections, a broad national partnership
Government and an opening environment for media
and civil society, the people of Iraq are now demanding
the dividends that were promised by their leaders. At
the core of the protests that have been taking place
across Iraq since 25 February are legitimate concerns
about better employment opportunities, the delivery of
basic services and accountability. Unless these

2

How to create opportunities and respond to the
aspirations of young people will be key. An estimated
78 per cent of Iraq’s population is under 35 years of
age, and 43 per cent is under 15. Youth constitute over
50 per cent of the total unemployment rate, about 1
million people. In addition, less than 40 per cent of
children are enrolled in school after their primary
education, and only 21 per cent are enrolled in the last
two years of secondary school. These statistics paint a
picture of a young population with few prospects for
the future.
Iraqi elected officials are taking these issues
seriously and have shown a renewed determination to
act decisively. Prime Minister al-Maliki has tasked
Cabinet ministers with ensuring that, within 100 days,
viable plans are introduced to achieve tangible progress
in the key areas of job creation and service delivery.
Other initiatives have also been announced, including
cuts in defence expenditures and Government salaries,
as well as in tackling corruption.
Together with Deputy Special Representative for
Humanitarian, Reconstruction and Development
Affairs Christine McNab, on behalf of the United
Nations country team, we initiated discussions with the
Prime Minister on how the United Nations could
further support his Government’s efforts. Subject to the
Government’s approval and co-financing support, we
proposed to implement a list of projects that could
rapidly be expanded and fast-tracked to address, in
particular, youth employment, health and nutrition,
solid waste management, the public distribution of
food rations and access to water. Specific initiatives
were also proposed to support the dialogue between the
Government of Iraq and civil society, with an emphasis
on the promotion of human rights. In addition, next
month, bilateral donors, the World Bank and the United
Nations will meet with a Cabinet delegation to review
the policy recommendations relating to Iraq’s
economic and social development and institutional
capacity-building, which were presented to the
Government by the Iraq Partners Forum in the socalled “Iraq Briefing Book”.
Pending issues from the Government formation
still require attention. The appointment this week of the

11-29308

S/PV.6511

Minister of Planning will hopefully contribute to
fostering progress on the social and economic front. I
remain concerned, however, that agreement on key
security ministerial portfolios has yet to be reached.
With the announcement by Mr. Ayad Allawi, on
3 March, of his decision not to chair the proposed
national council for higher policies, it is as yet unclear
how power-sharing agreements reached during the
Government formation negotiations in November 2010
will be effectively followed. I would therefore urge
political leaders to set aside their differences and bring
the Government formation process to a close. This
should help the Government of Iraq to live up to its
promise to those who voted in March 2010.
While developments in Iraq are no longer at the
forefront of international media coverage, Iraq’s
stability is still under pressure. The targeting of various
communities and terror attacks on Government
structures, such as the one of 29 March against the
Salahaddin provincial council building, which killed at
least 76 people and injured almost 100 others, continue
to remind us of destructive minds and agendas at play.
Furthermore, the possibility that some may try to
exploit some of the developments in the region to
inflame sectarian tensions should not be discarded.
While the overall trend in security incidents in recent
months suggests a downward slope, an average of 25
incidents per day were still reported over the past
month. Yet the Government, security forces and society
continue their efforts to make decisive progress
towards stability and normalization. As United States
forces prepare to leave, Iraq should not be forgotten,
and the international community should stand ready to
continue its support.
The call for change in Iraq also reflects people’s
demands for stronger and more systematic observance
of fundamental human rights. While the Government
has explicitly upheld the principle of the right to
demonstrate, violent incidents have taken place in
different parts of the country, resulting in the deaths
and injury of many Iraqi citizens. On a number of
occasions, restrictions were placed on effective
participation in demonstrations and on free reporting
by the media. I hope that the relevant authorities will
look into these incidents and take steps to ensure that
these basic rights are protected. For its part, UNAMI is
working closely with the Council of Representatives
and the Government towards the establishment of an
independent high commission for human rights. As the

11-29308

law is already in place, we have now been requested to
assist with the recruitment of members and to advise
on best practice.
As I speak, UNAMI is concerned about reports of
recent violent incidents in Camp Ashraf, which have
resulted in deaths and injuries. I reiterate that efforts
are needed to stop violence and aim to peacefully
resolve all issues. I would like to call on the
Government of Iraq to enable a UNAMI mission to
monitor the situation on the ground.
Stability and long-term prosperity in Iraq will
also depend on progress made with respect to national
reconciliation and, in particular, the resolution of
disputed internal boundaries and the status of Kirkuk.
In that regard, I would like to bring to the attention of
the Council some of the recent events that have taken
place.
As described in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, following a day of demonstrations in Kirkuk
province on 25 February, the Kurdistan Regional
Government (KRG) deployed about 5,000 Peshmerga
forces into the province, effectively encircling the
disputed city of Kirkuk. KRG authorities later
explained that this was in response to the alleged threat
of attacks against Kurdish citizens by former regime
elements and extremist groups in the province. This
movement of troops was not coordinated via the
combined security mechanism established between the
Iraqi Army and Kurdish Peshmerga forces under the
auspices of the United States Forces in Iraq. In a
meeting with President Barzani, I expressed my
concern about this action and the fact that it occurred
outside the framework aimed at preventing tensions on
the ground along the disputed boundaries. On the basis
of the most recent information, it appears that efforts
from many sides have indeed led to the Peshmerga
forces returning to their original positions.
Those events underscore the need for discussion
on the future of the triangular combined security
mechanism and the process to resolve the country’s
disputed internal boundaries. In line with the call by
the Security Council on 15 December 2010 (see
S/PV.6450) for intensified efforts to move towards a
negotiated political agreement, UNAMI is exploring
with Government and political leaders possible
modalities to ensure such a process of dialogue.
Building on the work of the high-level task force,
which has led to better understanding on issues related

3

S/PV.6511

to property, language and detainees, as well as on the
protection of minorities, I am pleased to report that
some encouraging preliminary progress has been made.
With our assistance, on 27 March, an agreement
was
reached
by
Government
officials
and
representatives of the main political parties to work
with UNAMI on key outstanding issues through a
standing consultation mechanism that would provide a
forum for preventive multilateral consultation in cases
of potential conflict. It was also agreed that further
meetings in April and May would be held to discuss
Kirkuk, Ninewa, the national census and the combined
security mechanism. With respect to the future of that
mechanism, if requested by the parties, I believe that
UNAMI could play a possible liaising and facilitating
role between all the parties with a view to maintaining
peace and stability and in line with its mandate to
develop “processes acceptable to the Government of
Iraq to resolve disputed internal boundaries”
(resolution 1770 (2007), para. 2 (a) (iii)).
Turning to the situation between Iraq and Kuwait,
I would like to recall the importance of the resolutions
adopted by the Council on 15 December (resolutions
1956 (2010), 1957 (2010) and 1958 (2010)), which
accelerated the normalization of Iraq’s standing within
the international community. The Council’s decision
served as a strong incentive for Iraq and Kuwait to step
up efforts to resolve outstanding issues between them.
On 12 January, the Prime Minister of Kuwait, Sheikh
Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, visited the
Government in Baghdad, the first such visit since
1991. During my visit to Kuwait on 1 February, I felt
strongly encouraged by the commitment expressed by
the Emir of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, and Government
interlocutors to advance progress and the resolution of
issues with Iraq as part of a full normalization of
relations between the two countries, both of which
recognize that they stand to gain from cooperation in
all areas. Following that visit, I shared with both sides
identical suggestions for a road map to address
outstanding issues, in line with the guidance by the
Secretary-General and the views expressed by Council
members in December.
On 16 February, Prime Minister al-Maliki paid a
historic visit to Kuwait, which provided an opportunity
for an in-depth exchange of views on all issues relevant
to both parties. Further evidence of a new chapter in
the relations between the two countries was provided

4

by President Talabani’s attendance at the fiftieth
anniversary of the creation of the State of Kuwait and
the twentieth anniversary of its United Nationsmandated liberation, in 1991. Importantly, members of
Iraq’s Parliament and representatives of its business
community, media and civil society have joined hands
with their Kuwaiti counterparts in looking ahead
towards a brighter future. On 27 and 28 March,
Foreign Ministers Sheikh Mohammad Al-Sabah
Al-Salem Al-Sabah and Hoshyar Zebari headed the
first meeting of the joint ministerial committee
established to look into all issues concerning the two
countries, with the resolution of the outstanding
Chapter VII issues as a priority. I have received reports
from both Governments that the atmosphere of the
meeting was quite positive and that the discussions on
highly sensitive issues for both sides were constructive.
I am confident that the expected reaffirmation of
the land and maritime boundaries pursuant to
resolution 833 (1993) by the Government of Iraq is
now within reach. In turn, there is now a basis for
achieving full mutual understanding of the principle of
unimpeded maritime access to Iraqi ports. I have
expressed the hope that both parties will now seize this
unique opportunity to show leadership in settling a
complex and painful conflict, at a time during which
the region is searching for new perspectives of
cooperation and development as a substitute for
conflict and stagnation.
Allow me to express my appreciation for the
support that the General Assembly has provided in
approving a substantial increase in UNAMI’s budget to
enable us to respond to the huge operational challenges
we face. To become self-reliant, we need to generate a
full range of logistics, security and life-support
resources. We are doing so in close cooperation with
the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces.
However, there are many uncertainties, and at
times cumbersome procedures, that may stand in the
way of a seamless and timely transition. The situation
confronting us is unprecedented, and further
complicated by the urgent need to ensure the continued
safety and security of our international and national
staff. To that end, we look forward to, first, the
continuation of Member State support through the
provision of additional United Nations guards;
secondly, final approval for the enlargement of our
compound in Baghdad, which is a more cost-effective
and quicker alternative to the original plan for new

11-29308

S/PV.6511

construction, as a basis for the future one UN-house;
and, thirdly, the construction of UNAMI premises in
Kirkuk and Basra. I am pleased to report a generally
productive level of cooperation with and support by the
Government of Iraq, and we look forward to further
results of our presence in the near future.
Finally, I would like to once again thank the
Security Council for today’s opportunity. On a personal
note, I would like to add that while living and working
in Baghdad, I have observed the start of the removal of
endless lines of concrete T-walls over the past months.
It is symbolic of considerable progress to overcome the
years of war, conflict and sanctions that have plagued
the country, and to bring normality to Iraq’s
international standing and the daily life of its people.
Increasingly, the prospect for Baghdadis and residents
of other parts of the country to regain the space and
beauty of their cities no longer seems a dream of the
past. With determination and decisiveness in Iraq, the
United Nations is committed to assisting in building a
better future for its people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Melkert for his very comprehensive and illustrative
briefing, especially for his concluding words, which
indicate very promising prospects, which we hope will
come to pass.
I now give the
Representative of Iraq.

floor

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I would like also to thank your predecessor,
Mr. Li Baodong, Permanent Representative of China,
for his outstanding efforts during his presidency in the
month of March. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and in New York for
their rigorous efforts in assisting the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi people.
My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2011/213)
and would like to make the following comments.
At the political and security levels, the national
partnership Government, led by Prime Minister Nuri
Kamel al-Maliki, won the unanimous confidence of the
Iraqi Council of Representatives, which also passed the

11-29308

Government programme of work on 21 December
2010. During his presentation of the platform of
ministerial Government, the Prime Minister stated that
the Government’s goal would be to
“build a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified
Iraq with justice, equality and rule of law which
gets its strength from religious and intellectual
diversity and which cooperates in international
and regional contexts, rejects aggression,
terrorism, discrimination and sectarian division,
and which respects human rights”.
The programme of work for the Government of
national partnership is based on a clear set of
principles. Among those are maintaining and upholding
the Constitution and political stability, expanding the
base of participation in the political process,
consolidating State institutions and building the rule of
law. Those principles also include respect for human
rights, rejection of aggression, terrorism and
discrimination, and ensuring the right of all Iraqis to
live in peace, security and freedom.
The programme of work also includes the
completion of the building of the armed forces, the
extension of the rule of law, the completion of the
project of national reconciliation and the adoption of
the principle of balance and efficiency in the
management of the country. The programme of work
also focuses on a culture of tolerance and brotherhood,
the renunciation of violence, and, finally, working to
maintain the best possible relations between Iraq and
its Arab neighbours and at the regional and
international levels.
The Government of national partnership was
formed as a result of the political consensus achieved
in November 2010 and will work vigorously,
continuously and tirelessly to achieve all items on the
ministerial work programme for the benefit of the Iraqi
people. It is time for Iraq to reap the fruits of the
patience it has displayed and the sacrifices and
suffering it has endured so as to live in a better reality
in terms of basic rights and services.
During the past two months, Iraq has witnessed a
series of peaceful demonstrations that have put forward
a number of demands related to improving services and
the way of life of Iraqis. The position of the Prime
Minister towards protesters has been clear, recognizing
their right to express their views and raise their voices
in the face of any faults or failings. Taking into account

5

S/PV.6511

the need for the maintenance of public order in the
interests of the country and for security and stability
not to be jeopardized, the Government has a duty to
protect and listen to the voices of protesters in order to
address their problems.
Following the peaceful demonstration organized
on 25 February 2011, the Prime Minister said, in a
public speech to the nation, that “Nothing that is
objected to or protested will be ignored”, adding that
“I will personally continue the implementation of
all matters that fall under my responsibility as
President of the Council of Ministers as well as
follow up the work of ministers and local
governments to compel them to carry out the
promises they made to citizens with gravity and
responsibility”.
That was followed by an extraordinary meeting
of the Council of Ministers, which set a period of
100 days after which the work of all ministries will be
assessed to determine their success or failure in the
performance of work assigned to them. The Council
confirmed that it would make changes in the light of
the outcome of the assessment.
The Iraqi security forces have continued to
assume their responsibilities across the country and are
demonstrating the highest degree of responsibility,
discipline and ability to improve the security situation
in the country. Reports of the Ministries of Health and
of the Interior indicate that during the month of
February 2011 Iraq witnessed a marked improvement
in the security situation. The low number of people
killed or wounded in bombings carried out by terrorist
groups serves as clear proof of the efficiency and
professionalism of the Iraqi security forces. During the
meeting with top security leaders held on 3 March
2011, the Prime Minister emphasized the need to
energize intelligence efforts through the development
of effective plans for the intelligence authorities to
defeat all hostile plots.
During a meeting on 23 January 2011 with
António Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki stressed
that the Iraqi Government was keen to provide the
basic necessities for daily living for displaced Iraqis,
wherever they may be, and to meet the requirements
that will enable the displaced to return to their places
of origin. Reports suggest that about 89,000 families
returned to their places of origin during the first quarter

6

of 2011. Work is continuing in the Ministry of
Displacement and Migration to double the grants
provided to families to encourage them to return to
their home areas.
At the social and economic levels, the Iraqi
Council of Representatives approved the federal budget
for 2011 on 20 February 2011, with an estimated
amount of approximately $82 billion, the largest
budget in the history of the Republic of Iraq. A total of
$57 billion was allocated to fund the operating budget
for the year 2011, with $25 billion allocated to support
the investment budget for 2011. This new budget
focuses on the aspects of services, scientific
development and job creation as well as on raising the
standard of living for citizens and supporting the
momentum of reconstruction in the country.
Due to continued efforts by the Government to
create thousands of jobs for Iraqis and the widening
scope of private-sector activities aimed at establishing
a number of projects, which have started to attract local
labour, unemployment in Iraq has witnessed a
significant decline. Currently, the unemployment rate
stands at 15 per cent; in past years, it had ranged from
17 to 28 per cent.
Iraq’s oil exports increased during the month of
February, reaching about 2.2 million barrels per day.
The Iraqi Government continues to implement plans to
increase the amount of oil exported, which it projects
will reach 2.75 million barrels per day this year,
3.3 million barrels per day in 2012, 4.5 million barrels
per day in 2013 and 6.5 million barrels per day in
2014. The Iraqi Government is working on a range of
projects aimed at increasing storage capacity for Iraqi
oil production, from approximately 5 million barrels to
approximately 20.7 million barrels by 2014, in order to
ensure the stability of the flow of Iraq’s oil to the
international market.
The Iraqi Government is continuing with the
organization of bidding rounds, which have taken place
in the areas of oil and gas, to attract qualified
companies with international experience able to
develop the Iraqi oil industry. This reflects the
increased oil and gas production and export capacity in
Iraq, aimed at promoting economic development. The
Oil Ministry recently announced the organization of a
fourth bidding round, which will be held in the month
of November, for the exploration of 12 new gas areas
and the drilling of 10 wells to meet the shortfall in oil

11-29308

S/PV.6511

production and inventory. This will result in increasing
oil and gas reserves for future generations.
Marked improvement has been seen in the Iraqi
economy following the introduction of a series of
economic, investment and financial regulations by the
Government, which have contributed to the increase in
per-capita income, improved purchasing power and a
higher level of social welfare. Through bidding rounds
held in the areas of oil and gas last year, Iraq has
brought international experience to these sectors,
which will improve our ability to increase production
and export capacity to promote economic development.
In the context of the Iraqi Government’s efforts to
find comprehensive solutions for the problem of
housing, the Investment Authority of the Iraqi National
Investment Commission has submitted a proposal to
build 1 million housing units, at an estimated cost of
approximately $30 billion. This would be the first stage
of a plan to build 2 million housing units over the next
five years to provide adequate housing for various
segments of the Iraqi population.
In the context of Iraq’s regional and international
openness, the recent period saw a number of important
visits, which I will detail in chronological order. In
January, the Jordanian Prime Minister, Mr. Samir Zaid
Al-Rifai, visited Baghdad to discuss issues of common
concern to our countries. On 5 January, the Iranian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Aliakbar Salehi, visited Baghdad
to express his congratulations on the occasion of our
formation of a Government of national partnership.
Mr. Amr Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, visited Baghdad on 9 January to discuss
Iraqi preparations to host the next Arab Summit. His
Highness Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad
Al-Sabah, Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait, made
a historic visit to Baghdad, on 12 January, where he
met Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki to discuss
issues of common concern and how to develop bilateral
relations between our two countries. The VicePresident of the United States, Mr. Joseph Biden,
visited Baghdad on 13 January to discuss ways to
develop relations between Iraq and the United States in
various fields through the activation of the Strategic
Framework Agreement. The Syrian Prime Minister,
Mr. Mohammad Naji Ottri, paid a visit to Baghdad on
15 January to discuss the development of relations and
expand the horizons of cooperation between our two
countries. On 16 January, Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu,
Foreign Minister of Turkey, visited Baghdad to discuss
issues of common concern to Turkey and Iraq. On

11-29308

26 January, Mr. Yuri Shafranik, Chairman of the Board
of the Union of Oil and Gas Producers of Russia,
visited Baghdad to discuss ways to strengthen
cooperation in the field of investment in the oil and gas
sectors. On 14 February, Ambassador Tan Sri Abdul
Majid Khan, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, visited Baghdad to deliver a letter from the
Malaysian Prime Minister on ways to expand the
horizons of bilateral cooperation in various fields.
Chinese Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang
Zhijun paid a visit to Baghdad on 23 February to
discuss the development of bilateral relations and the
expansion of cooperation between our two countries.
Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, visited
Baghdad on 16 March to discuss means of cooperation
between Iraq and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. The Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan, visited Baghdad on 28 March to
discuss bilateral relations, ways of promoting such
relations, the situation in the region and issues of
common concern. Yesterday, United States Defense
Secretary Robert Gates visited Baghdad and held
meetings with President Jalal Talabani, Prime Minister
Nuri al-Maliki and other Iraqi leaders regarding the
status of a mutually agreed security pact between the
two countries.
At the same time, Iraqi officials have also worked
hard to promote bilateral relations on the regional and
international levels. President Jalal Talabani paid a
visit to Damascus for a meeting with Syrian President
Bashar Al-Assad on 12 February to discuss ways to
develop bilateral relations. On 25 February, President
Talabani visited Kuwait, where he met the Emir of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah
and to participate in the celebrations of the State of
Kuwait’s independence and liberation. Prime Minister
al-Maliki visited the State of Kuwait on 16 February
and met with His Highness the Emir and His Highness
the Prime Minister to discuss the development of
relations and the expansion of cooperation in various
fields. During this visit, agreement was reached on
activating the work of joint committees and convening
a meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait joint ministerial
committee, headed by the respective Foreign Ministers,
to resolve all outstanding issues. The President of the
Iraqi Council of Representatives, Osama Al-Nujafi,
also visited Kuwait, on 20 March. During his visit, an
agreement was made with Mr. Jassim Al-Kharafi,
Chairman of the Kuwaiti National Assembly, to form a
committee to coordinate the work of friendship
between the two countries. The Iraqi Minister of

7

S/PV.6511

Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, paid a visit to
Cairo on 2 March to preside over the work of the 134th
session of the Arab League Council to discuss current
developments in the region. On 19 March, Foreign
Minister Zebari visited Paris to participate in the
ministerial summit in support of the Libyan people,
during which he gave a speech emphasizing the
position of Iraq in support of the Arab and international
consensus for the enforcement of the no-fly zone to
stop military operations against civilians and support
the Libyan people in realizing their aspirations for a
decent life. Mr. Zebari visited Kuwait on 27 March to
co-chair the first meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait joint
ministerial committee.
Iraq, in line with its will to strengthen relations
with Arab countries and its commitment to playing a
leading role in supporting and strengthening the Arab
joint work system, has accepted the challenging task of
hosting the next Arab Summit, to be held in Baghdad
in May. This decision was based on Iraq’s assertion
that it has returned to normal relations with its Arab
brothers and that we are working to strengthen
relations
with
the Arab
community.
Iraq’s
determination in this is supported by all Arab countries
and confirmed by their participation in the Summit.
The convening of the Arab Summit in Baghdad
comes at a crucial and sensitive time for the Arab
world. The revolutions that have taken place in Tunisia
and Egypt, the painful events in Libya, and the
expansion of demonstrations and protests in a number
of Arab countries have given Iraq a leading role in the
Arab world. This situation emphasizes the need for the
Summit to proceed on schedule, in order for the
transformations in the region to be dealt with and
appropriate solutions found, in keeping with the
aspirations and hopes of the Arab peoples.
On 15 December 2010, the Security Council held
a historic meeting on Iraq (see S/PV.6450), at which it
adopted three important resolutions — 1956 (2010),
1957 (2010) and 1958 (2010). Those resolutions
represent the beginning of the end of the era of the
sanctions and restrictions that were imposed on Iraq
after the Saddam regime’s crime of invading Kuwait.
Despite these positive achievements, Iraq still has
some way to go to resolve all outstanding issues with
our brotherly neighbour Kuwait.
During the visit to Baghdad of His Highness
Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah,
Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait, on 12 January,
Kuwait and Iraq agreed to set up a joint ministerial

8

committee under the chairmanship of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of our two countries to address
outstanding issues between us. During the visit of
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki to Kuwait on
2 February, it was agreed to set a date for the joint
ministerial committee to meet.
The committee held its first meeting in Kuwait on
27 and 28 March, during which four sub-committees
considered all the issues that concern the two
countries, whether of a bilateral nature or relating to
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait in the light of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
importance of the joint committee’s meeting lies in its
being the first of its kind, its consideration of issues
sensitive to both parties, its atmosphere of openness
and transparency and the positive spirit that dominated
the proceedings.
Let me now comment on the issue of Camp
Ashraf, which was raised by Mr. Melkert. I do not have
any information on what happened yesterday, but I
know the position of the Iraqi Government, namely,
that it considers the people in Camp Ashraf as refugees
and that they have rights. It will not force them to go
back to their country of origin, Iran, but will encourage
them to go to a third country. However, when United
States forces handed over responsibility for Camp
Ashraf to the Iraqi forces and the Iraqi Government
decided to establish a police station there, the people in
Camp Ashraf used violence against Iraqi security and
police forces, which resulted in deaths and injuries. We
always try to solve this kind of problem peacefully and
we encourage third countries to accept these people as
refugees.
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government’s gratitude for UNAMI’s role in Iraq and
for Mr. Ad Melkert’s support offered in response to the
Government’s request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati for his briefing.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

11-29308
