S/PV.8521

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8521st meeting

Tuesday, 7 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Marsudi/Mr. Djani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Schalkwyk
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Investing in peace: improving safety and performance of United Nations
peacekeepers
Letter dated 30 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/359)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-13247 (E)
*1913247*

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council for the month of May, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Christoph Heusgen,
Permanent Representative of Germany, for his service
as President of the Council for the month of April. I
am sure I speak for all the members of the Council
in expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Heusgen and his team for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Investing in peace: improving safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers
Letter dated 30 April 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/359)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, the
Sudan, Thailand, Ukraine, Uruguay, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Lieutenant
General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho, Force
Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and Mr. Björn Holmberg, Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
2/69

07/05/2019

following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations; and Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Before we begin the consideration of the item on
the agenda, allow me to congratulate all Muslims in the
world on a Ramadan Kareem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/359, which contains a letter dated
30 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of
Indonesia
addressed
to
the
SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:
“The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and presidential statements
addressing peacekeeping.
“The Security Council underscores the
importance of peacekeeping as one of the most
effective tools available to the United Nations in
the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.
“The Security Council reaffirms the basic
principles of peacekeeping, such as consent of the
parties, impartiality and non-use of force, except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate, and
recognizes that the mandate of each peacekeeping
mission is specific to the need and situation of the
country concerned, and that the Security Council
expects full delivery of the mandates it authorizes.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General to mobilize
all partners and stakeholders in support of more
effective United Nations peacekeeping through his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and recognizes
the added value that the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations has in
relation to training and capacity-building.
“The Security Council welcomes the United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, the United
Nations Chiefs of Defence Conference and the
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit to
strengthen support to peacekeeping operations,
including in the area of training and capacitybuilding, and underscores the importance of
fulfilling the pledges made by a number of
Member States at the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial in 2019.
“The Security Council looks forward to
the Secretary-General’s annual briefing, due in
September 2019, further to resolution 2378 (2017).”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/4.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate on
peacekeeping training and capacity-building. It reflects
your country’s strong engagement in peacekeeping,
here in New York as well as in the field.
I salute the more than 3,000 uniformed personnel
from Indonesia who currently serve in eight of our
operations, and I pay tribute to the 37 Indonesian
peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice
under the United Nations flag.
Improving training is a major shared commitment
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Training saves
lives. Our peacekeepers are deployed to increasingly
complex and often hostile environments. Training
prepares them for their vital peacekeeping tasks and
improves their performance. As we know, improved
performance reduces fatalities. As such, training is a
necessary and strategic investment in peacekeeping
and a shared responsibility between Member States and
the Secretariat.
This system of collaboration was recognized in
1995. The General Assembly confirmed Member
States’ responsibility for the predeployment training
of uniformed personnel, while the Secretariat assists
Member States by establishing training standards and
providing training materials. The Secretariat is also
responsible for training civilian personnel. We need
to build on this approach of shared responsibility and
deepen our collaboration.
I thank the 151 Member States and 4 international
and regional organizations that have supported the

S/PV. 8521

Action for Peacekeeping initiative by endorsing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping
Operations. In doing so, they have reconfirmed the
shared responsibility for peacekeeping performance
and stated their commitment to providing well-trained
uniformed personnel.
Today, I would like to update the Council on the
Secretariat’s progress in fulfilling our commitment to
training and capacity-building.
On safety and security, we continue to take
forward the action plan to improve the security of
United Nations peacekeepers. This is supported by the
roll-out of a comprehensive training plan. In the five
high-risk missions — the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali — we have
conducted training support and assessment visits. We
are also instituting casualty evacuation training, stress
testing and crisis management exercises in these five
missions. Strengthening medical training is another key
component, and to help address the threat of improvised
explosive devices and other dangers, we are working
with troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure
that units joining our missions meet our operational
readiness standards before deployment and that they
have undergone predeployment training in accordance
with United Nations standards.
We are also placing a renewed emphasis on
in-mission training to ensure that our peacekeepers
benefit from the necessary support in the field. We are
particularly keen to develop the use of mobile training
teams, and we are encouraging Member States to
send such teams to provide targeted, flexible support
to our missions. We have established a framework
of performance standards and assessments based on
continuous evaluations of military units, including
command and control, protection of civilians, and
conduct and discipline. And we have strengthened
peacekeeping leadership training for civilians, military
and police, including through scenario-based exercises.
We are also working to increase the number of
women in our peacekeeping operations. A talent
pipeline specifically for senior women military officers

19-132473/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

07/05/2019

is under development, and we are looking at how we
can make mission environments more conducive
to women. The Council’s continued support will be
essential to enhance those efforts — through the
provision of training programmes and mobile training
teams, translating training materials into the six official
languages of the United Nations and funding.

receive far more nominations of women to take part in
training. We are grateful to those Member States that
have sponsored 50/50 male/female officer courses, and
we ask more Member States to do so.

Strengthening conduct and discipline is one of
our key priorities. We are encouraged that the number
of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping appears to be decreasing. But we are
also mindful that we must be vigilant in our prevention
efforts and seek accountability whenever the zerotolerance policy has been violated. We must continue to
do so in strong partnership with Member States.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Conduct-and-discipline issues are an essential
component of predeployment and in-mission induction
training, which is mandatory for all civilian, military
and police peacekeeping personnel. The Secretariat
is helping troop- and police-contributing countries to
improve their predeployment training on the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse, by making core
training materials available and deploying mobile
training teams to troop- and police-contributing
countries in response to requests from those countries.
I am pleased that our collective commitment
to better train and equip peacekeepers has led to a
number of effective triangular partnerships among
the Secretariat, Member States that have expertise
and resources, and Member States that deploy our
uniformed peacekeepers. We have facilitated and
conducted training for 330 uniformed engineers
and 2,700 uniformed signals personnel. Many of the
trainees, including 23 female officers, have deployed
to missions, including the African Union Mission in
Somalia, which we support. Following the success
of engineering training in Kenya, we are launching a
field medic assistant course in Uganda this year and
will conduct engineering training in Viet Nam and
Indonesia in 2020.
We have made notable progress, but much still
needs to be done. Training gaps remain in critical areas
such as weapons handling, first aid, human rights and
protection issues. To ensure the long-term sustainability
of triangular and other partnerships and initiatives,
I urge Member States to consider increased funding,
in-kind contributions of equipment and the provision of
trainers. I must also stress how important it is that we
4/69

Improving performance is at the heart of
our collective effort. We look forward to our
continued collaboration.

I now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Martins Filho.
Lieutenant General Martins Filho: Before
starting, I would like to pay tribute to Chief Private
Exwin Lahansang, from the Indonesian engineer
company deployed in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), who passed away this
morning as a result of a heart attack. I express my
deepest condolences to his family and to the Republic
of Indonesia.
I wish to congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Indonesia to the United Nations on the inauguration
of its presidency of the Security Council, as well as
to thank the Council for this opportunity. The idea of
this debate on the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
is indeed noble. It will enrich all of us, give us an
opportunity for reflection and bring forth a myriad of
ideas and experiences.
MONUSCO is one of the largest and most complex
peacekeeping missions under the umbrella of the United
Nations. Since its inception, the Mission has matured
and adapted itself well to the dynamic challenges and
changing requirements. Despite the evolving scenarios
and mandate requirements, one facet has remained
constant, that is, the Mission has focused on innovation
and professionalism with a view towards efficiency.
The force and the Mission headquarters have worked
well in synchrony, as part of a comprehensive approach
to face the challenges on the ground in order to fulfil
our mandate. In that respect, working in coordination
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and counting on its cooperation has become
challenging and fundamental for the peace, stability
and development of the country.
The main priority for the Mission remains changing
the mindset of all peacekeepers, civilians, military
and police, who must comprehend the environment
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and the challenges and perform accordingly. A
proper mindset is the basis for all that follows, from
selection, preparation and training to the performance
of individuals and troops.
The core of our mandate — the protection of
civilians — remains unchanged and requires building
confidence among the population, implementing an
effective intelligence system and our capability to
prevent. In fact, preventive deployment and neutralizing
the armed groups are the most effective ways to protect
the civilians of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As is well known, there is no purely military
solution for the problems and challenges we face in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the solution is
political and involves all components of the Mission.
That is why the focus of our analysis, planning and
operations since last year has been a comprehensive
approach that incorporates the views, priorities and
expertise of all concerned personnel deployed in the
Mission area.
We must also communicate better with locals
and the international community. Prevention does
not provide headlines. That is sad, but it is reality.
The positive outcomes, the good things MONUSCO
has done and the hard work of our peacekeepers are
not known. For example, few people in the world,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
know that, during the past three years, more than 6,000
children were rescued from different armed groups
and returned to their villages, or that, just recently, on
28 April, following the deployment of our troops in
Mpati, North Kivu, 114 children were freed from armed
groups as a result of joint, comprehensive work by the
Mission’s components.
In that regard, the force has implemented
the “protection through projection” concept very
effectively, in conjunction with that of “protection
through presence”. We are still learning, but the results
have been impressive. The number of attacks against
villages and cities prevented just because we were
able to deploy our troops at the first sight of a threat is
significant. During the month of April alone, the force
deployed more than 44 company operational bases and
26 standard combat deployment platoon sites, while
also carrying out more than 8,500 patrols, day and
night, and deploying Quick Reaction Force elements
4,163 times. The total number of operational activities
surpassed 13,600.

S/PV. 8521

In terms of neutralizing the armed groups, it is
worth mentioning that the most desirable outcome is for
them to be disarmed and demobilized. More than 5,000
members of armed groups have surrendered so far
this year, or have tried to do so. However, the process
has not been completed because the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are not
yet well established.
The MONUSCO force has also implemented
many initiatives to bring peace and development to
communities. The so-called quick-impact projects have
contributed to preventing ethnic conflicts at low costs.
In Kamako, Kasai Central, for example, water has been a
flashpoint for the tensions among five communities: the
Luba and Lulau, on one side, and the Tetela, Tshkokwe
and Pende, on another. A quick-impact project to collect
water, inaugurated on 9 January, was welcomed by all
communities and has worked well in terms of lowering
tensions. Another example is Lukweti, North Kivu,
which is a remote and isolated village — no roads or
communication with the outside world. The village had
been under threat of attack by the Nduma défense du
Congo-Rénové, which left the area after the deployment
of our troops. The force prevented the attack and then
developed a quick-impact project, which is ongoing,
to build an antenna and a bridge. Those initiatives are
contributing to providing protection and development.
To focus on the main subject of this debate, I would
like to highlight that training is an essential pillar to
ensure the desired performance of our peacekeepers.
Our troops must deploy in the Mission area fully able and
equipped to carry out all operational tasks. Training is a
continuous process that must also focus on the specifics
of the Mission and its operational environment, which
serves to underscore the importance of in-mission
training. Predeployment visits, which focus on training,
with the participation of representatives from the field,
the development of in-mission training programmes for
current and specialized operations and the deployment
of mobile training teams are examples of initiatives that
have been implemented to improve the quality of the
troops deployed in the Mission.
In that respect, MONUSCO welcomes the recent
decision to deploy a team of jungle warfare experts in
the Beni territory to improve its capabilities to plan
and conduct offensive operations in the challenging
jungle environment. We also welcome Headquarters
initiatives to provide field missions with manuals,
training exercises and courses at different levels, which

19-132475/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

will contribute to achieving the minimum level of
homogeneity required for such deployments.
In terms of capacity-building and performance, the
following measures have been implemented.
Regular safety and security audits of all company
operational bases and enhanced force protection
measures have been implemented to strengthen defence
and force protection. The force has also formalized
and promulgated standard operating procedures on the
related subjects concerned.
Regular evaluations of contingents have been
carried out, with the results having been shared with
Headquarters, with the aim of enhancing preparation
and operational effectiveness standards. The
contingents with significant performance issues have
been reported on. MONUSCO has also adopted the
online performance evaluation tool.
Tabletop exercises and stress testing of various
contingency situations are regularly practiced at
all headquarters and field unit locations. Recently,
a command post exercise was also organized for the
furtherance of the Mission’s objectives.
An analysis of existing security mechanisms
for military observers has been completed with a
view to suggesting explicit security guidelines for
implementation. All security strands have been
incorporated in the revised security guidelines for the
purpose of standardization and uniformity.
Casualty evacuation based on the 10-1-2 timeline
response concept remains a challenge for MONUSCO,
owing to the Mission’s infrastructure, aviation
challenges and the size of the area of responsibility.
However, the Mission has implemented it where possible.
The command and control arrangements have been
strengthened through regular field visits by the force
leadership, brigade commanders and force headquarters
staff. The existing reporting mechanism has been
reviewed to ensure real-time flow of information at
all levels.
MONUSCO has implemented new air-threat and
risk-assessment standards for all military aviation
missions. The current deployment of the aviation
assets is based on that threat assessment and the
operational requirements.
The force has undertaken various measures for
enhancing and encouraging female engagement in
6/69

07/05/2019

MONUSCO, which will provide guidance and direction
on the various ways MONUSCO can operationalize
female engagement. The force headquarters has obtained
formal certificates from all contingent commanders on
caveats, and no caveats have been declared.
I would like to reassure you, Madam President,
Council members and all Member States that the
MONUSCO force is committed to fulfilling the
Mission’s mandate with innovation and professionalism
and that the troops deployed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have been proactive, showed willingness
and worked hard to overcome the challenges and
difficulties encountered on the ground.
In conclusion, I would like to convey my heartfelt
gratitude to the Council presidency for organizing this
open debate on the implementation of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, as well as for extending an
opportunity to me to express my thoughts. May peace
prevail in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I thank Lieutenant General Martins
Filho for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Holmberg.
Mr. Holmberg: I would like to start by
congratulating the Indonesian presidency for
organizing this open debate on training and capacity
to improve the safety, security and performance of
United Nations peacekeepers. Furthermore, I would
like to commend today’s important presidential
statement S/PRST/2019/4, which paves the way for our
work ahead.
I thank you, Madam President, for providing space
for the International Forum for the Challenges of Peace
Operations. The Challenges Forum is a partnership of
49 departments and organizations from all over the
globe — civilian, military and police. Seven out of
the Security Council’s 15 members are also partners
of the Challenges Forum. For more than 20 years, the
Challenges Forum has used its convening power to
build bridges, generate innovative ideas and promote
results for more effective peace operations.
In 1989, when I entered the Peace and Conflict
Studies programme, the Berlin Wall came tumbling
down and the Cold War ended. Ten years later, I stood
outside the gates of the United Nations as a Junior
Professional Officer inspired and guided by the late
Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s words and mantra
“Delivering as One”, or “One United Nations”, to
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8521

avoid stovepipes and work effectively together towards
common goals.

performed exceptionally in the field for use as part of
training exercises.

Once again, we have a unique opportunity to
benefit from the fruits of United Nations reforms, not
least regarding the shared commitments of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which are aimed at refining
one of the United Nations and its Member States’ most
important instruments for peace, security and reaching
the Sustainable Development Goals. This comes at a
time when the United Nations and other multilateral
institutions are needed more than they have been in
many years.

Thirdly, Member States, the Secretariat and field
missions can use the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations for improving operational effectiveness,
for example, by deploying women in operational and
outward-facing roles, such as female engagement
teams and female investigation teams, but also in
combat-related roles, thereby broadening the spectrum
of deployment. Moreover, the Elsie Initiative could
be used to identify mechanisms and incentives to
encourage troop- and police-contributing countries
to increase women deploying to the field, especially
in identifying and including a critical mass of female
mid-management officers, in addition to the present
efforts for positions at the senior level.

The purpose of this briefing is twofold: first, to
share the partners’ recommendations relevant to today’s
topics from our 2018 Annual Forum, which was hosted
by the Folke Bernadotte Academy and the Swedish
armed forces in Stockholm in November; and, secondly,
to share recommendations from Challenges Forum’s
updated guidance for senior mission leaders of United
Nations peace operations, a process which was initiated
by the Indonesian Ministry for Foreign Affairs in 2016
and furthered by the Center for Strategic Research of
the Turkish Ministry for Foreign Affairs at our Annual
Forum in Istanbul 2017. The Challenges Forum’s report
entitled Considerations for Mission Leadership in
United Nations Peacekeeping has been a key guidance
in United Nations training of mission leaders since
2010. Starting with the Challenges Annual Forum 2018,
I would like to share four recommendations for safety,
security and performance.
First, the United Nations Secretariat could,
in cooperation with Member States, develop an
interactive electronic archive of different complex and
challenging scenarios. Those could be used for field
training and generic training exercises. That should be
complemented with mission-specific training on the
operational environment shortly prior to deployment
and combined with an effective e-roster of troop- and
police-contributing countries to ensure just-in-time
training. That would allow for a better understanding
of the context they will be deploying to and entrench
the necessary mindset.
Secondly, in addition to learning from our mistakes,
it is perhaps equally important to build on good
practices on safety, security and performance. Based
on the risk premium award process, the Secretariat
and field missions could identify and share examples
and case studies of instances where peacekeepers have

Fourthly, it is essential to clearly communicate
information on the priority of different training gaps
and needs so that Member States can concentrate their
support. The use of a light coordination mechanism,
highlighted in the shared commitments of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and implemented by the
Department of Peace Operations, could also be used
for that.
Furthermore, to improve training, online surveys
can be used as part of monitoring and evaluation systems
to determine whether training was effective and/or can
be improved. Finally, all uniformed personnel should
have completed the online training, entitled “Basic
and advanced security in the field”, provided by the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security,
before deployment.
With regard to this topic and with the memory
still fresh of yesterday’s service for peacekeepers
who fell serving the cause of peace in 2018, the
Challenges Forum also recommends that all
peacekeeping stakeholders — both Member States
and the Secretariat — ensure that they fulfil their
responsibility of care for returning military, police and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.
Turning to the second area of the briefing — the
partnership’s work on senior-mission leadership — it
has been led by eight co-Chairs from the United Service
Institution of India; the Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding of Egypt; the CivilMilitary Centre of Australia; the Folke Bernadotte
Academy of Sweden; the Peacekeeping and Stability
Operations Institute of the United States of America;

19-132477/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the National Defence University of Pakistan; the
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces of
Switzerland; and the Institute for Security Studies of
South Africa, all in consultations with the Secretariat.
Three generic recommendations can be extracted
for improving safety, security and performance. The
report prepared by Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving Security
of United Nations Peacekeepers”, also highlights that
effective leadership is a key condition for security.
First, it is important to strengthen training of
leaders on team-based leadership to function effectively
as a mission leadership team, but also to apply modern
management tools and approaches, that is, to have tools
to convert vision and political strategies into action
and mission results for peace. The initiative of the
Secretariat and the Department of Peace Operations on
the comprehensive performance assessment system is
an important step in that direction.
Secondly, in addition to predeployment training,
it is also important to provide in-mission, scenariobased training for senior- and middle-management
teams. That is especially important to civilian leaders,
as they usually have had less exposure to scenariobased training than uniformed personnel. Training
together builds the cohesion of teams and increases
preparedness, effectiveness and the capability to
manage mission security.
Thirdly, we must ensure sustainability and expand
on the initiative to provide mentors for women and men
serving as senior mission leaders. Leadership is a harsh
task, many times without simple decisions, but balancing
between polarities, such as host-country consent, on
the one hand, and the protection of civilians, on the
other. Mentors can play an important role in helping
senior mission leaders cope with and manage difficult
considerations. In 2020, the Challenges Forum aims to
launch a web- and application-based leadership e-tool
for in-mission support, in cooperation with the United
Nations, together with interactive artificial intelligence
and tailor-made support for leaders in specific posts,
example cases and videos with guidance from former
leaders, both for online and offline use so it can be used
in mission settings.
One of Challenges Forum’s strategic objectives
is to support the effective development and reform of
peace operations, and another is to help strengthen
mission leadership. From 9 to 11 June, Challenges
8/69

07/05/2019

Forum partner the Government of Canada will
host our 2019 Annual Forum, looking at both those
examples, especially in connection with the “how” and
“who” aspects of the implementation of the action for
peacekeeping initiative from a field perspective. The
participants will review similar themes discussed by
the Security Council at last week’s Security Council
retreat, namely, the primacy of politics, strengthening
peacebuilding in peace operations, and effective
transitions. Furthermore, we will also look at coherent
and effective mission leadership and management. We
hope to be able to brief the Security Council on the
outcomes and recommendations at a future meeting.
Finally, the Challenges Forum partnership will
continue to work closely with the Secretariat, the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and Member States on training and capacity-building.
We will also continue to seek complementarities and
synergies with the Effectiveness of Peace Operations
Network, which provides essential and evidence-based
insights, the International Association of Peacekeeping
Training Centres and important Action for Peacekeeping
initiatives, such as the Egyptian Government’s
Cairo Roadmap.
Twenty years ago, I stood by the East River as a
young United Nations junior professional officer. Now
with some grey in my beard, I still feel quite inspired
and see opportunities to work for One United Nations
and increase the effectiveness of peace operations. To
that end, all of us must keep walking the walk, convert
words into action and turn Action for Peacekeeping
commitments into real results on the ground. The
Challenges Forum partnership is committed and
prepared to accompany the Security Council on this
imperative journey ahead, which is paved not only by
challenges, but also by opportunities.
The President: I thank Mr. Holmberg for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
For decades, the Blue Helmets have been a distinct
model of a global partnership, collective leadership and
shared responsibility for peace. However, with today’s
new political and security realities, the challenges
facing our peacekeepers are enormous. The incident in
Mali in January brings those realities home.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

From the changing nature of conflicts to a lack of
commitment to a political solution; from inadequate
preparation of troops to the possible involvement of
transnational actors, including terrorists and relocated
foreign terrorist fighters, all those impact the safety
and performance of our Blue Helmets. It is important to
keep in mind that the Blue Helmets represent this organ
at work. They represent the face of the Security Council
on the ground. The Blue Helmets are the guardians of
peace, protecting millions around the globe.
Moreover, it is often overlooked that a peacekeeping
mission is more efficient than unilateral actions.
Deploying Blue Helmets in a mission is eight times
less expensive than unilaterally deploying forces. For
that reason, Indonesia fully believes in peacekeepers,
in adequately preparing them and in investing in their
performance. Investing in our peacekeepers is investing
in peace.
As conflicts evolve becoming increasingly
multifaceted, our support for peacekeepers must keep
pace with the challenges at hand. In that regard, I wish
to underline some pertinent points.
First, a mission-specific approach is necessary. A
one-size-fits-all approach is not sufficient. From the
perspective of a troop- and police-contributing country,
the success of a mission will depend on adequate
predeployment preparation grounded in the knowledge
of local needs and conditions. That requires improved
consultations among the Council, host countries,
contributing countries and the Secretariat to ensure
better synergy linking mandates, actual needs on the
ground and training.
Secondly, community engagement is crucial.
Let me share a story from one of our peacekeepers,
Major Gembong, who is currently serving in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He witnessed
families separated by conflicts and took the initiative to
work for family reunification. With his team, they talked
to community leaders, heads of villages and families
to enable the reintegration of former combatants into
the community. So far, 422 former combatants have
been reunited with their families, and peace prevails.
Indeed, peacekeepers’ capability should go beyond
basic soldiering skills and be complemented by soft
skills, such as communication and trust-building.
Thirdly, investing in women equals investing in
peace. Female peacekeepers are more effective in

S/PV. 8521

winning the hearts and minds of the local population and
providing comfort for those traumatized by conflicts.
There is strong evidence that women’s participation in
peace processes increases the likelihood of sustained
peace by 20 per cent and contributes to longer-lasting
and more resilient peace. We must therefore make
peacekeeping more conducive to the inclusion of female
peacekeepers by working in partnership.
Indonesia is committed to enhancing the role of
female peacekeepers. For the first time, the number
of our female peacekeepers exceeds 100, and we
are committed to achieving more. Beyond female
peacekeepers, Indonesia is determined to continuously
enhance the role of women as agents of peace. That is
why we organized the Regional Training on Women,
Peace and Security, held in Jakarta last month, for
young female diplomats in the South-East Asian region.
Finally, training requires partnerships. As our
challenges become ever more complex, training should
be adaptive. That requires investment in training and
capacity-building, supported by partnerships among
Member States. Council members may rest assured
that Indonesia stands ready to engage in that regard.
We wish to offer the Indonesian Peacekeeping Training
Center to serve as an international training hub.
Indonesia also sees the benefit of more innovative
approaches in training, such as triangular partnerships.
We will therefore host the Triangular Partnership
Project in 2020 and 2021 to provide quality training for
peacekeepers in South-East Asia and beyond. Another
possible area is joint training to support co-deployments
between contributing countries. Indonesia is keen to
explore that further.
United Nations Peacekeeping is the portrait of
multilateralism at its best. It is the most legitimate
and effective tool to maintain peace. We are pleased
that the Council has adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/4 on that issue — the first document
of the Council focusing on training and capacitybuilding that will promote the performance, safety and
security of peacekeepers, in support of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative of the Secretary-General. Let
us all stand firm behind our Blue Helmets and provide
them with all the support they deserve.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the other members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

19-132479/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes your presence, Madam President,
as well as that of the Secretary-General and the highlevel representatives of some States members of the
Security Council at this open debate on the training
and capacity-building of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That high-level participation enhances the
prestige of this debate and demonstrates once again
that the quest for appropriate approaches to improving
the effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions remains our common concern.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes Indonesia’s efforts leading
to the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4
on that issue. We also commend Lieutenant General
Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and Mr. Björn Holmberg
for their timely briefings.
I would like to highlight that Côte d’Ivoire endorses
the statement to be delivered by Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Despite the criticism that they sometimes receive,
United Nations peacekeeping operations are one of the
most effective tools for the promotion and maintenance
of peace and international security. While the basic
principles and doctrine underlying peacekeeping
operations have remained unchanged, the conflict
typology and deployment environments of United
Nations missions have undergone profound changes.
Those transformations, which impact the security of
military and civilian personnel and the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations, raise new issues to which
the international community will have to provide
appropriate and innovative responses.
For Côte d’Ivoire, the training and capacitybuilding of peacekeeping operations in the current
context must be seen as a shared responsibility requiring
the collective efforts of all peacekeeping partners.
To that end, the Secretariat, the Security Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries have a
prominent role to play in the framework of a concerted
and coordinated approach.
One objective of training and capacity-building
for peacekeeping operations is to improve their
operational effectiveness and performance culture
in the implementation of their mandates. In that
regard, my country welcomes the convergence of
views among peacekeeping actors on the importance
10/69

07/05/2019

of training in the predeployment phase of troops and
other components of United Nations missions, as well
as the strengthening of their capacities throughout a
mission’s life cycle. Indeed, predeployment training
makes it possible to prepare the mindset of the military
and civilian personnel for prior understanding of the
existing challenges in the sociopolitical and cultural
environments of their areas of deployment, as well as
the security risks that arise there.
With regard to military components in particular,
training should essentially take into account the
knowledge and perfect mastery of the equipment made
available to them, especially those relating to transport
and communication. It should also focus on strategies
for combat and the protection of troops, including
medical evacuations. It is therefore incumbent on the
troop-contributing countries, with the support of the
United Nations and all technical and financial partners,
to provide their respective contingents with equipment
conforming to accepted standards in order to enable
them to deal effectively with recurrent attacks by
asymmetrical forces.
In addition, if it is to be complete, the training
provided to the staff of the United Nations missions
must focus on the protection of civilians and respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
It should also take into account the role of women in
peacekeeping missions and the added value they bring
to mediation, the prevention of community tensions and
the fight against sexual violence in conflict.
For 13 years, my country hosted the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, which, through exemplary
cooperation with the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
contributed to the early restoration of peace, stability
and prosperity. Building on that experience and driven
by the desire to play its full part in the maintenance
of international peace and security, my country seeks
to contribute through its forthcoming deployment,
without operational restrictions, of a contingent of 650
troops within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
preparation of that contingent, in accordance with the
provisions of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations that it has
endorsed, is nearing completion. Côte d’Ivoire takes
this opportunity to commend the invaluable support
of the Secretariat on the training of the future Ivorian
peacekeepers who will join the 150-strong protection
battalion already deployed in Gao.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

It is undeniable that the success of peacekeeping
operations is the collective responsibility of all
peacekeeping actors. It is therefore incumbent on us all
to work harder to improve the coordination of efforts,
in particular by creating synergies between the supply
and demand of training, identifying best practices
and sharing lessons learned from ongoing missions to
inform the deployment of future missions.
In conclusion, I reiterate Côte d’Ivoire’s ongoing
support for the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments, which is the crucible of broad consensus
on the need to work together to improve the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations, whose crucial role in the
preservation of international peace and security needs
no further demonstration.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the other speakers for their
briefings today.
Peacekeeping is an arduous task to which we have
been committed since the Organization was founded.
From the beginning, peacekeeping operations have
been the vital and indispensable tool for carrying out
that responsibility. In the current context, peacekeeping
has given rise to constant and changing challenges that
have imposed on the States Members of the United
Nations the obligation of fulfilling the objectives set
out in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
We recognize the leading role played by
peacekeepers deployed in highly dangerous missions,
where many have lost their lives in the service of
peace. That sacrifice requires the adoption of measures
necessary to equip peacekeepers with the capacities
that will allow them to carry out their duties optimally,
thereby ensuring efficient and effective performance
on the ground.
The provision of humanitarian assistance in
safe spaces depends to a large extent on effective
collaboration between humanitarian action and
peacekeeping. Working closely with humanitarian
actors therefore continues to be a core activity of
peace missions. In order to do that, we must increase
our military personnel’s capacities with regard to
humanitarian work and the principles and rules that
govern this area. While we acknowledge the exclusively
civilian nature of humanitarian action, increasing the

S/PV. 8521

coordination between civilian and military efforts on
the ground is essential.
Peacekeepers are under constant threat of attack,
which is an obstacle to their implementation of
mandates, and that is why measures must be taken to
protect them. Adequate training for peacekeepers, both
before deployment and while on mission, is crucial
to developing their skills in various areas with the
aim of ensuring their own safety, their best possible
performance of their functions and the effective
implementation of their mandates. The link between
the training, security and protection of peacekeepers
is undeniable.
Given the new and increasingly varied challenges
threatening international peace and security, we
believe that it is vital to continue supporting concrete
measures to improve training, capacity-building and the
implementation of joint and coordinated mechanisms
by the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries,
regional and subregional organizations and the Security
Council. Some such measures include the collective and
proactive analysis of the specific threats on the ground
that interfere with the fulfilment of mandates, strategic
planning for decision-making in emergency situations,
training in areas related to every context and ongoing
assessments of peacekeepers so that they can be held
accountable when their results are unsatisfactory or
when good work is recognized. In that context, I would
like to highlight some additional points.
It is important to train peacekeepers on gender
issues in order to ensure that they are taken into account
in the design, planning, implementation and evaluation
of peace operations. In addition, we must deploy gender
and women’s protection advisers and strengthen zerotolerance policies for sexual and gender-based violence
committed by peacekeepers. It is crucial that United
Nations missions prioritize visible and tangible respect
for women’s physical well-being and safety. Troopcontributing countries must also work to increase
women’s representation in missions and implement
the necessary legislative reforms for ensuring gender
training prior to deployment.
The Dominican Republic has endorsed the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and Preventing
the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We
believe it is vital that appropriate provisions on the
protection of children be included in all United Nations
peacekeeping mandates, as well as measures to ensure

19-1324711/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that all children, including those associated with State
or non-State groups, are treated in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
In some circumstances, effective training on the
impact of climate change on social stability and as a
multiplier of threats to human security is as important
as military training. Through their contact with the
communities they serve, peacekeepers have a twoway channel of communication that they can use
for collecting information on communities’ climate
concerns, thereby raising awareness of the possible
implications for peace and security and contributing
to risk management and resilience-building plans. We
also advocate for peace missions that do not contribute
to environmental pollution and thereby to creating new
climate vulnerabilities. We therefore believe that we
must take concrete steps to achieve sustainable peace
missions, for example by using renewable energy
sources. In addition, the role of young people should
be mentioned in peacekeeping missions’ mandates and
reports, as it was for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia.
In conclusion, as a signatory to the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, between 2000 and today the Dominican
Republic has made modest but significant contributions
to several peacekeeping missions, including in Kosovo,
Cote d’Ivoire, Mali and Colombia. Those missions
have been supported by training programmes and
academic training in areas that include women in
armed conflict, the prevention of violence against
women, international humanitarian law, human rights,
languages and the rights of refugees. That is because
we believe that investing in peace essentially represents
working towards building a better world for present and
future generations, one based on multilateralism, best
practices and the common good in order to achieve
the inclusive, sustainable and peaceful world we all
dream of.
Lastly, we believe firmly that the maintenance of
peace is everyone’s responsibility and that only with
the will to do so and joint efforts can we achieve lasting
and sustainable peace.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Islamic
world on the blessed month of Ramadan and to thank
Indonesia for choosing the topic for today’s debate. I
also want to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
12/69

07/05/2019

for his informative and important statement, and the
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat for their
thorough briefings.
The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I would like now to discuss today’s topic, with
particular reference to three points — reform, the role
of peacekeepers and our responsibility.
The State of Kuwait would like to reiterate its
support for the reforms undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral in the area of peace and security, including the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We also reiterate
our support for the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
we have endorsed, along with all the members of
the Security Council. The Declaration is a powerful
expression of our willingness to develop and build
peacekeepers’ capacities. As the Secretary-General just
said, training can save lives and is a joint responsibility.
We commend the fact that many States, including
Indonesia, convened the first meeting of the tripartite
partnership, which is an important and necessary step
for strengthening coordination and consultation efforts.
We cannot but emphasize the priority given to
political solutions in peace operations. That requires
operations that are capable of supporting political
processes, depending on their mandates. Most
peacekeepers are operating in difficult environments,
and sometimes they contribute to the prevention of war
crimes, again depending on the mandate of each mission.
They are in the forefront with those who protect civilians
in certain conflict areas. They also facilitate and protect
humanitarian aid convoys. Consequently, it is important
that troop-contributing countries participate as much
as possible in the elaboration of the mandates that they
will be in charge of implementing and defending in
order to ensure greater coordination and unity of effort,
so as to guarantee the success of the mandate. As the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia mentioned a
while ago, the cost of peacekeeping operations is eight
times less as compared to the cost of bilateral actions.
As far as our responsibility is concerned, what
I just mentioned is only a part of the significant
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

role played by peacekeepers. What we need to do is
formulate mandates that take into account the needs of
host countries and their citizens, as well as the political
processes that we will need to support. To that, we
would add the training, language and logistical skills
that must be provided to peacekeepers. We stress the
inherent right of each country to train its troops and
choose its priority skills. We must also respect the rules
that govern the selection of peacekeepers and police
units in peacekeeping operations in a way that makes
it possible to implement the mandate of each operation.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia
mentioned, it is true, and we agree with her, that
there is no one size that fits all. We also welcome the
commitments made by States during the Peacekeeping
Ministerial held on 29 March.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation and pride for the role played by women in
peacekeeping. Experience and studies have shown that
the participation of women contributes to perpetuating
peace. We are proud of the peacekeepers in general.
Some of them have sacrificed their lives to maintain
and defend peace. We would like to reiterate the support
of the State of Kuwait for the efforts of all troopcontributing countries, and for the active role played
by Indonesia in peacekeeping as well as in involving
all stakeholders.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for your presence here in New York; it is
very nice to see you again. I join others in thanking
Indonesia for focusing this debate on this very important
issue, and I pay tribute to your country’s role in United
Nations peacekeeping. I also thank Lieutenant General
Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg for their briefings.
The United Kingdom is proud to be one of the
first Member States to endorse the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, in support of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Providing peacekeepers
with comprehensive and high-quality training will help
them deliver across all the other pillars of that rightly
ambitious initiative. As other speakers have said, the
better trained the peacekeepers are, the better prepared
they will be to perform to the highest standards. That
will include ensuring their own safety and security.
As has been mentioned, many of us attended that
moving memorial ceremony yesterday, which was
a stark reminder of the dangers that United Nations
peacekeepers face on a daily basis. Better training will

S/PV. 8521

mean that peacekeepers are better equipped to meet the
challenges of unpredictable, complicated and complex
multidimensional mission environments.
I would like to say a few words about performance.
Peacekeepers should all meet required standards in
basic military or policing skills — the so-called green
skills; however, we believe that the best performing
peacekeepers are those who are also well versed in blue
skills, such as the protection of civilians, the prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse and compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The United Kingdom recognizes that, like all
troop- and police-contributing countries, we bear the
responsibility for training and equipping our uniformed
personnel. If we fail to prepare them to perform to the
highest standards in the field, we not only fail them,
but we also fail the civilians they have been deployed
to protect. Therefore, if any Member State fails in that
respect, we believe it is right that they should be held
accountable for the failure and learn all the necessary
lessons from it. In that context, my Government reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General’s development
of an integrated performance policy framework for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. I would like
to underline the importance of robust predeployment
verification visits to ensure that uniformed personnel
are fully prepared for their missions.
Lieutenant General Martins Filho’s briefing
mentioned the important issue of field missions reporting
contingent-performance issues to Headquarters. If
I may, I would like to use this occasion to urge the
Secretariat to provide the Council with regular updates
on such issues and what remedial action is to be taken,
in the interest of transparency and accountability, and
as set out in resolution 2436 (2018).
I would also like to say a word about partnerships.
Each Member State brings invaluable experience and
expertise to peacekeeping; as such, more effective
and efficient sharing of insights, lessons learned and
best practice helps us all. To that end, we support
the Secretary-General’s initiative to develop a light
coordination mechanism in concert with the Strategic
Force Generation and Capability Planning Cell and
a range of Member States, which will match training
needs with training offers. That is why we were very
pleased to co-host the preparatory meeting on training
and capacity-building with Uruguay ahead of this
year’s Peacekeeping Ministerial. For our part, we will

19-1324713/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

continue our efforts to better align our training and
capacity-building efforts with the needs of our partners.
The United Kingdom trains some 11,000 peacekeepers
from around the world each year. We were proud to
work with Viet Nam ahead of their first contingent
deployment to South Sudan in 2018. We supported Viet
Nam’s efforts to train and prepare its peacekeepers to
take over the level-II field hospital at Bentiu.
In conclusion, the men, women and children who
we ask our peacekeepers to protect should be able to
trust that anyone in a blue helmet or a blue beret is
ready, willing and able to deliver and, as necessary,
defend the mandates set by the Council. Moreover, our
peacekeepers should be able to trust that, before they
are sent into some of the world’s most difficult conflicts,
they will be trained and equipped to the highest possible
standard. The United Kingdom remains committed to
meeting those standards in our own deployments and
to partnering with other Member States to help them
achieve those goals.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like to join
others in welcoming you, Madam President. I think
your presence here underlines the importance that
your country attaches to peacekeeping, something
that has also been demonstrated through the concept
note (S/2019/359, annex), on which I would like
to congratulate you. You have also underlined the
importance you attach to this issue. Let me make
five points.
First, Germany is committed to peacekeeping.
We are the fourth largest financial contributor to
peacekeeping and German peacekeepers are currently
deployed in nine missions. We train, prepare and equip
our peacekeepers to meet the required standards.
The Secretary-General noted in his intervention this
morning that training saves lives. We share that view
and in 2018 Germany conducted a military observer
course for female peacekeepers for the first time. This
year, we will conduct a course for United Nations
police commanders in Germany and our Center for
International Peace Operations in Berlin provides
training for civilian experts.
At the Peacekeeping Ministerial held at the end of
March, Foreign Minister Maas made three commitments:
Germany will send mobile predeployment training
teams, it will train staff officers on mission and it will
support international peacekeeping training centres
such as those in Ghana and Mali.
14/69

07/05/2019

I would also like to echo what you, Madam
President, said with regard to female peacekeepers,
to the effect that investing in women is investing in
peace. Women are still underrepresented and several
colleagues who spoke before me have said that the
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions is strengthened
by the presence of more women peacekeepers. We
should therefore work on that. We will support the Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations mentioned by
Mr. Holmberg and, as Defence Minister Von der Leyen
has stated to the Security Council (see S/PV.8508),
we know that such work begins at home and we are
committed to reaching similar targets in Germany.
Secondly, we must protect those whose work
is to provide security. We have more than 100,000
peacekeepers in the field putting their lives on the
line and our British colleague has just reminded us
of the ceremony yesterday at which we paid tribute
to the more than 100 peacekeepers who have lost
their lives on mission. Germany will supply concrete
support, including by providing United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali contingents with protective vests. Much more
needs to be done to provide adequate support to
peacekeepers. They need adequate intelligence on the
ground, they need more information and they need to
able to analyse the information they obtain in order to
improve their performance.
Thirdly, peacekeepers serve the most vulnerable
populations and should lead by example. Therefore,
it is key that they receive training in human rights
law and international humanitarian law and training
in the protection of children. In that regard, I would
like to commend the Force Commander the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), who
gave some very specific examples in his presentation
of how the Mission has taken action successfully to
protect children.
Fourthly, with regard to training to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence, exactly two weeks ago, we
heard from Dr. Mukwege of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who knows first-hand the meaning of
sexual violence in conflict. Germany was very happy
that the Council was able to adopt resolution 2467
(2019), which asks for peacekeepers to be provided with
training on sexual and gender-based violence as part of
their predeployment and mission training.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fifthly and finally, peacekeeping should be
embedded in a political strategy. I would like to recall
what was said very clearly by the Force Commander
of MONUSCO — solutions to conflicts are political.
Peacekeeping missions can support political processes
but cannot resolve conflicts by themselves. For example,
in Côte d’Ivoire we found a solution to the conflict, but
in South Sudan we continue to struggle. The Security
Council should promote coherent political strategies
for the crisis situations on our agenda that include exit
strategies, realistic political objectives and strategic
benchmarks. We should adopt timelines and decide on
the size of contingents according to a strategy and not
the other way around.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to warmly welcome your
presence among us today. Your participation in the
Council underlines the importance of the matters
discussed, especially for Indonesia.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the two briefers, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues
Martins Filho, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Björn Holmberg, Director
of the Challenges Forum International Secretariat, for
their informative and valuable contributions.
I would like to touch upon three main topics: the
significance of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations in the
area of training and capacity-building; the importance
of information-sharing as an enabler of better
performance; and the crucial role of well-crafted
predeployment training.
As one of the first Member States to endorse the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, Poland sees
it as a clear road map for all relevant stakeholders to
guide them in continuously enhancing United Nations
peacekeeping missions, including by providing
support for the preparation of the personnel and
capabilities required for effective performance and
mandate delivery.
Poland strongly believes in providing troop and
police units with customized predeployment training
and adequately adjusted equipment. We therefore
fully support collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping, including through triangular
partnerships and a light coordination mechanism.
In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the

S/PV. 8521

Peacekeeping Ministerial held in March 2019, which
led to substantive progress on relevant commitments
and training-specific pledges by Member States. None
of this, however, should undermine or replace the
general principle that the predeployment training of
peacekeepers is the primary responsibility of troopcontributing and police-contributing countries.
I would like to reiterate our strong support for the
requirement provided in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments that the participation of women at
all stages of the peace process should be full, equal
and meaningful. The same applies to the challenges
and opportunities of training and capacity-building.
Poland believes that it is only by ensuring the fair and
equal access of women peacekeepers to training and
development opportunities that we will achieve the
ambitious goals of the uniformed gender-parity strategy.
Effective and efficient performance culture
in peacekeeping missions requires, among other
things,
information-sharing
capabilities.
We
recognize information and data-driven analysis as
key entry points to enhanced peacekeeping. Better
situational awareness, including country-specific
information provided by local communities, improves
planning and allows the identification of clear and
achievable benchmarks. Subsequently, realistic plans
precisely guide troop-contributing countries in their
predeployment training activities. This chain reaction
regarding information management leads us all to
the effective implementation of the mandate and is
indispensable to a mission’s ultimate goal, which is to
protect civilians and United Nations personnel. Such
mission-specific preparations are possible only when
troop-contributing countries are provided with the
full operational, political, geographical and security
picture. We deem indispensable closer cooperation
between United Nations Headquarters and missions in
that regard.
I would like to conclude by expressing our
strong belief that insufficient and ineffective
training of peacekeepers directly affects mandate
implementation — the core and statutory objective
of the United Nations presence in the host countries.
There can be no proper response without the proper
preparation process. Peacekeepers’ training cycles
should equip the Blue Helmets with a clear vision of a
given mission’s priorities, with the overarching aim of
protecting the most vulnerable.

19-1324715/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We warmly welcome Her Excellency Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.
We align our statement to that to be delivered later
by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations.
I thank the presidency of Indonesia for having
organized this very timely high-level open debate. I
thank also the Secretary-General and the two briefers,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and
Mr. Björn Holmberg, for their edifying briefings.
Equatorial Guinea believes that moving towards
and investing in stable and lasting peace requires that
important social and institutional transformations
take place in a State. Decisive action is required that
guarantees the rights of each citizen; communities
must be responsible as concerns the rights and duties
of their peoples; and relationships among social,
public and private stakeholders must be based on
justice, transparency, citizen security, equity, care
for the environment, and respect for difference and
social dialogue.
Equatorial Guinea believes that however we may
live and interrelate, peacekeeping is the responsibility
of each one of us within our respective societies. Success
in this area will require new skills and capacities,
through the contributions of all States Members of the
United Nations, and international, regional, subregional
and social organizations and institutions — in short,
cooperation among all States.
Peacebuilding must be seen as something that goes
beyond just ending war. Peacebuilding requires actions
aimed at tackling learnt prejudices, developing empathy
for others, promoting a change in mentality that opens
the way to new relationships in which violence and
force are not ways of achieving results and resolving
conflicts, and this must be done through dialogue and
in a peaceful way.
In order to achieve this complex set of actions,
society, as a whole and at the international level, must
bring to bear its full potential, deploy its full capacities
and create connections so that it can transform itself
as a society, including by seeking strategies that will
allow it to enhance well-being and respect for human
dignity and guarantee human rights, justice and equity.
16/69

07/05/2019

Improving the security and the performance of
United Nations peacekeeping personnel undoubtedly
means including, valuing and implementing in practice
all the aspects contained in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, presented by the Secretary-General on
25 December 2018, during the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly. The same is true of all
the other strategies set out during the recent highlevel Peacekeeping Ministerial on the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative (see S/PV.8508), at which the
following main objectives were established: generating
specialized high-performance capacities for the United
Nations regarding peacekeeping so as to meet everchanging needs and tackle new challenges, in particular
increasing capacities for rapid deployment and the
training of units that speak the local language, and
strengthening compliance with standards of training
and performance, including in addressing security and
protection issues.
Additional objectives are revitalizing political
determination and networks to support the United
Nations in its efforts to reform and further galvanize
support for Member States so as to enable them to
meet their financing commitments for the effective
implementation of action for peacekeeping; and
undertaking substantial reforms to improve the
functional structure of peacekeeping operations,
making them more coherent, agile and effective.
My delegation welcomes the fact that the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative represents the main agenda
and is an agent of change that affects all aspects of the
laudable work done by United Nations peacekeepers
and strengthens missions charged with maintaining
international peace and security, thanks to the impetus
to collective action by peacekeeping personnel from
all Member States as well as the Security Council,
the General Assembly, financial contributors, troopand police-contributing countries, host countries,
intergovernmental and regional organizations and
the Secretariat.
In that regard, further efforts are necessary to
devise and adopt mechanisms aimed at putting into
practice, according to our shared, mutually-agreedon commitments, all the objectives listed as areas for
improvement pursuant to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and in line with the shared road map.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Allow me to conclude with an observation: it is
imperative for international peace and security that
the African Union be endowed with the resources
necessary to fulfil its subsidiary responsibility under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
requires sustainable and predictable financing of the
peacekeeping operations carried out by the African
Union under a Security Council mandate, and also that
the troops undertaking these missions be provided with
the necessary training, capacities and equipment. This
is an issue of logic and justice that is key to achieving
our shared goal of silencing the guns in Africa and
across the world.
We conclude by paying well-deserved tribute
to the laudable contribution made by Indonesia to
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to welcome you to the
Security Council, Madam President, and to thank you
for organizing today’s debate on issues related to the
training of peacekeepers and building the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We are also
grateful to Secretary-General António Guterres and the
other briefers for their informative statements.
We share the concerns about the fact that today’s
challenges demand particularly thorough training of
peacekeeping contingents. That is especially important
in missions with complex mandates operating in
extremely difficult and dangerous situations. Highquality training for personnel plays a decisive role in
the process of putting together modern multicomponent
peacekeeping missions, and the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping is directly dependent on it.
The issue of personnel training cannot be resolved by
the United Nations on its own. The main responsibility
lies with the States themselves. We know that from
experience. Russian men and women peacekeepers
are serving in eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we take an active part in providing
aviation services for United Nations needs. We have
therefore gained significant experience in issues related
to training peacekeeping personnel. We train foreign
peacekeepers as well as our own — police, formed
units and military observers — in Russian training
centres. We have developed an instruction system that
includes both general and specialized training just prior
to peacekeepers’ deployment to specific missions. We
also adapt language training to what is needed.

S/PV. 8521

We believe firmly in the need for robust triangular
cooperation and the coordination of efforts on training
and capacity-building issues between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. However, direct contact between States that
are developing training programmes and those taking
part in them is no less important. In general, we hope
that the institutionalization of the light coordination
mechanism and linking intergovernmental cooperation
to the work of the Secretariat will not create additional
obstacles or lead to unnecessary competition between
States providing training programmes, and that it will
lead to a better awareness among troop-contributing
countries about the training programmes available
to them. Of course, it is extremely important to take
into account modern realities and needs. We have to
understand what kind of peacekeepers are needed
today and the areas where training is most relevant. It
is essential to take into account the views and concerns
of troop-contributing countries. It is their Blue Helmets
and Blue Berets who understand better than anyone the
kinds of tasks that have to be dealt with on the ground
and the skills that are needed for them.
We also want to point out that peacekeepers’
effectiveness and security certainly does not depend only
on how well their training went. The way the Security
Council formulates their missions’ mandates is no less
important. In fact, that may be the most crucial stage,
where we ensure that the tasks are commensurate with
peacekeeping capabilities. In that regard, we continue
to be alarmed by the excessive enthusiasm for so-called
robust mandates. We should not forget that among other
things, the right to use force increases security risks
for Blue Helmets themselves, turning them into targets
and even parties to conflicts. That cannot be allowed to
happen. Peacekeeping’s job is maintaining peace, not
creating new risks. I want to remind the Council that
this became one of the key issues during the discussion
of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, especially at the stage when the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations was being drafted.
It is no secret that despite the broad support for
such initiatives, States still disagree about a number
of very important aspects. In September of last year
Russia circulated an official note as a Security Council
document in which we explained that we could not support
the linking of human rights issues to the protection of
civilians, since the latter involves the use of force based

19-1324717/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Needless to say there can be no question of monitoring
human rights with the use of force. We also stressed
that United Nations peacekeeping missions’ activity
should prioritize working with host Governments.
Lastly, we maintained, and continue to maintain, that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping should play
a key role alongside the Security Council in defining
the parameters for United Nations peacekeeping. At
the time, we thought that a common understanding
had been reached between the States Members of the
United Nations and the Secretariat that it was essential
to continue working to establish a consensus on general
peacekeeping issues. Unfortunately, however, we are
still encountering attempts to circumvent the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping in order to push issues
through the Security Council that have failed to reach
agreement in the General Assembly. Needless to say,
we cannot accept that approach.
However, we are definitely not denying the
significance of the Secretary-General’s initiatives on
very concrete issues of peacekeeping. That applies first
and foremost to the training and capacity-building of
peacekeepers. In this area we should act collectively
to find appropriate and balanced solutions. We
were pleased to see that it is precisely such balanced
approaches that are reflected in the presidential
statement issued today (S/PRST/2019/4). There is no
hiding the fact that the drafting of the statement was not
easy. Some delegations refused to be actively involved
until the very last round. However, we salute the efforts
of the Indonesian delegation, whose extreme diplomatic
skill ultimately made it possible to achieve a result that
satisfied everyone. We believe we should continue to
work on developing United Nations peacekeeping on the
basis of consensus, listening carefully and respecting
one another, which is the only approach that will make
it possible to fully realize the Secretary-General’s
ambitious goals for the field of peacekeeping.
Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): We welcome
you as President of the Security Council today, Madam,
and South Africa would like to thank the Republic
of Indonesia for organizing this open debate on an
important matter. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), and Mr. Björn Holmberg, Director
18/69

07/05/2019

of the Challenges Forum International Secretariat, for
their comprehensive briefings.
South Africa aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and by the observer of the
African Union (AU).
My delegation recognizes and reaffirms the
importance of peacekeeping as one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security, as
well as in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts. As the body entrusted with the deployment
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and in the
context of new emerging threats faced by our troops
and United Nations personnel, the Security Council
must ensure that operations are fully resourced,
entrusted with the appropriate mandate to respond to
the context-specific environment in which they are
deployed and adequately equipped with troops that are
able to protect themselves in the process of carrying out
their mandates.
In our view, the safety and security of the
peacekeepers should also be strengthened by adopting
the use of modern technology in peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations should use smart
technology and heightened key capabilities to enable
peacekeepers to counter any attack by armed groups
or other forms of the asymmetrical threats that are
increasingly prevalent in peacekeeping.
South Africa reaffirms the primacy of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) in
making United Nations peacekeeping policy. We regret
the fact that the substantive session of the C-34 that
concluded in March was unable to adopt its annual
report. We urge all Member States to work together
to reach consensus on issues that are pertinent to
the discharge of the Council’s mandate. The C-34’s
chapters on the enhancement of African peacekeeping
capacities and best-practices training are relevant to
our discussion today.
South Africa acknowledges the increased and vital
role that regional organizations play in peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts. Regional organizations such as
the African Union are first responders, deploying early
where necessary in order to stabilize crisis situations
and thereby enabling the United Nations to deploy
when conditions are more favourable. As is envisaged
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
partnerships with regional organizations will therefore
address some of the constraints that the United Nations
faces in implementing successful peace operations. It is
our firm view that the efforts of regional organizations
are indispensable, and there is merit in having the
United Nations develop and strengthen their capacities.
South Africa would like to reiterate the importance
of enhancing the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of the financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. That
principle has been endorsed by the Council and we
must continue to support it.
We must also ensure the availability of the
necessary training and capacity required to increase
the number of women in peacekeeping operations.
South Africa will therefore continue supporting efforts
aimed at advancing women’s meaningful representation
and participation in peacekeeping missions, such as
the opportunities presented by the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Operations, of which we are a member.
Programmes aimed at female military officers have
been undertaken in partnership with UN-Women and
the Government of Norway, with the assistance of the
Department of Political Affairs and the African Union.
South Africa is fully committed to the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
operations. We have deployed a comprehensive,
institutionalized predeployment programme on
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in order to
raise the level of consciousness of that scourge among
our deployed troops. We are also providing continuing
additional in-mission training interventions to
reinvigorate troops’ situational awareness and mission
readiness in terms of command-and-control matters, the
use of leisure time, the protection of civilians, human
rights standards and, once again, sexual exploitation
and abuse. We are a member of the Secretary-General’s
Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
operations, and we fully endorse it.
In operationalizing Action for Peacekeeping,
enhancing partnerships and strengthening performance,
South Africa is sharing its expertise and training
competencies with the Force Intervention Brigade
partners in MONUSCO. The tactical intelligence unit
course presented for six weeks in South Africa for our
own troops, as well as those from Tanzania and Malawi,
as preparation for predeployment to the Democratic

S/PV. 8521

Republic of the Congo, is a case in point, aimed at
ensuring a common operational picture and solidifying
operational effectiveness.
In conclusion, and in reply to the questions in
the concept note for this debate (S/2019/359, annex),
South Africa would like to make the following
recommendations. With regard to predeployment
verification, we propose that the United Nations
consider establishing technical training teams that
will provide workshops for the peacekeeping training
institutions of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs) to assist them
in translating United Nations doctrine with a view to
improving field training, as well as identifying and
correcting capacity gaps, during the preparation of
forces prior to deployment. Furthermore, TCCs and
PCCs must analyse the scope of intervention operations
as they relate to the security landscape in the theatre
of conflict. That will help guide the development of
scenarios for military units and form a baseline for
mission-specific training according to the real-time
situations that military units are deployed to.
The Secretariat should further expand the reach
and number of United Nations peacekeeping training
centres on the African continent, as well as in other
regions, which would supplement the activities of both
the Member States and the United Nations in building
peacekeepers’ capacities and training them. Lastly,
consideration should be given to standardizing the
peacekeeping doctrine between the United Nations and
regional peacekeeping training institutions, with a view
to developing a common doctrine on peacekeeping.
We believe that these recommendations can contribute
to improving the training and capacity needs of
our peacekeepers.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting and your presence here
today in presiding over our meeting, Madam President.
We thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their valuable statements.
We believe it is essential for troop- and
police-contributing countries to participate actively
in the institutional reforms and changes aimed at
making peacekeeping operations more efficient, just
as we believe that it is the Security Council’s job to
provide the troops participating in those operations
with clear and precise mandates. We believe that for
this analysis to be productive it is essential to diagnose

19-1324719/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the many challenges and difficulties currently facing
peace operations. The troops deployed to missions are
operating in increasingly hostile environments and
dealing with many different kinds of non-State actors,
including insurgent groups, terrorists and organized
criminals, which makes their work extremely complex
and risky. They must therefore be given the specialized
training they need to enable them to carry out their
mandates successfully. In that regard we note with
concern the frequent attacks on Blue Helmets, and
we pay tribute to those who have lost their lives in
the execution of their duties. This difficult scenario
requires an adequate response from States in terms
of training, and that means going beyond a model of
general preparation towards a more specialized one that
takes into account the specific characteristics of the
environment where the personnel will be deployed and
the specific tasks that the Council will require of them.
In our view it is also crucial to provide training
in a number of other areas. They include the specifics
of mandates and the tasks to be implemented on the
ground, which means that the Council’s resolutions
should establish clear mandates and achievable
objectives in operational terms; individual missions’
specific tasks, such as the protection of civilians and
the protection of critical infrastructure, strategies
for ex-combatants’ disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security-sector reform and demining
operations; international humanitarian law and human
rights, with a particular focus on combating sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping personnel,
who must sign and implement the voluntary compact
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and
abuse; capacity-building and integration projects in
host societies, with a view to building relationships
of respect and trust with the people; the use of new
and appropriate technologies, which can contribute
substantially to peacekeepers’ security and fulfilment
of their mandates, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians; and, lastly, a strengthened focus
on gender. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group
on Women and Peace and Security, we recognize the
importance of raising the awareness of uniformed
personnel with regard to the special protection and
empowerment needs of women in conflict and postconflict situations.
In achieving those objectives, we believe it is useful
to share the important synergies that exist in Latin
America. They are not limited to bilateral relations,
20/69

07/05/2019

through exchanges of officials and instructors or
lessons learned on doctrine and course design, but are in
fact multilateral, thanks to the creation of ALCOPAZ,
our Latin American association of peace operations
training centres, which is aimed at mutual integration
and cooperation. It is currently chaired by Peru and
continues to strengthen its links and capacity in various
technical areas. We believe that similar approaches
could be applied to police and civilian involvement in
peace operations. We also consider it important to link
such efforts with the experience of other continents
in order to generate synergies of greater scope. In
addition, we believe that it is crucial to complement
those positive practices with the involvement of civil
society organizations, such as research centres, think
tanks and universities, with which partnerships and
cooperation agreements should be developed.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that, as
the Minister for Defence of Peru announced at the
Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March, Peru
will host the twenty-fifth Annual Conference of the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres, to be held in October. We call on all countries
that have training centres to continue to contribute to
the strengthening of those key capacities and the joint
task of investing in peace.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Indonesia
for bringing up this important aspect of peacekeeping
for discussion in the Security Council. Incident reports
have demonstrated the extent to which training and
related issues are key to the responses that must be
provided. The statement made by the Secretary-General
earlier also illustrated the importance of this issue for
the Secretariat. The Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative is the matrix on which we must
base our work.
I would like to address three points: first, the
primary responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries for training their contingents; secondly, the
importance of pursuing such training through specific
and needs-based initiatives; and, thirdly, the importance
of adequately training contingents on the specific issue
of children in armed conflict.
The primary responsibility for training uniformed
personnel deployed in peace operations lies with troopand police-contributing countries. In that regard, it is
important for the Secretariat to ensure that contingents
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

are operational following predeployment training.
Before taking up their posts in a given peacekeeping
operation, Blue Helmets and police officers should be
operationally prepared and fully aware of the reality
that they must face.
In addition to general mandatory training, the
specific content of the training package should be
determined by the person who knows best what is needed,
namely, the Force Commander. Belgium supports
the Secretariat, in particular the Integrated Training
Service, in its mission to provide troop-contributors
with comprehensive and up-to-date training material.
In particular, Belgium assists in translating training
manuals into French, as it is aware of the importance of
conducting training in the language of the contingent or
of the duty station.
Secondly, with regard to training and related
issues on the ground in the theatre of operations,
uniformed and non-uniformed personnel should receive
theatre-specific information and, where appropriate,
should participate in exercises that will enable them to
carry out their specific mission more effectively.
One post-deployment training tool for continuing
training is the use of mobile training teams, which
the Secretary-General mentioned earlier. Belgium is
currently providing such teams to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali for four six-week periods in order to deliver
targeted needs-based training, including primary
emergency assistance. The partnership involves the
Secretariat, the country providing instructors and the
troop-contributing countries, in close cooperation
with the Mission. We are counting on the Secretariat
to quickly facilitate the operationalization of a light
coordination mechanism.
Thirdly, for a soldier, even one who has operational
experience, facing an armed child can be overwhelming.
In an ideal world, we should not have to train our
contingents how to react when confronted by a child.
Unfortunately, the situation on the ground is sometimes
very far removed from our ideals, and the reality is that
some unscrupulous groups continue to arm children.
More generally, given the many different
situations they have to deal with, the members of peace
operations must be made aware of child-protection
measures. As mandated by resolution 1612 (2005)
and related resolutions, including resolution 2387
(2017), it is important that mission personnel receive

S/PV. 8521

sufficient training in that area. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend Lieutenant General Martins
Filho on the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the results achieved in that area, which the
Force Commander mentioned earlier.
In conclusion, Belgium will remain committed to
the continuous process of improving the performance
of peace operations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of
the Security Council for holding this important open
debate, which focuses on an element that is key to
ensuring the success of peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to especially welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
whose participation in presiding over this open debate
illustrates Indonesia’s determined commitment to the
topic that has brought us together today.
I also convey my sincere thanks to the SecretaryGeneral, the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mr. Björn Holmberg for
their valuable contributions.
We can never stress enough how much we need Blue
Helmets who are well-trained, well-equipped and fully
aware of the mandate they have to deliver in order to
optimize the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
In Mali, for example, adequate equipment would have
prevented the deaths of several Blue Helmets, and the
ongoing improvement of the quality of equipment is
therefore a top priority.
In many theatres of operation, better predeployment
training of staff officers is needed. More generally,
increased interoperability among those staff officers
would allow them to mount a more effective response
to threats against civilians and would strengthen the
security of the peacekeepers themselves.
In addition to military and police personnel, all
peacekeeping personnel must be trained, in particular
the mission leadership. Today’s peacekeeping operations
are complex and multidimensional and require the
integration of the work carried out by civilian and
military components. In post-crisis countries in which
State authority must be restored, such close cooperation
should extend to the United Nations country teams and
bilateral and multilateral partners. It is therefore a new

19-1324721/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

ecosystem in which peacekeeping operations function,
and they must adapt to it. Training is a crucial element
in achieving that.
Significant progress has been made in recent
years. The Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March,
attended by the French Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, demonstrated that
Member States are ready to make the necessary efforts
to strengthen future peacekeeping operations. Most
of us made robust commitments last September by
subscribing to the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. France will continue
to lend its full support to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which has already been a significant success
for the United Nations and the Secretary-General.
Training is above all the national responsibility of
all of us as troop-contributing countries, and we must
collectively make the necessary efforts in that regard.
France wishes to do its part and, in addition to training
its own troops, is making a significant effort to support
other troop-contributing countries in the training of
their contingents.
We must now work to implement the Declaration
of Commitments as quickly and completely as possible.
The failure of the negotiations of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations must not stop us. We must
continue the momentum of mobilization around the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We must make the
most of the meeting of the heads of general staff in
July and the conference on peacekeeping in a Frenchspeaking environment, to be held in the fall in Morocco,
to make steadfast progress in that regard. Moreover,
the launch and development of the light coordination
mechanism for the purpose of deconfliction deserves
our full attention. The mechanism should enable
the Secretariat to be fully informed of the various
training activities carried out by States for troopcontributing countries.
In the Security Council, France is already
implementing its peacekeeping commitments. For
mandates in which we are penholders, we strive
to be exemplary with a view to setting in motion a
positive dynamic. We have already put many of those
commitments into practice. We systematically consult
troop-contributing countries throughout the year, and
not only at the time of mandate renewal; we organize
field evaluation visits before each renewal; we consult
22/69

07/05/2019

the host State; and we work to prioritize mandates,
where possible.
On the issue of training and capacity-building,
France is especially committed in the area of training
French-speaking troop-contributing countries. France
supports six peacekeeping operation training centres
in Africa, three in Latin America and one in Asia,
which contribute to building the capacity of future
contingents deployed in peacekeeping operations. We
are also strengthening the skills of those contingents
in specialized areas, such as mine clearance, health,
judicial police, logistics and civil protection, thanks to
our network of national and regional schools and our
network of 320 experts working as closely as possible
with the defence and security forces of many countries.
Through those different activities, we are
committed to training more than 30,000 African
military personnel next year to qualify them to serve in
peacekeeping operations. That is a considerable effort
with real operational significance. We also emphasize
so-called refresher courses during missions to ensure
follow-up to training provided previously. France has
just conducted a trial exercise with a mobile training
team for the Guinean battalion of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. Lastly, for the fifth consecutive year, and in
coordination with the Department of Peace Operations,
France will organize a training session for United
Nations trainers in Paris for approximately 40 Frenchspeaking staff officers.
I would also like to highlight the crucial importance
of multilingualism, which is not only in the United
Nations DNA but is also necessary for the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations. It is essential for Blue
Helmets to speak the language of the country in which
they are deployed, as it enables them to be in close
contact with local populations and authorities, which is
one of the conditions for successful peacekeeping. That
is why we provide special support for teaching French to
future contingents through the En Avant method, which
offers a method of learning French that is adapted to the
peacekeeping environment.
We also organize French language courses for 7,500
trainees per year and provide translations of reference
documents. In that context, France, in association with
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
published a practical guide in French in March, entitled
“Etre acteur des opérations de paix”, which the French
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Minister of the Armed Forces co-presented here in New
York. It is an important educational tool designed to
promote the presence of Francophone contingents in
peacekeeping operations.
I would like to conclude by underlining the extent
to which the protection, participation and empowerment
of women are at the heart of France’s priorities in all
areas of peacekeeping operations. France today ranks
fourth in the world for women’s participation in the
armed forces. The personnel of all our current military
operations, both nationally and in peacekeeping
operations, are at least 7 per cent female — and,
of course, we would like to take that commitment
further. That is why the Minister of the Armed Forces,
Ms. Florence Parly, launched a new gender parity plan
in March within the armed forces to encourage the
participation of women and fully value their role, and
in particular to double the number of women general
officers by 2025.
I again thank you, Madam President, for presiding
over this debate.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Indonesia for its initiative
in convening today’s open debate during its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
your coming to New York, Madam Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, to preside over this meeting.
My thanks also go to Secretary-General Guterres,
Lieutenant General Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg
for their briefings.
Since their inception, more than 70 years ago, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have made important
contributions to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Over the past year, SecretaryGeneral Guterres has been actively advancing the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. United Nations
Member States, the Secretariat and relevant regional
organizations have made shared commitments, and
those efforts have given new impetus to bolstering and
improving United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Training and capacity-building are crucial to enhancing
peacekeeping operations and have a direct bearing
onthe effectiveness of the implementation of Security
Council mandates. As such, they merit the full attention
of Council members.
China
supports
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2019/4, which was adopted today at Indonesia’s
initiative. I would like to make the following comments.

S/PV. 8521

First, we must prioritize capacity-building for
troop-contributing countries (TCCs). TCCs are the
major actors of peace operations and make important
contributions to peacekeeping operations, and in doing
so their troops sometimes make the ultimate sacrifice.
The international community should pay attention to
the actual needs of TCCs, in particular those from
developing countries, enhance tcapacity-building in
the area of peacekeeping and ensure the availability
of targeted training and resources. Thorough and
effective training and capacity-building should be
conducted to continue improving the safety, security
and performance of peacekeepers.
Secondly, it is important to fully leverage the role
of the Secretariat. The Secretariat should continue
improving training policies for peacekeeping and
provide updated training materials in a timely manner.
It is necessary to carry out targeted training during
deployment in the light of the situation in the task
areas targeted in mission training. Based on its own
advantages, the Secretariat can play a coordinating role
between supply and demand in the area of peacekeeping
capacity-building.
Thirdly, it is essential to actively build partnerships
for peacekeeping capacity-building. Bilateral, regional
and international cooperation must be conducted in
peacekeeping capacity-building. Support must be given
to the African Union (AU), the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and other regional organizations in their
efforts to enhance their regional peacekeeping capacity.
It is imperative to prioritize and support the significant
role of the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining peace and security in
Africa and to assist the AU in its efforts for the early
operationalization of the African Standby Force and
Rapid Reaction Force.
China, a permanent member of the Security
Council, is a major troop-contributing country
(TCC) and financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is a staunch supporter
of and major participant in such operations. At
present, more than 2,500 Chinese peacekeepers are
implementing mandates in eight task areas, working in
fields such as demining, medical services, engineering,
transportation and security. China attaches great
importance to the training and capacity-building of
peacekeepers. Chinese peacekeepers are well-trained,
well-equipped and disciplined. The Peacekeeping
Centre of the Chinese Ministry of Defence and

19-1324723/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the Chinese Peacekeeping Police Training Centre
provide high-quality predeployment training for
Chinese peacekeepers.
China fully implements the commitments made
by President Xi Jinping in further supporting United
Nations peacekeeping operations. A peacekeeping
standby force of more than 8,000 troops and two
peacekeeping standby police contingents have been
established and have all passed United Nations
assessments and completed registration in the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System.
They can be put into operation at any time. In addition
to our efforts, China has also been actively helping
police-contributing countries that are developing
countries in their capacity-building since 2015, through
international workshops on peacekeeping, and by
sending experts and trainers abroad to conduct training.
China has helped other countries train more than
1,800 peacekeepers and has assisted countries in SouthEast Asia in training more than 200 mine-clearance
personnel. China will continue to work actively on
providing the AU with gratis military assistance worth
$100 million and additional training worth $80 million
to help Africa advance its African Standby Force and
Rapid Reaction Force. It will continue to support Africa
in its efforts to enhance its own peacekeeping capacity.
Since its inception, the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Trust Fund has made peacekeeping
capacity-building a priority. Since 2016, the Fund
has supported more than 10 peacekeeping capacitybuilding projects, including training for formed police
units, first aid and research on the safety and security
of peacekeepers. The Fund gives priority to funding
the peacekeeping capacity-building projects of African
TCCs. In 2018, eight training sessions were conducted,
benefiting more than 200 trainees. In 2019, the number
of training sessions will be increased to 15.
Last but not least, China wishes to reiterate that it will
continue to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping
capacity-building and honour its commitment to world
peace with concrete actions.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on Indonesia’s
Security Council presidency this month.
I also thank our briefers and Indonesia for organizing
today’s debate on how training and capacity-building can
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. In that regard,
24/69

07/05/2019

the United States is engaging with partners to provide
innovative approaches to improving peacekeeping.
We know that high-quality training and
accountability can directly contribute to the safety
and security of uniformed peacekeepers. Just as
importantly, qualified professional troops and police
can deliver more effective and efficient missions
that better protect civilian populations. Uniformed
personnel must also have an understanding of the
mandate, the background and the conditions of their
peacekeeping environment. There are many troopand police-contributing countries that may have the
political will to help peacekeeping operations achieve
lasting solutions and seek partnerships to fulfil their
peacekeeping potential. That is where the United States
excels. We will continue to answer the call to help,
as the largest bilateral training and capacity-building
partner in the world.
Our commitment to the effective development
and delivery of peacekeeping training and capacitybuilding is long-standing and our efforts are working.
Police trained in conjunction with the United States
regularly pass United Nations predeployment
assessments and United States-trained Rwandan
police units in both the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic received United Nations medals of service
excellence in recognition of their leadership and efforts
to protect civilians — qualities we should demand from
all deployed uniformed personnel. On the military
side, we are working with a partner troop-contributing
country to pilot a predeployment certification exercise
to validate the readiness of deploying battalions.
Through our peacekeeping initiatives, the United
States does more than conduct training courses.
Our long-term partnerships help enable troop- and
police-contributing partners to prepare, deploy and
sustain fit for purpose peacekeepers. We hope that
other training and capacity-building partners will
follow suit. Our assistance activities further aim
to address mission shortfalls that might undermine
the performance or effectiveness of a peacekeeping
operation. For example, we have provided training and
equipment to 41 partner countries to develop 82 distinct
critical enabling capabilities — such as engineering
companies, level-2 hospitals and riverine units — for
deployment to peacekeeping operations.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8521

Our training also aims to increase the number
of qualified civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping. More than 11,000 female military and
police personnel have participated in United States
peacekeeping training events, through the United States
Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI) and the
International Police Peacekeeping Operations Support
Programme. As part of our efforts to achieve the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in all
stages of the peace process, we have further integrated
gender-related topics into training for all peacekeepers.
In GPOI partner countries, we are investing in
infrastructure, such as building female barracks and
latrines, to accommodate female peacekeepers at
training sites.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will continue
today’s open debate right through the lunch hour, as we
have a very large number of speakers.

We do those things because we know, as you pointed
out, Madam President, that having qualified women
in meaningful roles makes peacekeeping missions
more effective. However, safety and security are not
just about training and capacity-building. They str
primarily about improving peacekeeper performance.
That is why we drafted resolution 2436 (2018), adopted
by consensus last September, and why we welcome the
Secretary-General’s commitment to implementing an
integrated performance policy.

I would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and the briefers for their valuable
input to the discussion. It is a particular pleasure for
me to welcome the Force Commander of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lieutenant General
Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho. That Mission continues
to be a decisive stabilization factor on the ground
with the substantive support of Ukrainian attack and
military transport helicopters.

Resolution 2436 (2018) makes it clear that
the Security Council needs better information on
performance in order to make better decisions.
From training and capacity-building to ensuring
accountability for underperformance, we cannot fix
what we do not know. As the representative of the United
Kingdom also noted, better reporting on peacekeeping
will help us make better decisions in the Council. We
will therefore continue to work with partners towards
the full and speedy implementation of resolution 2436
(2018). Through that effort, we will further strengthen
peacekeeping, including with tailored, targeted training
and capacity-building. In turn, that will enhance the
safety and security of peacekeepers and the communities
they protect so that we can arrive at lasting conditions
for the political solutions that we seek.

From the briefings it appears indisputable that, to
keep up with an unpredictable world, the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour urgently requires additional
reform. It is high time to assess the current state of
play and prospects of United Nations peacekeeping. I
sincerely hope that this debate will contribute to that
vital exercise.

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to join the
participants in today’s discussion in expressing our
sincere gratitude for the organization of this important
debate. It is only fair that this meeting take place
during the presidency of Indonesia — a nation with an
outstanding peacekeeping record.
I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity; however, I would also like to signal that
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We fully support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to implement a robust, comprehensive
United Nations reform agenda within the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. There are certainly palpable
results achieved in the implementation of the September
2018 Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which Ukraine also
joined. However, we still have a long road before us to
make contemporary and fully effective peacekeeping
a reality.
For Ukraine, as an active troop contributor and
an initiator of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, the theme of
our discussion has much practical meaning. Ukrainian
Blue Helmets have been participating in United Nations
operations throughout the world. In many cases, they

19-1324725/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

have been instrumental in reaching peace — from the
Balkans to Liberia. Ukraine’s involvement in United
Nations peacekeeping did not cease even at the height
of the ongoing armed aggression against my country,
and even as Ukraine continues to await action from the
Council on the deployment of a peacekeeping operation
to the occupied territory in Ukrainian Donbas.
Unfortunately, the casualty level in United Nations
peacekeeping remains a grim reminder of the still
unsatisfactory level of personnel safety and security.
On the other hand, the action for protecting civilians
as an integral part of the peacekeeping endeavour still
lacks efficiency and determination. Both issues have
often similar or closely interlinked causes, as was
rightly outlined by the briefers. I see several essential
issues to be addressed for success here.
Ukraine proceeds from the understanding that the
United Nations has to use all its potential to prevent
the outbreak, resurgence and prolongation of armed
conflicts. Gross human rights violations are often a
precursor to the outbreak of a military conflict. Yet
some Member States try very hard to prevent the
United Nations and the Council from addressing human
rights violations as an issue of international peace and
security. The consequences of such irresponsibility can
be seen in many places around the globe.
Decisions on peacekeeping operation deployment
should be based on a political solution or guided by
peace agreements, which must include the protection
of civilians. If an operation’s mandate has nothing to
do with the implementation of peace accords, such
a peacekeeping operation will not serve its main
objective of establishing lasting peace and can result in
the freezing, or even in the escalation, of the conflict.
Any peacekeeping operation relies on appropriate force
generation to be able to deliver on its mandate. One
should not be deceived by a false belief in the ability
of peacekeeping operations to function efficiently
and effectively without proper funding and sufficient
capabilities, including aviation assets, advanced
intelligence and modern technologies.
The Council should continue the dialogue with
troop- and police-contributing countries in formal and
informal consultations during the establishment or
renewal of peacekeeping operation mandates, in order
to ensure proper and on-time personnel training and
equipment supply to the missions. Proper conduct by,
and the discipline of all personnel deployed in, United
26/69

07/05/2019

Nations peacekeeping operations are vital to their
effectiveness. The Council must continue to support
the Secretary-General’s initiative to eradicate sexual
violence in United Nations peacekeeping operations. It
is essential also to ensure gender balance integration
in peacekeeping operations, which would certainly
further improve their capabilities to address genderbased violence, thereby contributing dramatically to
conflict resolution.
Ukraine has committed itself to the protection of
civilians policy, including by recognizing the Kigali
Principles, and views the issue of the protection
of civilians as one of the most important tasks of
peacekeeping operations. One of the practical ways for
achieving improvement in that regard is by eliminating
the practice of caveats, which often becomes an obstacle
for a swift reaction by the United Nations.
We also support the importance of protecting the
environment in peacekeeping operations, which could
make them a more effective instrument in curbing
challenges on the ground. We welcome the ongoing
implementation of the environmental performance
and risk management framework in peacekeeping
operations. It is now important to translate into action
data collected from the framework in the course of
peacekeeping operations.
Our Organization has to move from traditional
to cost-effective and smart peacekeeping, using all
the necessary technologies and capabilities. As we
approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations next year, we have to be prepared to give an
honest assessment of the peacekeeping activities of
the Organization. We must be prepared to assess all
its achievements and gaps in the face of contemporary
challenges in order to make our peace efforts stronger
than ever before.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing this debate.
Your presence, Madam President, is a testament to the
importance that your country attaches to the topic of
peacekeeping operations.
Similarly, I express our gratitude for the
participation of, and the briefings given by, the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, by the
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins
Filho, and by the Director of the Challenges Forum
International Secretariat, Mr. Björn Holmberg.
I wish today to reaffirm Uruguay’s commitment
to the United Nations peacekeeping system and to
peacekeeping operations. Our country has already
deployed more than 45,000 troops in its long history as a
troop and police contributor in more than 20 operations
throughout the world. As of today, the contribution of
Uruguayan troops positions my country as the largest
contributor in the Americas, and very close to the top
20 contributors in the world. That effort, sustained over
decades, has given our country a very rich experience
in the field.
My intervention will focus on three points. The first
is the importance of training and capacity development.
The second is the normative framework and the various
United Nations documents and other initiatives in which
Member States participate. The third point covers the
concrete actions carried out by Uruguay in accordance
with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
First of all, Uruguay understands that the training
and capacity-building of troops are critical factors
for the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. We are at a time when peacekeeping
operations must increasingly face highly challenging
operational environments, in which complex and
deteriorating political and security environments
can be observed and in which complex asymmetrical
threats are at play.
At the same time, peacekeeping operations are
being asked to do more and to do it better. Currently,
many of the missions have the characteristic of being
multidimensional, which means that they must carry
out a variety of tasks and responsibilities, such as
facilitating political processes, protecting civilians
and humanitarian partners, contributing to institution
building and promoting human rights. In that complex
operational context, we have observed how any
kind of deficiency in the areas of training, such as
predeployment training, the selection of troops from
contributing countries, the deployment of troops with
declared — or even worse, undeclared — caveats, or
equipment deficiencies, cannot only affect negatively
the execution of the mandates and the performance of

S/PV. 8521

the missions, but can also increase the security risks for
the peacekeeping personnel deployed.
We believe, therefore, that effectively trained
troops with sufficient capacity would be better
equipped to fully implement the various aspects of a
mandate, which would result in better performance and
minimized security risks to deployed personnel. As a
long-standing troop-contributing country, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to the responsibilities
of troop- and police-contributing countries, given that
they are the ones acting on the ground and that they
must implement a given mandate.
We must also acknowledge that the effective
implementation of peacekeeping mandates is also the
responsibility of other actors concerned, including the
Security Council and financial contributors, and that
it depends on a number of key factors, in particular
clearly defined and realistic mandates, political will,
leadership, performance and accountability all levels
and sufficient resources, inter alia.
The key importance of training and capacitybuilding to improving peacekeeping operations is
reflected, and here I turn to my second point, in the
efforts that various United Nations bodies have made
in this respect, be it in the form of resolutions, policies
or other initiatives.
Just as a brief overview, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2436 (2018) last September, in
which it reaffirmed its support for the development
of a comprehensive, integrated performance policy
framework to evaluate all United Nations uniformed
personnel who provide support to peacekeeping
operations and work therein. By the same token,
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, the main peacekeeping
actors reaffirmed their collective commitment to
peacekeeping operations and undertook to take action
on various issues, including the training and capacitybuilding of peacekeeping personnel.
For its part, the Special Committee for Peacekeeping
Operations is continuing to consider these issues and
to provide political guidelines in this area as well as
specific recommendations to the Secretariat. The Fifth
Committee, which has just begun its consideration of
the peacekeeping operations budget, is responsible for
providing to peacekeeping operations the resources
necessary to fulfil their tasks. In this respect, we would

19-1324727/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

express our concern at the trend of budget reductions
that has been seen in recent years and at the possible
negative impacts that this could have in the fulfilment of
missions’ mandates, which could lead to shortcomings
in their critical tasks, such as the protection of civilians.
On my third and last point, I would like to highlight
some specific actions that Uruguay has carried out in the
field of training and capacity-building. Last December,
my country, together with the United Kingdom,
organized a preparatory meeting on training and
capacity-building in Montevideo. Forty-two Member
States participated in the meeting, which served as
preparation for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial held on 25 March. At that conference, of
which we had the honour of being co-host, my country
offered training and capacity-building programmes in
the area of the protection of civilians. Furthermore, in
keeping with our efforts to increase the participation
of female peacekeepers, Uruguay offered to contribute
to the establishment of female task forces such as the
one we will soon deploy as part of our contingent in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
In support of the efforts of the Department of Peace
Operations in the area of training, Uruguay, with the
backing of the United States, translated into Spanish
a number of United Nations educational materials
for the predeployment training of troops, which are
now available to all Member States. Furthermore,
Uruguay’s national school of peacekeeping continues
to offer training courses on various topics. Yesterday
in Montevideo, a training-of-trainers course on
the protection of civilians began, supported by the
Department of Peace Operations. The course will be
held over several days and includes the participation of
a large number of Member States, including the main
troop-contributing countries.
To conclude, and taking advantage of the presence
of the MONUSCO Force Commander, I wish to
emphasize the high operational level of the Uruguayan
peacekeeping personnel deployed in the Mission. It
includes rapid response; no caveats; loyalty to the Force
Commander; and an unwavering commitment to the
protection of civilians. It is with this mindset and great
enthusiasm that we train our personnel prior to their
deployment in peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
28/69

07/05/2019

Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I wish a Ramadan
Mubarak to all who observe and celebrate this month of
Ramadan. Germany brought light, and now Indonesia
has brought beautiful colour, to the Council Chamber,
so it is clear that we can count on the elected members
to innovate. I thank them also for their leadership.
I commend Indonesia for having convened
today’s open debate and thank the briefers for their
engaging presentations.
In recent years the Council has expanded the
mandates and tasks to be executed by peacekeeping
operations. Guided by the need to protect vulnerable
populations and secure a more sustainable peace, we
are asking our deployed military, police and civilians to
do more than ever before. At the same time, as today’s
briefers have noted, peacekeeping operations have
become more complex, multifaceted and dangerous.
In order to go from strategic intent to practical effect,
we need capabilities that are provided collectively by
troop- and police-contributing countries. Delivering
on these capabilities requires specialized training and
capacity-building, because the tasks and the operational
environment of United Nations peacekeeping are often
unique. It is for this reason that’s today’s debate is
so timely.
Training needs to be specialized and contextspecific. Where possible it should be scenario-based,
providing concrete examples and practical guidance on
how to respond to realities on the ground, and it should
be carried out predeployment and in-theatre as needed.
We recognize that training and capacity-building is
inherently a work in progress, whether it is to maintain
our edge, prepare successive rotations of peacekeepers
or adapt strategies and tactics to the evolving nature
of conflict. As noted in the report authored by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers”, training and
capacity-building is also intimately linked to the safety
and security of our peacekeepers.
We should not compromise the safety and security
of even a single United Nations peacekeeper as a
result of a lack of adequate training. That is not a high
bar; it is the only responsible way to deploy, for our
troops and police and for the communities they serve.
Furthermore, training and capacity-building is an
essential component of peacekeeping performance. We
simply cannot enhance performance without investing
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in knowledge and skills. In this regard, partnerships are
essential. As troop and police contributors, we do not
need to operate alone. We can work together, drawing
on one another’s strengths and areas of expertise, and
eliminating redundancies in our efforts.
In this regard, Canada has provided $20 million
in the past three years in direct support of identified
United Nations training and professional development
needs. Canada has also partnered with institutions
such as the Ecole de maintien de la paix Alioune
Blondin Beye de Bamako to deliver essential training
to peacekeepers. More recently, we have worked in
developing implementation guidance on the Vancouver
Principles to help peacekeepers better deliver on their
child-protection mandates.
Training is required at all levels. Indeed, in
addressing complex challenges, effective leadership
is a prerequisite. That is why for the past three years
we have supported the United Nations Senior Mission
Leaders Course and taken steps to make that course
more accessible to a wider and more diverse range
of personnel.
(spoke in French)
Of course, what counts is not only how we train, but
also whom we train. Experience and studies show that
greater diversity leads to better results for peacekeeping
operations by contributing broader perspectives,
advantages, connections and varied forces. As we say
in Canada, diversity is strength.
Training and capacity-building should seek
to increase diversity, not only by expanding the
representation of all Member States in peacekeeping
operations, but also by ensuring the full and effective
participation of women at all levels of peace operations.
As part of the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations, we have found that women do not have the
same access to training opportunities that develop the
basic skills for deployment. They face ostracism within
the training cohorts, as well as the perception that they
cannot do their job as well as men. We must ensure
that women’s personnel in peacekeeping operations
have equitable access to training and capacity-building,
enabling them to be deployed and contribute to the
success of missions.
Because language skills are essential to
understanding the local context of peacekeeping
operations, our training and capacity-building efforts

S/PV. 8521

must also include a language component. That is
particularly evident in the light of the high number of
large missions deployed in Francophone environments.
We therefore stress the importance of developing
French-language training materials and offering
French-language courses to Blue Helmets. In that
regard, we commend Djibouti’s efforts to provide a
French-language training course on strengthening
the peacekeeping capacity of the countries of La
Francophonie. This kind of leadership deserves
our support.
Finally, on the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
protection of civilians mandate, we must remember that
the failure to implement mandates can have catastrophic
effects for regions, Member States, communities and
the lives of those whom the peacekeepers are supposed
to protect. The training of Blue Helmets is therefore
vital in the true sense. We must therefore ensure that
they have the necessary skills, training and equipment
to carry out their protection mandate.
In conclusion, the United Nations can count on
Canada to be a partner in training and capacity-building,
be it as Chair of the Working Group of the Whole of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, as the
host of the next Challenges Forum in June in Montreal,
or — as we all know — as a candidate for the Security
Council in 2021-2122.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and on organizing this timely debate. I also
join my Canadian friend in congratulating you on the
elegance you have brought to the Council. I hope that
it will bring new impetus to your work in the Council.
Italy welcomes presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4,
adopted today under Indonesia’s leadership, and
joins the Council in recognizing the added value of
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations in relation to training
and capacity-building and in welcoming the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary General through his Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. I also thank today’s briefers
for their contributions to the discussion.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would like to
add some remarks on my national capacity.

19-1324729/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations peacekeeping Missions are still
an essential instrument for global peace and security.
Whenever they are effective in delivering their mandate,
protecting civilians and contributing to lasting stability,
our commitment to and investment in peace operations
can be considered productive. This should encourage us
to enhance our efforts.
Training plays a critical role in guaranteeing the
high level of effectiveness, efficiency and performance
required of the Blue Helmets. Training and capacitybuilding activities should be viewed not as one-off
activities, but rather as tools to enhance operational
effectiveness throughout a mission’s life cycle. Thus,
training activities should take place before and after
deployment and be calibrated to the specific context
of every mission, also encompassing, as appropriate,
innovative issues, such as the environmental
management of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that a steady dialogue between
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as among troop and police
contributors, and their own training centres, is essential
in order to share experiences and best practices, develop
common standards and provide information on training
opportunities in different fields. Partnerships are also
crucial in the training sector. Therefore, we support
enhancing synergies between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, and as a member of European
Union (EU) Italy welcomes the EU-United Nations
cooperation to this end. We also promote triangular
cooperation in training and capacity-building.
Italy commends the initiatives taken by the
Department of Peace Operations (DPO), the
Department of Operational Support and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance to
implement the Action for Peacekeeping principles. Italy
welcomes the multiform mechanisms established by the
DPO to coordinate and share information on training
activities and gaps. Tools such as the light coordination
mechanism, the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System and the uniformed capabilities requirements
go in the right direction and Italy stands ready to
strengthen their performances.
Italy is the largest provider of Blue Helmets within
the Group of Western European and other States and one
of the most generous contributors to the peacekeeping
budget. As such, Italy places training and capacity30/69

07/05/2019

building activities at the core of its commitment to
peacekeeping. Fruitful and articulate cooperation is
already in place with the United Nations and several
Member States. Over the past five years, our military
training centres — including the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, the
Post-Conflict Operations Study Centre in Turin and
the Security Force Assistance Centre of Excellence,
located near Rome — have provided specialized
training and capacity-building to well over 10,000
military and police officers from 118 countries and 17
international organizations.
The Italian training pledges for 2019 encompass
a wide range of courses for more than 700 military
and police units. Our training curricula comprise
different subjects, including protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect, cultural heritage,
environmental protection, women and peace and
security, gender protection, ammunition disposal and
mine clearance, together with courses for patrol leaders.
We strongly believe that training plays a critical role
in increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations, and for the current year we are offering a
new set of courses on the gender perspective and the
deployment of female engagement teams.
(spoke in French)
Parts of our training courses for police forces are
also taught in French.
(spoke in English)
I would like to conclude by paying the most
respectful tribute to all the men and women who are
serving the values of the United Nations in the field,
bringing peace and security where they are most
needed, as well as to those who have lost their lives
doing so over the years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): It is a privilege to see
you, Sir, presiding over this important open debate.
As a long-standing and traditional peacekeeper, we
welcome your initiative.
We thank the Secretary-General and the briefers
for their insights.
Peacekeeping today is in the domain of a vaguely
defined no-man’s-land. It lies somewhere between
trying to keep the peace in fragile environments and
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

trying to enforce the maintenance of peace where
there is none to keep. Operational concepts for such
objectives are being put in place. It is also necessary
to have properly equipped and well-trained personnel
to meet the expectations of deployment in challenging
environments in order to fulfil a range of mandates.
Responses to new security environments cannot merely
ratchet up traditional methodologies. They require a
willingness to adapt abilities to meet emerging realities,
as envisaged in the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peace initiative.
As a country with a long tradition of peacekeeping,
we offer the following suggestions to enhance
performance and improve capacities.
First, to ensure performance in peacekeeping, the
Secretariat needs to carry out a realistic assessment
of the contingents being selected and deployed in
mission areas. Troop competencies need to be a
critical requirement of selection criteria. On the other
hand, accountability for troop-contributing countries
should entail adherence to training plans, including
predeployment and in-mission training, so that key
mission tasks are not left to be learned on the job.
Secondly,
capacity-building
and
training
benchmarks relating to the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse, gender sensitivity, requirements
of conduct and discipline and environmental standards
are key ingredients. It was with that intent that last year
India commenced its funding of the United Nations
Pipeline to Peacekeeping Command Programme, with a
focus on conduct and discipline. Over a period of three
years, the Programme will help develop the capacity of
future commanders and managers to lead by example
and raise awareness of United Nations standards of
conduct among personnel.
Thirdly, we welcome initiatives such as mobile
training teams and the training of trainers, which pool
instructors from Member States. They are an innovative
effort to impart training to new troop-contributing
countries. In that way, United Nations experience can
be shared with minimal financial implications.
Fourthly, as the importance of logistical support
and enablers grows, capacity-building for enablers
requires attention. Specialized units, such as field
hospitals and engineering and signal companies, that
are already deployed in missions can provide training
to core groups within mission areas, thereby enhancing
capacities through in-mission training.

S/PV. 8521

India employs its United Nations peacekeeping
experience to partner with other Member States
in capacity-building initiatives in a very tangible
manner. One such example is our successful recent
co-deployment initiative with Kazakhstan in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. India’s Centre for
United Nations Peacekeeping conducts mission-specific
predeployment training to ensure the highest standard
of performance for the troops being deployed. It also
conducts international courses based on United Nations
guidelines, with the goal of enhancing the capacity
of military observers, contingent officers, staff and
logistics officers and female officers. In order to
enhance effectiveness, peacekeepers are also trained in
French and Arabic. India has recently concluded a field
training exercise on United Nations peacekeeping with
18 African countries. We are planning to do more.
Training is not only a prerequisite to fulfil mandates;
it is a must to ensure safety and security in difficult
environments. Let me conclude by rephrasing the wellknown military adage to suit current peacekeeping
requirements — the more peacekeepers sweat in times
of peace, the less they bleed in situations of conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I would also like to
congratulate you, Sir, and Indonesia for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I also thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and
Mr. Björn Holmberg for their insightful briefings.
We take this opportunity to pay tribute to all those
who have fallen serving under the United Nations flag,
including the 30 Blue Helmets who have lost their lives
in 2019.
The recent attacks against Blue Helmets
demonstrate the continued need to ensure that our
troops have the proper training, equipment and logistical
support necessary to implement mission mandates and
guarantee their safety and security. Those are also
commitments that we adhered to in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and in the action plan based on the Santos
Cruz report.
Guaranteeing the effectiveness of our peacekeeping
endeavours requires a comprehensive and integrated

19-1324731/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

approach that comprises political will, financial support,
realistic mandates, adequate equipment, cooperation
from regional actors, peacebuilding activities and, of
course, tailored training.
When it comes to training, it is essential to
strengthen existing mechanisms to assess the concrete
needs of each mission, so that training efforts can
factor in the specific challenges found on the ground.
We are glad to see that the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System is becoming an important tool to
address missions’ capacity gaps.
Brazil recognizes the current efforts by the
Secretariat to develop and review its field manuals. We
have been an active supporter of that process, including
by hosting and sending representatives to workshops.
In line with the shared commitments and United
Nations environmental policy on field missions, Brazil
has also shared with the Secretariat its guidelines for
environmental practices in missions under the aegis of
international organizations.
In some instances, in-mission training will also
be necessary to maintain the skills of troops and adapt
them to changing circumstances. Over the years,
Brazil has deployed mobile training teams to several
countries in Africa and Latin America. Most recently,
during the Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March,
Brazil was glad to pledge to deploy a team of experts
in jungle operations to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Brazil has shared its experience of more
than 70 years of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping with other troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries, including through
the partnerships of the Brazilian Peace Operations
Joint Training Centre. We have hosted different
courses in close cooperation with the United Nations.
Brazil will host the United Nations Buddy First Aid
Train-the-Trainer course in 2019 and the Senior
Mission Leaders Course in 2020. Brazil has also
provided training to African military contingents on
the management of engineering projects.
Brazil is fully committed to the women and peace
and security agenda, including by offering specific
training on this issue for both uniformed and civilian
peacekeepers. Recently, a Brazilian officer, Captain
Márcia Braga, was awarded the honour of Military
Gender Advocate of 2018 by the United Nations, in
32/69

07/05/2019

recognition of her work as an adviser in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. She is an
outstanding example of the positive impact that women
can have in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
The training that we offer must, above all, ensure
that peacekeeping operations have a transformative
impact on the ground. General Elias Martins Filho gave
a sound example of how a quick-impact project was
used to mitigate rising tension in a local community
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our own
experience in Haiti demonstrates that quick-impact
projects, programmatic activities and peacebuilding
activities can garner local support for the military and
police components of peacekeeping missions. United
Nations peacekeepers should receive adequate training
to play the role of early peacebuilders.
Improving peacekeeping operations requires a
collective effort. The Council can count on Brazil’s full
commitment to attain that objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Indonesia for convening
today’s meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and
the two briefers for their insightful briefings.
Due to the difficult operational environments and
complex challenges that current peace operations are
facing, it is imperative to enhance both the performance
and the safety and security of peacekeepers. We
welcome the steps taken by the United Nations and
Member States to address those issues through training
and capacity-building. However, further efforts by
various stakeholders are necessary. Japan has supported
capacity-building for peacekeepers from 45 countries
over the past five years. Based on our experience, I
would like to make two suggestions that we believe will
help to ensure the effective delivery of training.
First, the training and capacity-building needs of
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
and field missions should be addressed effectively
through partnerships. The Secretariat has several
channels to identify those needs, including assessment
and advisory visits of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and in-mission performance
evaluations of contingents. In order to conduct training
that incorporates those inputs, we will need strong
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

partnerships among TCCs and PCCs, the Secretariat
and supporting countries.
In 2014, the Secretariat launched an innovative
framework to promote such cooperation, called the
Triangular Partnership Project. Conducting training
through the project has allowed us to effectively
address the needs of TCCs and PCCs and field missions,
because such training is organized by the Secretariat,
which receives direct feedback from the missions
and assessment and advisory visits. That ensures that
personnel learn the specific skills that they need for
their mission.
Triangular partnerships can be applied to the
development of any type of capabilities, from infantry
to enablers. They can also be used to address a wide
spectrum of training needs, from basic training, to
predeployment training, to in-mission training. In
fact, the development potential goes beyond training.
The triangular partnership model can even serve as a
platform to facilitate innovative approaches, such as
equipment contribution and co-deployment.
Our second suggestion is to establish an effective
mechanism to rapidly scale up critical expertise for a
huge number of personnel in a short period of time. We
sometimes need to assist tens of thousands of personnel
in acquiring standardized skills, in order to enhance
their performance and security. Buddy first aid is one
such skill. As one of the innovative approaches to achieve
such an ambitious goal, the Department of Operational
Support has been trying to establish trainer pyramids
in the field of medical training. That endeavour has
just begun, and further efforts are required to make the
trainer-pyramid concept work. For example, TCCs and
PCCs should dispatch qualified candidates to training
courses. The United Nations and supporting countries
have to certify trainees’ performances according to
strict standards.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Japan’s commitment
to capacity-building in order to ensure that peacekeepers
have the skills that they need to safely carry out their
mandates. We will continue to support engineering and
medical training through the triangular partnership
model, and we are ready to provide mobile training and
training-of-trainers courses in the area of engineering.
Japan will also continue to facilitate women’s
participation in United Nations peace operations
through training. We co-hosted, with the Department
of Peace Operations, the first ever capacity-building

S/PV. 8521

training for women’s protection advisers in Tokyo
last December. We will continue to pursue that goal,
including through dispatching female trainers to
capacity-building programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also start by thanking
Indonesia for organizing this debate and for bringing
much-needed colour to this Chamber. Let me also
thank the Secretary-General, the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Director of
the Challenges Forum for their briefings.
Pakistan is a strong and consistent supporter of
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its centre,
to effectively address the global challenges of peace
and security. Peacekeeping remains a pivotal tool
to achieve that objective. Pakistan’s participation in
United Nations peacekeeping is the most tangible
demonstration of our commitment to the United
Nations and a practical way of reaffirming our abiding
faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. For close to six decades, despite
our own challenges, we have contributed and provided
personnel, assets, training and financing for United
Nations peacekeeping. We are also host to one of the
earliest United Nations peacekeeping missions, the
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan, which continues to play an invaluable role in
a volatile and fraught environment.
Peacekeeping has, over the years, evolved from
single-dimensional monitoring to multidimensional
mandates, as recognized by resolution 2086 (2013),
adopted under Pakistan’s presidency of the Council.
Conflicts today are becoming more complex, prolonged
and lethal, posing new challenges for peacekeepers.
The protection of civilians, supporting peace
processes, peace-building, national capacity-building
and institution-building are now all interconnected
dimensions of peacekeeping missions. That is the
context in which ongoing reviews, debates and
discussions on the evolving nature of peacekeeping
have to be situated. Allow me to make six quick points.
First, predeployment training, preparation and
the professional competence of peacekeepers are key
to success in the field. The Secretariat must ensure,
through predeployment assessments, that only the best
and adequately equipped are deployed. Pakistan has

19-1324733/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

been a leader in the field, and the performance of our
troops in the field is a testimony to the premium that we
place on training and professionalism.
Secondly, best practices and real on-ground
experience must be incorporated into manuals that are
shared with key players. Persons selected to impart
training must also have on-ground peacekeeping
experience and not rely on theory alone. We have
offered our expertise to other troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) in that regard.
Thirdly, the drafting of the mandates of
peacekeeping missions should be a phased process to
allow for consultation with relevant TCCs. Current
trilateral consultation mechanisms — both formal and
informal — must be improved and better utilized. The
group of TCCs that Pakistan and Morocco co-chair has
emerged as an important informal platform that can be
used for that purpose.
Fourthly, peacekeeping is a collective endeavour.
It is important to keep our expectations from
peacekeeping realistic. While TCCs are required to
provide well-equipped and well-trained personnel,
other peacekeeping stakeholders also have to give
their best for real success. Achieving more with less is
neither tenable nor rational.
Fifthly, the principles of peacekeeping are not an
impediment to mandate implementation. In fact, they
ensure the United Nations credibility and neutrality,
which have been achieved over decades of service and
sacrifice. They are also critical to ensuring the safety
and security of peacekeepers.
Sixthly, in order to attain durable peace, a political
track must accompany peacekeeping efforts. That is
obviously essential for credible exit strategies.
Pakistan’s credentials as among the largest
and most consistent TCCs are well established. We
have an elaborate system of training that has been
institutionalized through the establishment of the
Centre for International Peace and Stability, which
was inaugurated by former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. At the recently held Peacekeeping Ministerial,
in addition to personnel and assets, we also offered
the peacekeeping competencies of the Centre to other
TCCs. Pakistan is also participating in the relatively
recent initiative of the training-the-trainers programme.
In conclusion, let me say that our commitment
to peacekeeping remains unflinching. Let us work
34/69

07/05/2019

together to make missions successful in the face of new
and imposing challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for convening today’s
open debate on a topic of such importance, as well as
Lieutenant General Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg
for their briefings.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Additionally, I would like to make the following
few remarks.
First, I would like to underline that, in order to
build truly successful peacekeeping operations, we
need better prepared troops. Sufficient training that
is suitable to the conditions on the ground and the
right equipment and interoperability of forces is the
responsibility of us all. Predeployment training based
on consolidated standards is vital to meeting the
increasing expectations of the United Nations.
Secondly, let me highlight that Estonia fully
supports striving towards more realistic, robust
and tailored mandates for peacekeeping operations.
Realistic mandates are the baseline according to which
the performance of missions can be evaluated. Our
expectations of United Nations peacekeeping missions
are ever-growing. Missions are multidimensional and
their objectives are much more far-reaching than mere
peacekeeping. In order to meet multifaceted demands
and expectations, missions ought to be agile and capable
of constant adaptation. We continue to underline the
relevance of our shared commitments under the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
Thirdly, on gender mainstreaming, peacekeeping
operations and uniformed personnel are the most
visible representatives of the United Nations, directly
working with communities each day. For that reason,
it is imperative to increase the number of female
peacekeepers and promote their full, effective and
meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. Estonia has increased training opportunities
for women in our armed forces. In time, that will have a
direct and positive impact on Estonia’s ability as a troopcontributing country to accelerate gender parity among
United Nations peacekeeping troops by encouraging
female military and police personnel to apply.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In addition to striving to increase the number of
female peacekeepers, we consider it paramount to
sensitize all peacekeepers on gender aspects in peace
operations. Thorough predeployment training on
human rights and gender-related issues, including on the
prevention of, and response to, conflict-related sexual
violence and the eradication of sexual exploitation and
abuse, is a must. Furthermore, gender advisers should
be an integral part of all United Nations missions, and
their activities should be further reinforced in settings
where conflict-related sexual violence is widespread
Estonia has contributed to peace and stabilization
operations around the world. We will continue to
contribute to making a difference for a peaceful world
and to promote those ideas throughout our bid for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the
period 2020-2021.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries, namely, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
We welcome Indonesia’s initiative to hold this
timely debate. We fully agree that quality training and
capacity-building are crucial for improving the safety,
security and performance of peacekeepers. I will make
three points, based on our experience and the current
challenges facing United Nations peacekeeping.
First, the Nordic countries cooperate to provide
a wide range of training courses that are vital for the
effective implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
Those courses are open to all Member States, which
means that a wide range of valuable perspectives are
brought to discussions. The Nordic countries are also
supporting the review and updating of the United
Nations police training architecture, in line with
the Strategic Guidance Framework for International
Police Peacekeeping.
Secondly, we strongly support the emphasis on
innovative approaches to make training more effective.
The in-mission training carried out by the Nordic
Mobile Training Team in Mali is one example. The
team from Finland and Sweden trained more than
400 soldiers and officers from Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, Egypt and Liberia during a five-week period
in Timbuktu. The training focused on strategies to
cope with the demanding security environment in the

S/PV. 8521

mission area, such as counter-attack tactics, medical
first aid, escorting and patrolling. That was a pilot
project. We found it to be of great value to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. However, we also saw the need for
well-coordinated preparation on the part of all those
involved prior to the training period. We are therefore
looking forward to learning from the project and
sharing best practices, including with other countries
that provided or received that training.
Thirdly, if we are to improve the safety, security and
performance of peacekeepers, training should focus on
crisis management. That includes casualty evacuation
and medical evacuation. It should also focus on the
protection of civilians. Situational awareness is vital, as
is good conduct and a gender-sensitive approach. We are
convinced that, if peacekeepers take a gender-sensitive
approach, it will enhance their capacity to engage
with local communities in promoting reconciliation
and peace.
Special efforts must be made to ensure that women
are included in all training activities. Moreover, those
who have been trained must actually be deployed. A
greater number of women peacekeepers will result in
more effective implementation of mandates. Relevant
training also needs to focus on work to prevent,
investigate and prosecute serious crimes committed
against peacekeepers.
The Nordic countries are long-standing and
consistent supporters of United Nations peacekeeping,
and efforts in training and capacity-building will
remain integral elements of our support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel welcomes the
initiative to convene a debate on training and capacitybuilding for United Nations peacekeepers. Over the
past year, we have taken important steps to address the
current gaps in training and capacity-building, most
recently during the Peacekeeping Ministerial.
If our ultimate goal is the full implementation of
peacekeeping mandates, effective training is critical.
We should establish clear training requirements and
procedures and assist troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) in the implementation of those procedures. We
should also institute an effective process for validating

19-1324735/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the quality of training at the predeployment stage, in
full coordination with TCCs.
As Benjamin Franklin once said, “Tell me and I
forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and
I learn”. Member States have collectively committed to
better prepare, train and equip United Nations personnel
through innovative approaches. Israel is committed to
working with the United Nations to share our state-ofthe-art medical expertise and enhance the medical
training of TCCs. We have been working with the
Division of Healthcare Management on two initiatives.
The first of those is the development and
implementation of buddy first aid training. Studies
show that the loss of blood that occurs between the
time of an injury and the arrival of the paramedics is
the leading cause of death in 90 per cent of potentially
survivable field injuries. If all peacekeepers are trained
in basic first aid, they have a much better chance of
saving the lives of their comrades in the field. Israel has
been working with the United Nations to develop a first
aid manual for United Nations peacekeepers. We also
provided one of the United Nations first super-trainers,
who has so far taught master trainer courses for TCCs
in Italy and Ireland. Finally, Israel is working with the
United Nations to develop a curriculum for field medic
guidance and training. Those medical capabilities are
crucial for peacekeeping forces.
However, through our work with the United Nations,
we have seen that there are significant differences in
the level of preparedness of TCCs. It is therefore our
duty to ensure that general standards are achieved and
maintained by all forces. The United Nations should
provide guidance and oversight to ensure that those
standards and training materials reflect operational
requirements. The United Nations cannot, however, be
responsible for the individual training of each troop.
Once the standards have been defined, approved and
demonstrated through a limited number of United
Nations-led courses, it is up to Member States and
TCCs to ensure that all troops are trained according to
the guidelines set by the United Nations. One project
that can facilitate this is the Triangular Partnership
Project. Israel hopes to continue to work to strengthen
this initiative as it incorporates medical training over
the next few years.
As we pledged during the Peacekeeping Ministerial,
we intend to continue contributing to United Nations
medical training and plan to host a first-aid master
36/69

07/05/2019

trainer course in Israel. We also seek to work in
partnership with TCCs to facilitate the implementation
of predeployment medical training.
The United Nations has taken positive steps over
the past few years to improve training, especially in
the medical field. There is much more work to be done,
but we can be sure that working together will make
us stronger. Creating partnerships through innovative
mechanisms will help us achieve our common goals,
as stated in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. If we expect
our troops to perform their duty in the field, it is our
moral obligation to ensure that they have the necessary
medical knowledge and equipment to fulfil their tasks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on convening this open discussion
and allowing us to contribute to the important
topic of training and capacity-building in United
Nations peacekeeping.
Last year, the United Nations celebrated 70 years
of peacekeeping. Over these 70 years, the United
Nations has established more than 50 peacekeeping
missions. More than 15,000 peacekeepers from Fiji
have participated in United Nations missions, ranging
from Timor-Leste to South Sudan. Fiji has also paid a
heavy price, having lost 60 of our own men and women
across these missions. Peacekeeping casualties remind
us of the importance of training and capacity-building.
United Nations peacekeepers need to be able to fulfil
their mandates effectively, while minimizing casualties.
This has become only more important as conflicts have
become more complex and varied, both at the regional
and the international levels.
United Nations peacekeeping has evolved over the
last 70 years, from mostly observer and peacekeeping
missions into stabilization, justice support, transitional
support, confidence restoration and multidimensional
and enforcement tasks. These reflect the growing
complexities of peace operations and mission mandates
in increasingly complex conflicts. The United Nations
and its peacekeepers are being asked to do more and
more. This is indeed the right thing; of all the work that
the United Nations does, peacekeeping is perhaps the
most important. This work needs to be well supported,
as do capacity-building and training. This support
must be consistent and predictable and the capacity19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

building of peace operations must be of a high technical
and operational quality. This can be achieved only if
capacity-building and training needs are properly
supported financially from the outset.
In 2017, the Secretary-General unveiled reforms to
integrate the United Nations peace and security pillar
to support peacebuilding and make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective. That was a timely
decision. Peace operations must include, at their heart,
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. At best, the
mission of United Nations peacekeeping is to create
spaces to make politics to work to enable leaders — both
men and women representing their conflict-affected
communities — to take measured risks to ensure peace.
In environments affected by years of conflict, it takes
time for markets to kick in; it takes time for institutions
that protect civilians to kick in; and it takes time for
politics to kick in. A high-performing peace operation
needs to be able to reduce the time it takes for all of
these to kick in.
A good peacekeeping mission, at its core, is about
broadening spaces in and between communities. This
process involves peacekeepers interacting with the men,
women and children who need their protection. But it
also involves peacekeepers knowing what the stress
points are; understanding hidden drivers of conflict;
being able to identify victims and support them; and
being able to identify and respond to systemic sexual
violence. When the United Nations does peacekeeping
well, we save lives, we promote sustainable development,
we increase prospects for peace and we demonstrate
progress across the Sustainable Development Goals.
The world has become more dangerous for United
Nations peacekeepers, as they must combat asymmetric
threats from non-State actors. To be fit for purpose,
peacekeepers will need to be highly trained in broader
ways to respond to new and complex mandates. This
will require capacity-building to focus on these skills,
including new and specialized ones.
One of these new skills in a new area relates to
climate change. Water stress, extreme weather events
and food insecurity associated with climate change are
all drivers of conflict. They may exacerbate competition
and conflicts. They may fuel the outbreak of new cycles
of conflict in a context of intense competition for
resources. Peace operations need to understand these
climate-related drivers of conflict far better. They
may be small performance improvements in our peace

S/PV. 8521

operations, but they will have far-reaching implications
for stability and peacebuilding in the long term.
Fiji has embarked on an ambitious peacekeeping
capacity-building action plan to enhance its peace
operation preparation for United Nations missions.
It is doing so with the strong support of our regional
partners, particularly Australia and New Zealand. Our
ambition is to make Fiji’s peacekeepers fit for these
more complex United Nations peacekeeping roles. As
a significant troop-contributing country, we have an
obligation to do far more to perform to the highest
standards expected of us.
We are proud that Fijian peacekeepers bring
extraordinarily strong soft skills into complex
peace operations. Fiji’s experience over 40 years
of peacekeeping from deployments around the
world has taught us important lessons, which we are
systematically integrating into our preparations for
new missions. We are doing so because we recognize
that when peacekeepers strike a positive rapport with
communities, it contributes hugely to improving
dialogue and prospects for reconciliation.
Fiji’s peacekeeping capacity-building action plan is
firmly committed to improving all areas of peacekeeping.
For a small developing country, partnerships are the way
forward in its United Nations peacekeeping role. Fiji’s
partnership with Australia and New Zealand may serve
as a model for other small countries seeking to engage
in United Nations peacekeeping. With the support of
these and other traditional partners, including all of the
permanent five members of the Council — and your
own country of Indonesia, Mr. President — we expect
to go a lot further.
We are preparing our forces to be able to speedily
respond to climate-induced disasters, both in regions
affected by conflict and regions that are not. We hope
to be able to contribute these skills within United
Nations peace operations. Fiji remains steadfast in our
commitment to United Nations efforts to persistently
improve performance and capacity-building.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I extend my appreciation to your
country, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.
I also welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral; the Force Commander of the United Nations

19-1324737/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Lieutenant General Elias
Rodriguez Martins Filho; and Mr. Björn Holmberg,
Director of the International Forum for the Challenges
of Peacekeeping Operations, of which Argentina is
honoured to be a member.
I wish to highlight the importance of this space to
discuss the vital need to achieve quality training and
capacity-building in order to improve the performance
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We already
have various commitments and initiatives in many
United Nations forums, such as the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations; the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations; and
the Peacekeeping Ministerial.
This debate is yet another opportunity to identify
ways and means of enhancing and strengthening the
capacities of peacekeeping operations to improve the
performance of troops on the ground and to ensure
the successful implementation of the mandates of
these operations, as well as the shared commitments
expressed in the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Argentina once again reiterates its firm
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began 62 years ago. We also reiterate
our dedication to quality training and capacity-building
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Through the Argentine Joint Peace Operations Training
Centre (CAECOPAZ), Argentina is providing training
and capacity-building par excellence to contingents
and individuals to be deployed in United Nations peace
operations. Thousands of officers, non-commissioned
officers, men and women soldiers and civilian personnel
from Argentina and friendly countries have been
trained by CAECOPAZ in its 23 years of existence.
Similarly, Argentine personnel returning from
missions must submit a report on their completed
mission, in which they share their experiences
and lessons learned so that we can make relevant
improvements in the future. Furthermore, Argentina
has conducted numerous intersectional training
courses regarding the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse; international humanitarian law; the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development Sustainable
Development Goals; and peacebuilding. The aim of
these courses is to raise awareness of the roles of other
actors within the United Nations system, especially the
38/69

07/05/2019

Peacebuilding Commission, in the implementation of
successful mandates.
Troop- and police-contributing countries must
also receive technical and financial support in order to
improve their performance on the ground. Moreover,
peacekeeping missions must also be able to count
on the necessary financial resources for the proper
implementation of the tasks entrusted to them. In that
connection, and given that the budget for peacekeeping
operations is currently being discussed within the
Fifth Committee, Argentina stresses the importance
of avoiding further cuts in the financing of posts
and programmes on development, human rights,
gender and the protection of women and children.
These posts and programmes play a key role in
communicating the particular vulnerabilities of various
populations. Fresh cuts would seriously undermine the
ability of peacekeeping operations to protect these
vulnerable populations.
With regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, emphasis must be placed on the training of
peacekeeping operations personnel to evaluate threats
to international peace and security, taking into account
the risk factors that could lead to possible crimes
against humanity.
Given that a key global commitment is to increase
the number of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we must spare no effort in achieving broader
general confidence — through training and not just by
upgrading mission infrastructures — so that more and
more women become peacekeepers. More women Blue
Helmets would greatly improve communication and
relationships between peacekeeping operations and
local communities, especially with women and girls.
In many ways, United Nations peacekeepers are
being required to do more and more. The challenges
they face are increasing in size and complexity. Member
States and the Secretariat must find ways to maintain
the best possible training in order to fulfil increasingly
diverse mandates, identify gaps in capacity and work
together to ensure that our peacekeeping operations are
indeed fit for purpose.
Argentina considers it a priority to continue the
debate on how to strengthen training and capacitybuilding for peacekeeping personnel. We encourage
further efforts to promote constructive, transparent and
inclusive dialogue among States and other stakeholders,
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

thereby giving our best to those societies and nations
where our troops are deployed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Indonesia for convening this open
debate and today’s briefers for their statements.
As we all know, this debate is being held in a
context of major challenges. As a country committed to
peace, we reiterate our strong support for the initiatives
led by the Organization. The United Nations has been
undertaking peacekeeping missions for more than
70 years in various conflict zones around the world.
We take this opportunity to honour the heroic work
of the tens of thousands of uniformed and civilian
peacekeeping personnel who have faced numerous
dangerous situations over the years.
El Salvador has a historic commitment to
peacekeeping operations and is currently contributing
to eight of them through military and police
contingents, with a total of 289 troops, in support of
various tasks helping to maintain international peace
and security and in seeking to promote human rights
and protect humanitarian aid. We are committed to
the effective fulfilment of the specific mandates of
each mission and to complying with United Nations
performance standards and the codes of conduct agreed
among Member States. Therefore, in order to fulfil this
commitment to the best of our ability, we consider it of
great importance to provide peacekeeping operations
personnel with the necessary capabilities. This will
ensure that they have the necessary tools to guarantee
that each mission is conducted professionally, capably
and effectively in resolving short-term conflicts and
sustaining long-term peace.
In that connection, it is important to train, build
the capacities of and equip our uniformed and civilian
personnel prior to their deployment and, as far as
possible, build the specialized capacities needed for each
case. These include language skills and approaches to
improve force generation, the operational availability of
equipment and the sustainability of existing equipment.
At the same time, we believe it important to enhance
understanding of the application of international law
and human rights, including international humanitarian
law, with the particular aim of protecting civilians
and with a special emphasis on protecting the most

S/PV. 8521

vulnerable groups. Of course, we cannot overlook
the essential need for the gender perspective here,
including the empowerment of women, so as to
address the perceptions, situations, experiences and
specific abilities of women. We believe that educating
staff on a broader gender perspective will provide
a complementary and fundamental approach to this
mechanism, so as to better understand and confront the
different challenges that we all face on the ground.
We would like to highlight that, at the national level,
we are making huge efforts to improve training for
our personnel through our Peace Operations Training
Centre, which is an institution attached to El Salvador’s
Ministry of Defence. We provide comprehensive
training for our military personnel and, through
internal agreements, also train elements of our national
civil police, military observers and future trainers.
In addition, and in coordination with the Department
of Peace Operations (DPO), our police staff were
assessed by the Selection Assistance and Assessment
Team in late 2018, which prepared police officers
for rapid deployment and ensured they were ready to
execute their mandates successfully on the ground. We
are grateful to DPO for its collaboration in organizing
the assessment and we are working with it on followup activities. As complementary measures, we are also
continuing to train our staff in language skills, with
courses through public and private partnerships, as well
as in other pertinent disciplines, such as marksmanship
and handling various kinds of vehicles.
We must promote innovative approaches to achieve
these aspirations. At the same time, we must strengthen
traditional approaches such as partnerships and
triangular cooperation among States and other relevant
stakeholders, as well as countries’ joint contributions.
At the same time, we underscore the need to increase
financing to better enhance capacity-building. We take
this opportunity to thank those partner countries that
have supported us over the years in order to increase our
participation in terms of the number and capabilities
of our staff. We are currently the largest contributor
of the Central American region. We also call on those
countries that are in a position to continue making these
contributions to do so for these initiatives.
El Salvador would also like to reiterate its support
for the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which we believe plays an important role in
the development and implementation of training on the

19-1324739/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

matter. We have no doubt that this initiative will make a
vital contribution to the activities of the United Nations
in this area.
Finally, we wish to stress how essential it is to
ensure training for peacekeeping personnel enjoys
greater predictability and sustainability. This will help
them to bolster their performance and achieve their
objectives, including those in mission mandates. The
Organization can therefore count on my country to
formulate initiatives that seek to take practical, realistic
and effective action and to ensure that peacekeeping
personnel are given the necessary resources so that
they can reach their maximum potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: As this is my first time
addressing the Council during your presidency, Sir, I
wish you, on behalf of the European Union (EU), the
greatest success for the month of May.
I am honoured to speak on behalf of the EU and
its 28 member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
In recent years, the European Union has welcomed
an in-depth analysis conducted by the United Nations to
review the global peace and security architecture. The
reform currently being implemented by the Secretariat
is a crucial step in adapting our collective action,
making it fit for purpose. The Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative, which aims at renewing our collective
engagement and attaining excellence, is another
important milestone in this direction.
The European Union and its member States
continue to stress the paramount importance of political
solutions to conflicts and addressing root causes and
drivers of conflict, as well as the priority that should
be given to prevention. This is a central component of
our own EU Global Strategy for Foreign and Security
Policy and drives our efforts to strengthen the EU
Common Security and Defence Policy, structures and
instruments. This is also in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s determination to place prevention at the
centre of United Nations peace and security efforts.
40/69

07/05/2019

Only an integrated approach can lead to truly sustaining
peace and, in that respect, the quality of training and
the overall performance of the peacekeepers are of
paramount importance.
The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in fragile political and security environments
has resulted in a rise in the number of deaths, as well
as other security incidents. We unwaveringly support
measures being developed and undertaken to improve
the safety and security of United Nations personnel.
We are committed to exploring all options that
contribute to the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground and, by so doing, ensure
better protection for civilians and guarantee a more
effective maintenance of peace.
The European Union and its member States have
been leading efforts over the past few years to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel. In
that context, we welcome United Nations initiatives to
better integrate modern technology and peacekeeping
intelligence capabilities into peace operations. By
helping to improve the situational awareness of troops
and police in real time, this will contribute to the
implementation of mission mandates, to the protection
of civilians and to the security of personnel, including
humanitarian actors, on the ground.
But technology alone cannot be the solution.
Instead, a coherent combination of modern technology
with relevant methods placed at the disposal of wellprepared and trained staff is imperative. We continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to further
develop these capacities for current and future
missions, including through our own United NationsEU Strategic Partnership on Peace Operations and
Crisis Management.
In many ways, training is central to carrying out
peacekeeping mandates. In the spirit of A4P, we believe
that properly training and equipping mission personnel
before and during deployment — whether they belong
to a military, police or civilian component, and on
the basis of consolidated standards — is crucial to
ensuring mission success as well as to safeguarding
the safety and security of peacekeepers. It is essential,
in our view, that such training include predeployment
and in-mission training and be adapted to operational
challenges and focused on gender and human rights
components, including child protection, women
and peace and security, and combating sexual and
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

gender-based violence, as well as sexual exploitation
and abuse. This is especially relevant in increasingly
complex environments and could also be enhanced in
cooperation with regional actors.
Moreover, for us, relevant and appropriate training
remains the cornerstone of any performance policy.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s emphasis on
increased accountability and his efforts to strengthen
the system’s ability to deal with sexual exploitation and
abuse swiftly and decisively. We remain committed
to working in the long term with partners, all troopand police-contributing countries and stakeholders
in the spirit of genuine cooperation. This will ensure
that prevention measures are further strengthened,
victims are provided with assistance, allegations are
duly investigated and justice is served by the countries
that contribute the personnel. We also want to see the
Secretariat optimally configured and delivering as one.
In line with resolution 2436 (2018), we very
much welcome progress on the development of the
comprehensive performance assessment system, with
clear standards of performance for assessing and
evaluating all United Nations civilian and uniformed
personnel. Robust and objective methodologies based
on clear, well-defined and identified benchmarks are
central to improving not only mission planning and
evaluation, but also mandate implementation at large.
Finally, we continue to underscore the importance
of the protection of civilians as a core task of
peacekeeping. In this regard, regular assessments
constitute an indispensable part of our performance
policy, as they ensure that the protection of civilians
under threat of physical violence is fulfilled. The
establishment of the Strategic Planning and Monitoring
Unit within the Executive Office of the SecretaryGeneral is a welcome step forward towards improved
assessments and enhanced operational output. The
European troop- and police-contributing countries will
continue to support the Secretariat in delivering both the
capacity and willingness to create safer environments
for communities under peacekeepers’ protection.
Training is primarily a Member State’s responsibility
in order to provide well-trained and well-equipped
uniformed personnel and partake in a collective effort
to better prepare, train and equip these personnel.
However, the European Union, through the deployment
of its own missions and operations, implements a whole
array of action in matters of training and capacity-

S/PV. 8521

building with a view to complementing United Nations
efforts in this regard.
Indeed, the European Union will continue to
be a loyal partner, not only by supporting United
Nations peacekeeping operations, but also within the
framework of our strengthened Common Security and
Defence Policy. We continue to support each other
and asset-sharing in-theatre, be it in Mali, the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Libya, the Balkans or Iraq.
We share best practices on conduct and discipline, and
lessons learned from strategic reviews and assessments
of our missions and operations. In our biannual
steering committee meetings between the EU and the
United Nations, we discuss operational needs, agree on
benchmarks and ensure the strategic direction of our
partnership, all to better align our efforts and improve
our modalities for cooperation in different areas.
This is reflected in the recently adopted 20192021 priorities of the United Nations-EU strategic
partnership. As one of our eight priorities, we have
agreed to contribute to the enhancement of performance
by reinforcing cooperation on training and capacitybuilding, including on exercises. To this end, we
are exploring how our services could help facilitate
support from EU member States for different types
of trainings, including on human rights, international
humanitarian law and gender, as well as other relevant
trainings. This means engaging more systematically
with the European Security and Defence College, as
well as with the European Association of Peacekeeping
Training Centres.
We are also deeply committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda. We welcome
the recently approved uniformed gender-parity strategy
for the period 2018-2028, as well as all efforts aimed
at increasing the number and participation of women
in peacekeeping and the integration of a gender
perspective into all phases of the policymaking process
and analysis. Part of the solution lies in increasing the
quantity and quality of training for women personnel.
We made women and peace and security the first of
the joint priorities of the United Nations-EU Strategic
Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis Management
for the period 2019-2021, as well as a cross-cutting
priority across all areas of our cooperation. Our missions
and operations around the world are already working
together on the ground to enhance the integration of
a gender perspective throughout their activities. We

19-1324741/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

are mapping ongoing cooperation on the ground and,
as mentioned during the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial on 29 March, we have agreed to organize
a joint United Nations-EU workshop in Brussels on
enabling factors for engaging more women in all roles
and areas of expertise and at all levels of peacekeeping
and crisis management. The aim of that joint effort is to
build on ongoing work and existing data in this area and
to arrive at a set of practical recommendations that will
be shared widely. We hope to encourage a practice of
regular, informed and practical exchanges on enabling
factors for engaging more women in peacekeeping
between EU member States, other United Nations
troop- and police-contributing countries and experts in
that area.
In conclusion, the EU welcomes the emphasis
that Secretary-General António Guterres puts on
partnerships — and the EU-United Nations partnership
in particular — as key to global peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
sincerely congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
entire Indonesian delegation on successfully assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate on the training and capacity-building of United
Nations peacekeepers.
I wish to align my delegation’s statement with the
statement just delivered by the observer of the European
Union. My statement will be very short, and I will limit
myself to a few additional remarks on beyond those
already made on behalf of the European Union.
Today’s open debate builds on an important
resolution — resolution 2436 (2018), adopted in
September last year. The resolution provides important
provisions and commitments to ensure the effective
training of United Nations peacekeepers as an enabling
component of delivering effective performance as well
as strengthening the safety and security of military,
police and civilian personnel in United Nations missions.
Similarly, the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as part of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative spearheaded by the
Secretary-General, represents yet another important
milestone to shore up the effectiveness, credibility and
integrity of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The safety, security and performance of United
42/69

07/05/2019

Nations peacekeepers was also the subject of this year’s
deliberations in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. While consensus was achieved on those
particular chapters, we regret that a substantive report
as a whole could not be adopted.
As a committed and long-term troop- and
police- contributing country (TCC/PCC), Slovakia
remains strongly committed to improving the overall
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations through its comprehensive national
predeployment training, comprising language training,
cultural diversity awareness and the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse, among other areas, in
order to ensure the security and best performance of our
peacekeepers soon after entering the operational area.
In order to achieve operational readiness status,
Slovakia has developed a demanding national training
system that puts emphasis on the specifics of the mission,
the rules of engagement and situational awareness.
It is also our common national practice to include
subject matter experts — personnel from previous
deployment on missions — to develop scenarios that
are also part of the assessment team for the certification
of the contingent. Key leadership personnel receive
operational updates and consultations with deployed
contingents. In addition, women are an integral part
of the training teams, which contributes to their equal
mission preparation and performance.
We welcome the recently launched comprehensive
performance assessment system in selected United
Nations missions, including in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), where we
have our largest contingent. We hope that it will prove
to be a useful tool in ensuring proper conduct and
discipline and also serve to deliver important feedback
for participating TCCs and PCCs. In that regard,
ensuring active communication among the Secretariat’s
assessment teams, force commanders and the respective
TCCs and PCCs is absolutely essential. We welcome
the upcoming visit to Slovakia next month by the
UNFICYP Force Commander Major General Cheryl
Pearce, to observe the training of Slovak peacekeepers.
Slovakia also appreciates the introduction of the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, which will
help in capacity-planning, reducing critical capability
gaps and ensuring the smooth transition of services
among Members States as their deployments undergo
changes. We think that the key to success in the force
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

generation process is timely, systematic and inclusive
communication among all stakeholders.
In conclusion, as we approach the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers this month — on
29 May — allow me to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to all those who wear blue helmets and
serve under the United Nations flag, as well as to pay
tribute to all those who have lost their lives in the
service of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in carrying out
your duties. I would also like to thank you for having
convened this important meeting, which addresses
one of the most important tools in enabling the United
Nations to carry out its tasks in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also wish to express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General and all of today’s
briefers for their valuable presentations.
Based on our vision and the humanitarian
role of the Jordanian Armed Forces — the Arab
Army — and the General Security Apparatus, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been participating
in United Nations peacekeeping operations all over
the world for many decades, contributing more than
100,000 men and women. Throughout that period, the
Kingdom of Jordan has never hesitated to participate
in United Nations missions, despite the difficult tasks
and dangerous environments. We are a model example
in respect of conduct and discipline, while maintaining
high levels of readiness and competence, which have
been internationally recognized.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan attaches special importance to and greatly
supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to reform
and restructure the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with a view to improving the performance
of its missions. Jordan is proud to be among the first
countries to support the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, in line with our country’s
principles. We also support the Secretary-General’s
great efforts to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations and preventive diplomacy.

S/PV. 8521

As a result of the continuing evolution of the
concepts of United Nations mandates and their different
nature, Jordan established a National Peace Operations
Training Institute in 1996 to train members of the
Jordanian Armed Forces of all ranks on peacekeeping
operations, as well as training sisterly and friendly
troops. From its establishment to the beginning of
this year, the Institute has trained 66,000 soldiers
from Jordan and other countries. The Institute offers
several courses, including mechanisms of action for
peacekeeping operations, the protection of civilians
and children, disarmament, rehabilitation, international
law and humanitarian law, among others. The Institute
has started to provide courses on cultural awareness in
2003, given the importance of that topic for the success
of peacekeeping missions in different areas of conflict.
The courses are divided into two. The first is
directed at friendly foreign countries and aims to
increase the knowledge and experience of participants
in terms of their cultural awareness regarding Arab and
Islamic traditions and customs, as well as social, ethnic
and family structures, religious aspects, stereotypes,
and working with translators and negotiators, taking
into account the nature and place of the mission. The
second is directed at the Jordanian Armed Forces
and other Arab countries and aims to increase the
knowledge and experience of participants in terms
of their cultural awareness regarding the customs,
traditions and religions of different peoples.
At the level of peacekeeping policing, Jordan’s
General Security Directorate decided in 2015 to
establish a Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
which includes the Police Training Institute for
Peacekeeping Operation, in order to provide participants
with advanced policing skills, in line with the highest
international standards. Through development and
restructuring, Jordan looks forward to becoming a
regional centre for specialized training in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is committed to
implementing its action plan for women and its priorities
with a view to increasing the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations at all levels. The Jordanian
Armed Forces — Arab Army — managed to increase
the number of women observers and staff officers to
15 per cent by the end of last year. We reaffirm our
continued support for the Secretary-General’s efforts
regarding a zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.

19-1324743/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to achieve,
maintain and build peace at all levels. I wish to
recall Jordan’s pledge during the latest Peacekeeping
Ministerial at the end of March to provide a mechanized
infantry battalion, a special operations unit, a level-II
field hospital and a protection unit, in addition to the
resources we have already provided. We look forward to
the Jordanian police unit beginning its work in the near
future, having been selected to participate in the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei. We also look
forward to reviving our participation in peacekeeping
operations, which has been limited over the past few
years owing to the situation in the Middle East.
In conclusion, I can only ask for God’s mercy for
those peacekeeping martyrs who have sacrificed their
lives for a world of peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): We are pleased that you, Mr. President,
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia — a country that has played an active role in
peacekeeping missions since 1957 and is currently one of
the largest troop-contributing countries — are presiding
over this important debate on the theme “Investing in
peace: improving the safety and performance of United
Nations peacekeepers”.
There are two fundamental issues leading today’s
debate. First, peacekeeping missions continue to
operate in difficult environments and with more
complex mandates, including providing support for
difficult political processes, protecting civilians and
supporting national capacity-building, particularly in
the areas of security, the rule of law and respect for
human rights. Secondly, asymmetrical attacks and the
use of terrorist tactics against peacekeepers undermine
the implementation of peace-support mandates
and demand greater efforts to safeguard them and
guarantee their safety. Ecuador therefore reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General in his efforts to
reform the United Nations by means of improving the
Organization’s capacity to efficiently and effectively
fulfil its mandates. We are also grateful for the
presence of the Secretary-General at this important
debate, as well as that of all other briefers and for the
information provided.
44/69

07/05/2019

Ecuador also believes it is important to highlight
the various initiatives and actions that have been carried
out in the past year to address fundamental issues: the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
to which our country is a signatory; the Peacekeeping
Ministerial in September 2018, which was held
with a view to gaining political support and making
peacekeeping missions more efficient and safer as
well as to mobilize the strongest possible support for
political solutions and well-structured, well-equipped
and well-trained forces; and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which is supported by 151 Member States,
including my country, through which we renewed our
collective commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and reaffirmed the primacy of politics
in resolving conflicts and the support role played by
peacekeeping operations in that respect.
It is also relevant to mention the 2017 voluntary
compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse in peace operations, to which
Ecuador is also one of the signatories. We believe that
the training of personnel ahead of their deployment is
key to contributing positively to that joint commitment.
Accountability and increasing international cooperation
are two other elements that we believe are necessary
for the eradication of sexual exploitation and abuse.
All of those actions reflect the vital importance that
host countries, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat continue to work in a committed
manner in each of their roles in order to revitalize those
instruments and ensure the responsible, efficient and
effective deployment of peacekeeping missions.
Ecuador believes that the new peace and security
structure, which has been in place since January, as
well as the accession of the majority of Member States,
including our country, to the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the implementation of
the action plan on improving the security of United
Nations peacekeepers, all generate an important
impetus to establish a performance evaluation system
for peacekeeping operations, which would have a
positive impact on accountability to Member States
and would promote transparency and comparability
among missions. In that regard, we welcome the fact
that the Secretariat has embraced the recommendation
issued by the Board of Auditors and is ensuring that the
future development of that comprehensive performance
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

evaluation system and its experimental application to
peacekeeping operations is adapted to the requests of
the Security Council and General Assembly.
Firm in our conviction as a country of peace,
Ecuador has been participating in several peacekeeping
operations through its presence mainly of military
observers, which includes female personnel, on several
missions — the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara. Our country is
committed to increasing the percentage of women
participating as military observers. In recognizing the
importance of women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations and seeking to promote gender equity
within our armed forces on a permanent basis, we
have developed workshops on gender and women and
peace and security through Ecuador’s Peacekeeping
Missions School, which is the entity responsible for
training our military personnel before deployment to
peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, as a country committed to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, in which it has been
participating since 1952, Ecuador wishes to commend
the commitment of troop- and police-contributing
countries and pay tribute to the memory of the male
and female uniformed and civilian personnel who have
sacrificed their lives in carrying out United Nations
peacekeeping mandates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the smooth start to your leadership of
the Council for this month, outfitting all the members
of the Council with shirts and getting them ready for the
heat of summer, in a very original move. We wish you
all the best in your able stewardship of the Council for
this month. We also thank the Indonesian presidency
for highlighting the importance of enhancing training
and capacity-building in order to improve the security
and performance of United Nations peacekeepers
and civilians serving in conditions featuring extreme
violence and terrorism. The death toll is rising, and we
pay tribute to all who have fallen in the cause of peace.
We must ensure that their sacrifice was not in vain. It
is our moral responsibility to provide adequate levels of
training, preparedness and equipment at various levels

S/PV. 8521

and modes, and my delegation would like to make the
following proposals.
First, we must help troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) to build their own capacities adequate to
peace operations by developing national trainer
cadres, refurbishing training facilities, refining
training materials and providing training equipment.
Secondly, we should invest in critical enablers such as
engineering, aviation, medical, logistical, signal and
counter-improvised explosive device (IED) capabilities.
Predeployment training for specific missions, technical
and advisory assistance, equipment maintenance and
sustainability, strategic-level planning and in-mission
competence is equally important.
Thirdly, we must master communication skills,
languages and content on international law and
humanitarian law. In that regard, the training of civilian
components engaged in dangerous tasks on field
missions, as well as of larger numbers of women, is
critical. Fourthly, we should prepare peacekeepers for
measures related to early warning, information-sharing
and, as appropriate, intelligence-sharing, as well as
self-defence. Fatalities can be reduced only if we
understand and combat the drivers of conflict. In that
regard, primary prevention can be achieved by investing
in development by using combined regional approaches
as well as national ones, and through cooperation
among Member States. We should therefore focus on
the best ways to harness the potential of international
instruments to that end, including the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which Kazakhstan strongly supports.
Fifthly, we must promote partnerships and
co-deployments, which can enhance the credibility and
effectiveness of United Nations missions through the
engagement of countries, regional organizations and
the world community. Kazakhstan would like to thank
India for its partnership, which includes predeployment
training conducted in both India and Kazakhstan. We
are currently operating in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon together with an Indian battalion.
Such co-deployment is valuable in ensuring capacitybuilding for new TCCs.
Kazakhstan pays great attention to peacekeeping
training and the development of its national
capacity. This year I am pleased to announce that the
peacekeeping courses on the protection of civilians
and for United Nations staff officers at our Partnership

19-1324745/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for Peace Training Centre, KAZCENT, have been
certified and are available to partner nations. Today’s
peacekeeping missions very often lack technology
adequate to overcoming the brutal threats that exist
on the ground. Such avoidable failures require
adequate equipment, technology and innovation. In
that regard, we would like to inform the Council that
the fifth Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
Symposium will be held between 28 and 31 May in
Nur-Sultan. The focus of the Symposium will be
technological improvements to enhance peacekeepers’
safety, strengthen communications, improve situational
awareness, counter IEDs, introduce tele-health and
reduce environmental impacts. We would like to take
this opportunity to once again remind Member States,
international organizations, think tanks and academia
that they can participate in the Symposium in our
capital with the aim of establishing and improving
partnerships that strengthen the security of our missions
and enhance capacity-building.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Husni (Sudan): First and foremost, I would like
to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and thank
Germany for its leadership of the Council in April. I
also want to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia, for her presence in the Council this morning.
I commend the Secretary-General and the two briefers
for their presentations.

07/05/2019

Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, along with the efforts to reform the peace
and security pillar through the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, have all stressed the importance of
training and capacity-building in conducting effective,
efficient and robust peacekeeping operations. The
implementation of those commitments is therefore vital
to advancing the Declaration and ensuring that we walk
the talk.
Partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, especially the African Union,
are pivotal to enhancing the capacity and training of
peacekeepers, for African Union-led peace operations
as well as those of the United Nations. The streamlining
of training and capacity-building in Africa is crucial
if we are to maintain inclusivity, cover all the African
subregions equally and enhance women’s participation,
thereby supporting the agenda of silencing the guns
in Africa by 2020 and advancing the cause of African
solutions to African problems. Taking the culture,
values and traditions of host nations into consideration
is crucial to the capacity-building and training of
peacekeepers in order to make them fit for purpose
and to address the diverse nature of the challenges and
mandates in the field. Giving regional perspectives a
leading role in matters of training, capacity-building,
performance, safety and security is therefore essential.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to all the peacekeepers who have lost their lives
while serving the cause of peace worldwide. Their
valuable sacrifices will always be recognized.

The intelligence services of host countries could
also provide peacekeepers with prevention assistance,
which could help to reduce fatalities among uniformed
and civilian personnel. In order to harness that
intelligence, we must enhance cooperation and promote
confidence and coordination between peacekeeping
operations, the Secretariat and host countries.
Furthermore, transparency and synergy between
the Secretariat, the Security Council and troop- and
police-contributing countries are central to evaluating
and reviewing performance.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
and the report by former United Nations Force
Commander Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, emphasized the necessity
of training and capacity-building for improving
peacekeepers’ performance, safety and security. The

Following the new dawn of its December revolution,
the Sudan is looking forward to participating in future
peacekeeping operations once the gradual exit of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is concluded. We are relying on our longstanding experience with uniformed peacekeepers,
including our recent participation in peacekeeping
and military observation under the mandate of the

The Sudan aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the African Union.

46/69

19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

African Union in the Comoros and the umbrella of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in South
Sudan, respectively. Training and capacity-building for
our peacekeepers is now very much needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Benard Estrada (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to congratulate the Republic
of Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month.
We thank you for convening this open debate,
Mr. President, and for circulating the concept note
(S/2019/359, annex) that serves as the basis for our
deliberations today. We are also grateful for the briefings
on the subject, which is very relevant to the successful
implementation of the Organization’s peacekeeping
operations. We share the view expressed in the
concept note that we troop- and police-contributing
countries are committed to deploying well-trained
and -equipped uniformed personnel and fulfilling
our collective commitment to continually preparing,
training and equipping peacekeepers to an adequate
standard, including through innovative approaches,
such as the strengthening of triangular cooperation and
joint deployments.
My delegation recognizes that effective training
and discipline before, during and after deployment is
critical for the military and police forces to be able to
provide a proportionate and effective response against
the perpetrators of attacks on the civilian population
as well as for the defence of personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions.
It is worth noting that the Secretariat has developed
training guides and materials based on scenarios
for the protection of civilians, among others, but
is not equipped to assess whether the training has
been effectively delivered to all deployed military
and police personnel on the ground. We therefore
reiterate our position that the Secretariat is primarily
responsible for the development, implementation and
validation of standards, as well as for training guidance
for peacekeeping.
We stress the importance of translating specialized
training material on the protection of civilians and other
subjects into the official languages of the Organization,
which is essential for a proper understanding of the
standards and requirements applicable to peacekeeping

S/PV. 8521

operations. While my delegation welcomes the
emphasis placed on strengthening the performance and
effectiveness of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping
personnel, I note that it entails responsibilities for both
the Security Council and the Secretariat. The Security
Council has recognized that training is one of the
critical factors for the effective implementation of all
peacekeeping mandates.
For our part, and in order to comply with its
obligations and commitments in this area, Guatemala
established its Regional Command for Peacekeeping
Operations Training (CREOMPAZ) in July 2004. We
have trained personnel composed of senior officers,
junior officers and specialist troops, both nationally
and from member countries of the Central American
Armed Forces Conference and other friendly
countries that have been selected to participate in
various peacekeeping operations under the standards
established by the Organization.
CREOMPAZ is one of the most important
training centres in Latin America, is part of the Latin
American Association of Training Centres for Peace
Operations and was certified by the United Nations
in 2014. The high level of training provided has been
demonstrated through the performance of our military
observers and staff officers in numerous peacekeeping
operations, as well as by the 19 Guatemalan special
forces contingents deployed in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and previously in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. CREOMPAZ
also offers advanced logistics courses for United
Nations instructors, war correspondents and military
experts in peace missions, as well as courses on gender
perspectives in peace operations and civil-military
operations. To date, it has trained 5,880 nationals and
1,652 foreigners, for a total of 7,532 people. In addition,
it has trained 390 women.
We recall that Guatemala has a military education
system comprised of a group of educational institutions
that impart knowledge in the military sciences and
arts at various levels and modalities, as informed by
the philosophy and doctrine of the Guatemalan Army,
under the Higher Education Superior Command of
the Guatemalan Army, with the aim of promoting
and generating academic excellence and professional
performance based on military science and doctrine,
where we develop ethical and civilian competencies

19-1324747/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and values for due compliance with international laws
and treaties, based on virtue and excellence.
We would like to highlight the daily efforts of our
Guatemalan personnel to fully carry out their mandates.
In order to continue to do so effectively, peacekeeping
operations must have financial and human resources.
We reiterate that the mandates of the Council must be
clear, realistic and achievable.
Finally, my delegation reiterates its commitment to
contributing properly trained and capable peacekeepers
in order to maintain our participation in peacekeeping
operations with high performance on the ground and
without reservations. We also take this opportunity to
reiterate our position that the mandates of the Security
Council are bolstered and updated by the work of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C34), which includes a section entitled “Best practices
and training” in its annual reports. The C-34 mandate
updates the principle of ownership by troop- and
police-contributing countries in the peacekeeping
operations, thereby contributing to strengthening
the performance and effectiveness of uniformed and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. I also thank
you for having organized a meeting on this important
topic. The presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
is a powerful testament to Indonesia’s critical role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
which reflects his firm commitment to peacekeeping.
I also thank all previous speakers for their statements
on the topic.
This debate is indeed timely, being held at a
moment marked by the momentum created by the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The resulting Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations recognizes
the importance of training for performance, safety
and security. I take this opportunity to commend
the presidency for having proposed the presidential
statement that was issued this morning (S/PRST/2019/4).
48/69

07/05/2019

Morocco welcomes this opportunity to share
its views on the issue from the perspective of a
troop-contributing country, and highlights the
following points.
First, we stress that the responsibility of providing
quality training commensurate with United Nations
standards lies with troop contributors. But like all
elements that contribute to the success of peacekeeping
operations, that responsibility is shared, particularly
with the Secretariat, through the provision of modules
and doctrines adapted to the realities of each mission.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment to
that end.
Secondly, it is recognized that well-trained troops
are better able to defend themselves and their mandates,
which impacts their performance. However, when we
refer to the complex notion of performance, we should
not focus exclusively on that of the troops. Performance
depends on a multitude of factors, of which training,
while important, is but one of many.
Thirdly, in his report to the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping, the Secretary-General informed the
Members States about the Secretariat’s new training
strategy, which focuses on three elements: developing
and disseminating training standards, enhancing the
capacity-building of troop- and police-contributing
countries for quality training, and verifying that
training is up to United Nations standards and that
only properly trained personnel are deployed. Those
commitments go hand in hand with those of the troopcontributing countries and will undoubtedly have a
positive impact in the medium and long terms.
Fourthly, the various existing processes, such
as Peacekeeping Ministerials and summits of chiefs
of staff and police have enabled Member States to
announce substantial commitments in several areas,
including training and capacity-building. Those many
commitments must be managed appropriately and
consistently, particularly through the establishment of a
light coordination mechanism in order to bring together
countries that offer training with those who need it. We
welcome its imminent implementation in cooperation
with the troop-contributing countries.
Fifthly, as part of our collective commitment to
promoting the participation of women in peacekeeping,
we must ensure that they can benefit from all the
necessary training.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Morocco is convinced that it can make a
meaningful contribution in the area of training
and capacity-building. Through its participation in
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, my country
has acquired a recognized and valued expertise in the
area. In that regard, it was the first troop-contributing
country deployed in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as in the
Central African Republic. Moreover, through military
cooperation agreements, Morocco is involved with
more than 30 African countries in hosting all categories
of soldiers pursuing training in every military specialty,
including predeployment training.
In the light of that experience, Morocco stands
ready to respond positively to any request from another
troop-contributing country. In addition to the principle
of South-South cooperation, which remains a priority
of its foreign policy, Morocco is convinced that troopcontributing countries in need of training or capacitybuilding will benefit from the peacekeeping experience
of the country providing the training.

S/PV. 8521

and military contingents — including Indonesia — are
all members of our Movement.
We commend Foreign Minister Retno Lestari
Priansari Marsudi and wish her delegation every
success in guiding the work of the Security Council
this month.
Everything relating to the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is important,
including the training and capacity-building of personnel
deployed on the ground. We therefore emphasize the
need for a partnership of shared responsibility between
the Security Council and troop- and police-contributing
countries, together with the Secretariat, in order
to objectively evaluate and harness the potential of
peacekeeping mandates and operations. We need a clear
and viable mandate commensurate with the challenges
on the ground. That will be possible if cooperation is
continuous, meaningful and representative, including
prior to the renewal of mandates.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

In April 2018, the Ministers reaffirmed their
position on peacekeeping operations, which must be
carried out in strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations. At the same time, they stressed that
respect for the principles of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of States, as well as that
of non-interference in their internal affairs, are key
to the promotion of international peace and security.
In that regard, respect for the basic principles of
peacekeeping — the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force, except in self-defence and in
defence of the mandate — is necessary for the success
of operations, in particular those with protection of
civilians mandates. Peacekeeping operations must be
supported by a participatory and well-planned political
process, based on national ownership and supported by
the international community, as well as with the consent
of the parties concerned. In other words, peacekeeping
operations must not be used as an alternative means
to address the root causes of conflicts or to manage
conflicts themselves.

Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the 120
States members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries to address an issue of such great importance,
given the fact that 88 per cent of the peacekeepers
deployed on the ground come from non-aligned
countries and that the 10 largest contributors of troops

We welcome the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
aimed at ensuring that efforts are made to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of operations to address
changing realities. The Movement also stands ready
to work within the framework of the practical and
comprehensive implementation of the Cairo Roadmap

Given current needs, as well as new methods of
cooperation, the Kingdom of Morocco will shortly
host two critical training courses in the medical and
engineering areas within the framework of triangular
partnerships. Those training courses will be mainly
intended for Francophone countries, given that a glaring
lack of training courses persists in such countries,
although many missions are deployed in the Frenchspeaking world. I stress the importance of triangular
cooperation among troop-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and the Security Council. We firmly believe
that the strengthening of such cooperation will have a
positive impact on all aspects of peacekeeping
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity to
pay special tribute to all civilian and military personnel
deployed in United Nations missions, who often work
in difficult conditions, while risking their lives.

19-1324749/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for Enhancing the Performance of Peacekeeping
Operations from Mandate to Exit. We reaffirm our
commitment to providing well-trained and wellequipped uniformed personnel, as well as to participating
in a joint agreement to better prepare, train and equip
such personnel through innovative approaches.
We note that, although performance is related
to the safety and security of peacekeepers, the
performance of the mission as a whole, and not just
the performance of troops, must be evaluated. We
believe that well-defined, realistic and achievable
mandates, political will, leadership, accountability,
adequate human and financial resources, planning and
operational guidelines, capacity-building and training
are key to ensuring the effective implementation of
mission mandates.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, we express our commitment to
increasing the number of female civilian and uniformed
personnel in peacekeeping operations, including in
key positions, as well as to ensure women’s full and
equal participation in every stage of the peace process.
We are aware that the presence of women in military,
police and civilian roles on the ground sends an
important message to host communities with regard
to gender equality and empowering women, which can
help in preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. We
also reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General’s
policy of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and
abuse, including the voluntary compact and the circle
of leadership initiatives.
In conclusion, the Movement pays tribute to the
work of the men and women peacekeepers who carry
out their work, oftentimes in adverse circumstances
in armed conflicts, while risking their lives daily. Our
sincere appreciation goes out to all of them, as well as
to those who have lost their lives in the performance of
their duties, defending the United Nations flag and the
cause of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would first like to commend
the Republic of Indonesia for holding this open debate,
and I am confident that, under your presidency, Sir,
the Security Council will continue to build on this
important topic.
50/69

07/05/2019

Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I will now
national capacity.

make

a

few

remarks

in

my

Given the many challenges that our world is facing
today, peacekeeping remains one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations, representing
an important mandate of multilateralism and a
symbol of international solidarity in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.
Romania has a long-term commitment to the values and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
the peace, development and justice nexus, which is also
my country’s motto as a candidate for a non-permanent
seat in the Security Council for the term 2020-2021. As
a security provider, Romania attaches great importance
to the effectiveness of the United Nations in the pursuit
of peace and stability. Since 1991, when the first
Romanian military peacekeepers were deployed in
the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission,
more than 12.500 Romanian military, police and
close-protection personnel have served under the blue
flag all over the world in 25 United Nations missions.
Before deployment in United Nations missions,
Romanian peacekeepers follow a special training
course aimed at developing three main competencies:
the ability to communicate in a professional context
in either English or French, the ability to perform
mission-related tasks depending on the mandate of the
mission, and the ability to apply first-aid techniques.
Romania has taken concrete measures in the
training of foreign officers as well. One example is
the international superior course performed at the
Application School for Officers of the Romanian
Gendarmerie, delivered in French, consistent with
United Nations standards and incorporating the most
recent version of the predeployment training materials.
That course has trained more than 240 francophone
officers from 28 countries from Europe, Africa and
Asia.
Also, the Romanian Protection and Guard Service
is the only service in the world that provides close
protection units, which ensure the protection of United
Nations high-level officials. The officers follow, before
deployment, the close protection course, provided
under the cooperation between the Service and the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
Since its inception 10 years ago, more than 300 United
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations security officers from different countries have
been trained at the centre’s premises in Romania.
Romania contributes to the United Nations light
coordination mechanism by creating a mobile training
team with a focus on gender mainstreaming in security
and defence. Furthermore, we highly appreciate the
efforts carried out by the Secretary-General through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative, as it sets
complementarity, synergy and coherence for the
improved safety and security of peacekeepers, as well
as better performance.
Romania’s contribution has been emphasized in the
development of the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping by providing national
experts in doctrinal development to participate in online
working groups in order to advance guidance materials
on topics identified by United Nations field missions
as priorities. In that respect, Romanian United Nations
certified assessment instructors currently deployed in
missions to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan stand ready to participate in the selection
of police officers from Member States to better match
specific mission needs with adequate skills.
Moreover, Romania also provides military experts
in aviation and engineer units to participate in online
working groups coordinated by the Office of Military
Affairs in order to improve and update the specific
United Nations military units’ manuals and guidelines
issued by the Department of Peace Operations and
the Department of Operational Support, in support of
peacekeeping capabilities readiness and predeployment
training.
My country is fully committed to resolution 2436
(2018), as we believe that the pursuit of improved
performance must continue to guide our common
efforts, which requires more training and education.
We believe that whereas troop- and police-contributing
countries remain responsible for the delivery of
predeployment training according to United Nations
standards, ensuring the safety and performance of
military and police personnel in the field is a collective
responsibility of Member States and the Secretariat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand,
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). ASEAN would also

S/PV. 8521

like to align itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I thank the presidency of Indonesia for convening
this timely debate. Continued dialogue and debates
on the subject are key to ensuring that the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative will succeed after achieving
near consensus on the shared commitments last
September. I would also like to express my appreciation
for the useful briefings delivered by the SecretaryGeneral and others.
United Nations peacekeeping is crucial to advancing
peace and security, safeguarding human rights and
laying the foundation for development. It would
therefore be essential for all stakeholders to ensure
optimum support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in today’s increasingly challenging operating
environment. In the light of that, ASEAN would like to
offer the following points.
First, we need stronger partnerships and a more
coordinated approach. We support strengthening
partnerships at all levels. We further emphasize the
importance of regional and subregional collaboration
in training and capacity-building efforts to enhance
missions’ peacekeeping competencies.
For example, the ASEAN Defence Ministerial
Meeting-Plus Experts’ Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations meets annually to discuss key challenges
faced in peacekeeping and share ideas on how member
States could strengthen mandate implementation in the
field. We also have continued efforts among the ASEAN
peace operations institutes to promote innovation,
capacity-building and training collaboration for
peacekeeping deployment.
Secondly, the efficient and effective achievement
of mandate outcomes depends on the quality
and capabilities of peacekeepers. Ensuring that
peacekeepers meet United Nations standards before
and during deployment is everyone’s priority. ASEAN
countries are hosting the inaugural Triangular
Partnership Project training on a rotational basis for
Asia-Pacific participants, with the aim of providing
high-quality peacekeeping operational training.
Moving ahead, Indonesia will replace Viet Nam in
hosting the Triangular Partnership Project training in
2020.

19-1324751/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Collectively, we pool resources and expertise by
effectively leveraging one another’s competencies,
capabilities and shared experiences to achieve the desired
Triangular Partnership Project training outcomes. There
is no debate about women’s pre-eminent qualification
for any aspect of peacekeeping operations, including
in the highest posts. ASEAN therefore supports the
Secretary-General’s call to increase the number of
women in peacekeeping.
Thirdly, the safety and security of our peacekeepers
are a shared responsibility among us all. All peacekeeping
stakeholders share and own the responsibility to ensure
realistic mission mandates, adequate resourcing,
effective training and efficient administration for the
success of peacekeeping missions.
Every stakeholder has its share of responsibility to
ensure the safety of peacekeepers while undertaking
their duties. The most direct and effective way is
primarily to ensure training competency and the
provision of adequate equipment to meet the demands
of the mission. While reaffirming the basic principles
of United Nations peacekeeping, it is of paramount
importance to ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers on the ground so that they can perform
competently and confidently. The Security Council
can rest assured, ASEAN remains committed to
strengthening the work and quality of its peacekeepers,
and we will contribute effectively to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
I will now speak in my national capacity.
First, Thailand is committed to ensuring that
Thai peacekeepers are properly prepared, trained and
equipped to meet the challenges that they will face in
the field. In July, by working closely with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Thailand is preparing to
organize the regional training course on the issue of
children and armed conflict.
Secondly, Thailand will continue to view
peacekeeping
through
a
comprehensive
and
people-centred lens. Peace is not a stand-alone agenda.
It is co-dependent on sustainable development and
respect for human rights.
In conclusion, good planning, adequate resourcing
and competent personnel are imperative to the success
of any peacekeeping operation.
52/69

07/05/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): Portugal aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union. I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.
Let me begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate, which provides a
valuable opportunity for the Security Council to take
stock of resolution 2436 (2018) and address some of the
commitments and pledges made during the recent United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial. Recent years have
demonstrated that peacekeeping missions operate in an
ever-more challenging security environment. However,
that cannot weaken our collective responsibility to
ensure that United Nations peacekeepers are deployed
with the highest assurance of their safety in the
fulfilment of their mandate. Unfortunately, the past
10 years of United Nations peacekeeping have been
particularly tragic, as the number of fatalities have
been exceedingly high. In that regard, efforts taken by
the United Nations and its Member States throughout
2018 to improve the safety of peacekeepers led to a
considerable reduction in the number of fatalities last
year. We hope those efforts continue with the goal of
achieving a zero-fatality rate.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the joint Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations are further evidence of our commitment to
enhancing the impact of peacekeeping, which depends
greatly on the training of peacekeepers.
As a troop- and police-contributing country,
Portugal sees training as a top priority due to its direct
impact, not only on the safety of our peacekeepers
and of the missions in which we participate, but also
in the conduct and fulfilment of mandated tasks. That
is why our military and police personnel meet the
highest standards of training, which includes models
in international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and focuses on areas such as rules
of engagement, the protection of civilians and sexual
exploitation and abuse. We also invest in predeployment
and in-mission training to ensure that our uniformed
contingents have the tools to operate in their specific
areas of deployment.
I would like to draw special attention to the role of our
female troops in the United Nations Multidimensional
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, where they perform combat roles in a very
volatile and demanding security environment. We
stand ready to share our experience and best practices
as we find ways to increase the number and role of
women in peacekeeping in the light of the women and
peace and security agenda and the uniformed genderparity strategy. In that context, Portugal is committed
to working with the Department of Peace Operations
on the possibility of organizing mixed training courses
on capacity and leadership, with 50/50 gender parity
attendance.
Another positive experience that is worth
mentioning here is our participation in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, together with Belgium, Denmark and
Norway, where we have implemented the transport
aviation unit rotational concept. It is a clear case of
good cooperation among United Nations Members to
articulate our needs and capacities in a structured and
coordinated way.
Looking ahead, we believe that the Santos
Cruz report provides the most comprehensive set
of recommendations to promote the training and,
therefore, the safety and security of peacekeepers.
One of its main virtues is identifying ways for the
Secretariat and Member States to integrate policies in
different areas, including medical services, improvised
explosive devices and technological solutions. Such
synergies could go a long way in improving the safety
and performance of all peacekeepers.
Finally, we are ready and willing to share our
experience and lessons learned, namely, by assisting
in the training of contingents from other troopand police-contributing countries. In that regard,
and particularly in the framework of our defence
cooperation with members of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, we have been exploring
ways in which our collective accumulated knowledge
can constitute a deliverable to improve the safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, Djibouti congratulates the delegation of Indonesia,
led by Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari
Marsudi, for convening today’s important event on the
theme “Investing in peace: delivering quality training

S/PV. 8521

and capacity-building to improve the safety and security
and performance of United Nations peacekeepers”.
Since the beginning of his mandate, SecretaryGeneral António Guterres has stressed the vital role
of peacekeeping operations in the peace and security
architecture. He has reiterated that it is a necessary
investment, since countless lives have been saved over
the past decade thanks to peacekeeping operations,
while many war-torn families have been able to make
a new start. Entire economies have been restored
and nations rebuilt. While differences and nuances
persist in the approach to strengthening peacekeeping
operations, there is no doubt that we can welcome the
strong consensus for increased investment in training
and capacity-building. Similarly, it goes without saying
that peacekeeping training is a strategic investment that
enables United Nations military, police and civilian
personnel to effectively carry out their increasingly
challenging and, at times, dangerous missions.
(spoke in English)
Last year marked the seventieth anniversary of
peacekeeping. It was a year during which several
key milestones were achieved, such as the reform of
the peace and security architecture, the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which Djibouti signed, and
the implementation of the action plan to improve the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Obviously, there is a widening gap between United
Nations peacekeeping doctrine and the reality on the
ground. Peacekeeping operations often face a set of
complex challenges. Those challenges are daunting
in high-threat environments, where both the United
Nations and regional peace operations are increasingly
deployed. We therefore need to rededicate our efforts
towards enhancing our policies and procedures to
better adapt to the changing reality.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to underscore Djibouti’s commitment to
the issue of peacekeeping operations, with a contribution
of nearly 2,000 men in Somalia, a formed police unit in
Darfur and women and men in other United Nations
peacekeeping areas. Djibouti’s presence is a concrete
manifestation of its commitment to promoting peace
and security on the continent. I would like to focus
my remarks to the Council today on the following four
points.

19-1324753/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

First, the United Nations and the international
community must promote greater cooperation and
strategic coherence in conflict prevention, in particular
in Africa. A process for planning and defining the
joint mandates of African Union peace operations
authorized by the Security Council is essential to
ensure the effectiveness of such operations. A greater
number of real-time consultations with the African
Union and with subregional organizations, including
joint assessments and analyses, are required in order
to recommend coherent options to decision-making
bodies. Such regular interactions must be increasingly
focused on emerging threats and ways to strengthen
partnerships to better address them.
Secondly, high quality training and capacitybuilding are today essential for improving the safety,
security and performance of our peacekeepers on
the ground. In that regard, under the auspices of His
Excellency President Ismaël Omar Guelleh, Djibouti
has pledged to continue to play an active role in United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations
by reaffirming its commitment to providing welltrained and well-equipped personnel and to support
the development and implementation of peacekeeping
training sessions. We made a commitment at the most
recent United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, held
in New York, to providing a support centre for capacitybuilding for troop-contributing countries.
Thirdly, out of a total of 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations, nine are deployed in Africa.
Those missions account for more than 80 per cent of
uniformed personnel and approved financial resources.
Three of those missions are deployed in French-speaking
areas. They account for more than half of current
uniformed police and military service personnel.
However, the contribution of French-speaking countries
remains well below aspirations. It appears that Frenchspeaking troop-contributing countries need to be better
informed of the various issues related to contributions,
in particular following the new reform. In that regard,
my country intends to organize, together with the
Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Operational Support, in close collaboration with
the Canadian, French and Irish Governments and with
the support of the International Organization of la
Francophonie, a two-day seminar on 24 and 25 June
in Djibouti. This flexible coordination mechanism will
raise the awareness of French-speaking troop- and
police-contributing countries about the various issues
54/69

07/05/2019

relating to their contribution, including as it pertains
to women, to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, as we approach the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we also
reiterate the important role women can play in
peacekeeping operations. We therefore welcome
ongoing efforts to ensure the integration of a gender
perspective in all peacekeeping operations.
We have sufficiently emphasized the close link
between logistical support and the health and safety
of peacekeeping operations, hence the importance of
adequate preparation of the operational planning for
transport supply logistics, maritime and air services
and medical logistic support. The tools exist, and the
basic regulatory framework is also in place. It is up
to Member States to ensure that units are structured,
professional and truly operational before deploying
them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
and to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for
convening today’s open debate of the Security Council
on the theme “Investing in peace: improving safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers.”
This subject is becoming increasingly important,
especially with the momentum created by the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The primary aim of the initiative is to enhance the
effectiveness of the peacekeeping system in responding
to changing operational environments by renewing
the shared commitment of all actors, namely, Member
States, the Security Council, host countries, troop- and
police-contributing countries, regional partners and
financial contributors.
Undoubtedly, there is an important correlation
between providing training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers and their contribution to strengthening
the security, safety and performance of peacekeepers.
At the same time, we must recognize that training and
capacity-building are just two enabling factors along
with other factors. In addition to the operational aspects,
there are political aspects that should be recognized,
particularly that peacekeeping ultimately is a tool to
support the political resolution of conflicts and that the
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

enhanced political impact of peacekeeping operations
can provide an environment that is conducive to
sustainable peace and stability.
The training and capacity-building of troops in
the absence of clearly defined and verifiable mandates
that include priorities and adequate resources will not
produce the results we seek. That is why it is important
to adopt a comprehensive approach to addressing
the issue of the security, safety and performance of
peacekeepers, one that addresses the relevant political
and operational aspects, starting from designing the
mandate pertaining to a peacekeeping operation, to its
renewal and review and ending with an exit strategy
that includes drawdown and the complete withdrawal
of the operation.
In that context, I would like to highlight that
United Nations peacekeeping reform initiatives focus
on enhancing capabilities despite the fact that many of
those initiatives — such as former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s An Agenda for Peace, the
Brahimi report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2000/809), the report of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
S/2015446) and the Secretary-General’s own Action for
Peacekeeping initiative — have all covered a wide array
of peacekeeping dimensions that are not limited to the
technical and operational aspects. They all stressed the
importance of the need for a comprehensive political
strategy and a clear vision to achieve sustainable peace.
Egypt has always been committed to enhancing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and has always
been one of the largest police- and troop-contributing
countries. Egypt was also one of the first countries to
support the initiative of the Secretary-General on the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations. Egypt has also actively
contributed to implementing that initiative. My country
organized the high-level regional meeting on enhancing
the performance of peacekeeping operations that took
place in Cairo in November 2018. That conference
served as a forum for major African and Arab troopcontributing countries to exchange views on this very
important issue.
The conference also produced Cairo Roadmap for
Enhancing the Performance of Peacekeeping Operations
from Mandate to Exit, which represents a practical
and balanced operational framework to implement
the initiative of the Secretary-General. The Roadmap

S/PV. 8521

places peacekeeping operations in a comprehensive
and shared framework that brings together all actors
in an objective and balanced manner. It includes
the Security Council, the Secretariat and Member
States — whether they be financial contributors or
troop- and police-contributing countries — as well as
peacekeeping mission host countries. The first phases
of mission design through to the fulfilment of the
mission mandate are included. The Cairo Roadmap
also provides certain practical recommendations for
all actors concerning training and capacity building.
Allow me to highlight some specific points.
First, Member States and the Secretariat should
operationalize the light coordination mechanism in
order to assess training needs and adapt predeployment
training to the contexts and the operational environments
of the tasks to be performed.
Secondly, Member States and the Secretariat
should develop training materials for predeployment
and in-mission training in order to raise awareness and
learn from previous experiences.
Thirdly, Member States should explore funding
mechanisms to satisfy the specific peacekeeping
training needs. The Secretariat should identify the
financial gaps in the provision of training and capacitybuilding.
During the Peacekeeping Ministerial held on
29 March, Egypt made pledges in the areas of training
and capacity-building. The most important was its
pledge to organize a train-the-trainers workshop on
providing civilians with comprehensive protection, to
be held at the Cairo International Centre for Conflict
Resolution,
Peacekeeping,
and
Peacebuilding.
Arrangements are currently under way with the
Secretariat to hold the training workshop during the
second half of this year, which will include the major
troop-contributing countries.
Egypt also committed to provide a training
session for African military observers, as well
as a train-the-trainers session on fighting sexual
exploitation and abuse, in accordance with the treaties
and policies adopted by the United Nations and the
African Union. Those trainings would complement past
trainings organized by the Cairo Centre this year, with
the possibility of expanding the scope of that training in
future. In addition to providing mobile training teams
to provide in-mission training on the issues of fighting
sexual exploitation and abuse, we are also committed,

19-1324755/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

07/05/2019

through Cairo Centre, to translate into Arabic training
materials on the protection of civilians.

the ground, especially with women, children and
vulnerable groups.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the presidency
once again for convening this important meeting at a
highly critical and challenging time for peacekeeping
operations. This requires all of us to work collectively
to make peacekeeping operations more fit for their
purpose and better able to achieve their desired goal.

We also want to ensure that our troops are
equipped to address issues of sexual and gender-based
violence. Ireland is providing customized training
for peacekeeping contingents on the appropriate
investigation of these issues.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Nason (Ireland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having convened
today’s debate. Like Indonesia, my country has a long
and proud tradition of peacekeeping. For any troopcontributing country, keeping those we deploy to the
field safe will always be uppermost. Here I would like
to pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice on our behalf.
Safety matters not just to our peacekeepers on the
ground and to their Governments and loved ones, but
also to the wider support for peacekeeping missions
overall. That is why training and capacity-building
is so important and why Ireland’s Defence Forces
are deeply and increasingly engaged in this area. It
is also why Ireland has so strongly supported the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the shared Action for
Peacekeeping commitments. Training and capacitybuilding are keystones of that agenda, and driving
implementation is clearly a shared responsibility.
As we see it, the increasingly complex nature of
conflicts inevitably brings greater risks to the safety
and security of our brave peacekeepers. Whether it is
ensuring that our peacekeepers are safer or that missions
are more effective, the delivery of quality training and
capacity-building is fundamental. Put simply, it is not
really possible to have one without the other.
I want to briefly highlight some of the ways in
which my country, Ireland, is working to help build
capacity and respond to specific training needs.
Last month Ireland was pleased to host troops from
our fellow troop contributors for a training course on the
protection of civilians. The protection of civilians is not
an abstract concept for us. Our experience in more than
60 years of unbroken participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations has taught the importance
of peacekeepers engaging with communities on
56/69

As co-chair of the United Nations military
intelligence working group, Ireland is working to help
build a better intelligence picture of peacekeeping
environments, which can both help missions carry out
their mandates more effectively and also, importantly,
help to mitigate risks.
Ireland is currently also partnering with the United
Nations Mine Action Service to deliver two training
programmes that will equip personnel to deal with
explosive ordnance such as improvised explosive
devices and anti-personnel mines.
We see partnerships and sharing experiences
as key to identifying and, importantly, to bridging
capacity gaps. We want to ensure that the practical and
administrative aspects of deploying peacekeepers do
not act as a barrier to engagement. Ireland is working
to prepare a seminar on this very topic in Djibouti in
June. We must also work to maximize the opportunities
for collaboration and partnership with regional
organizations such as the African Union. In the context
of the European Union, Ireland has put forward a “food
for thought” paper, offering recommendations for
partner troop-contributing countries to work together
on deployment issues.
As we all know, the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations has a positive impact not just
on a mission itself but also on the local population our
peacekeepers serve. That is why Ireland works hard in
support of the Secretary-General’s uniformed genderparity strategy as we move to meet our own targets
and increase the numbers of women peacekeepers at
every level. We wish to use this opportunity to urge
partners to nominate women to participate in Ireland’s
predeployment training courses.
Safety in the field means that as troop contributors,
we, too, must hold our own peacekeepers to the highest
standards and stamp out any conduct that harms
the populations that we seek to protect. This we see
as fundamental to the credibility and legitimacy of
the Organization. The Prime Minister of Ireland,
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

An Taoiseach Leo Varadkar, is proud to be part of
the Secretary-General’s Circle of Leadership on the
prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations operations.
Peacekeeping is a part of Ireland’s identity here at
the United Nations. As our Taoiseach said here at the
United Nations last year, we in Ireland are as proud of
the blue beret as we are of the harp or the shamrock (see
S/PV.8382). In my country we have a Gaelic saying,
“Ar scáth a chéile a mhaireann na daoine”, which I
like to translate as: “We live in each other’s shelter,
not in each other’s shadow”. This is the message that
Irish peacekeepers live every day in the field, whether
protecting civilian populations or helping to build
the capacity of our fellow troop contributors. It is the
philosophy we would respect and live out if lucky
enough to be elected to sit at this table for 2021-2022.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
Let me commend Indonesia for making
peacekeeping, and especially the improvement of
safety and security and performance, a priority during
its presidency. This momentous debate allows us to
exchange views on such important topics as training
and capacity-building.
I say nothing new when I state that adequate training
improves the performance of peacekeepers and that, in
combination with good equipment, it enhances safety
and security and decreases the risk of fatalities. Both
predeployment training and in-mission training of high
quality are essential for the effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates.
However, there is a world to be won if we manage
to go from saying to doing.
In addressing the challenges that training and
capacity-building still face, I wish to focus on three
elements: first, the Action for Peacekeeping framework;
secondly, from commitments to action; and, thirdly,
good practices.

S/PV. 8521

First, the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative enjoys wide support
among Member States. We are also very encouraged by
the steps that the Secretariat is taking to advance the
Action for Peacekeeping agenda and guide these efforts.
The Declaration of Shared Commitments lays out what
needs to be done, and we know that implementation is
the hardest part of the improvement of United Nations
peacekeeping. We, the Member States, as well as the
Secretariat, must stay committed to and focused on the
implementation of the Declaration, our blueprint for all
further action.
Secondly, today, more than a year after the launch of
Action for Peacekeeping, we must stand together, focus
on the tasks we have set ourselves and persevere to get
the job done. If we want to strengthen our peacekeeping
missions and improve the safety and security of our
personnel, coordination is key.
There are many initiatives, and there is a need for
coherence and consistency. We therefore greatly value
the coordinating role of the Secretariat in aligning
all Action for Peacekeeping efforts and actions. We
encourage the Secretariat to play a proactive role
in identifying training needs and matching them
with the pledging countries. We therefore welcome
the development and operationalization of the light
coordination mechanism to deconflict training and
capacity-building programmes, which the Kingdom of
the Netherlands financially supports.
This brings me to my last point. One of the
Action for Peacekeeping focus areas for the Kingdom
of the Netherlands is training and performance. We
provide numerous trainings, often together with other
Member States, on a wide range of subjects, including
peacekeeping
military
intelligence,
protection
of civilians, United Nations police and gender in
operations, and we support the United Nations mobile
training teams.
Many initiatives have already been taken to
improve training and capacity-building. Along the way,
many lessons have been learned and improvements
made. Let us use those good practices as examples to
further enhance our actions and improve training and
capacity-building.
In conclusion, training and building the capacity
of our Blue Helmets will improve their performance
and enhance their safety and security, thereby reducing

19-1324757/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the risk of casualties. Let us build further on the good
initiatives that are already under way.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We would like to thank the
Indonesian presidency for organizing this debate, and the
Secretary-General, Lieutenant General Martins Filho
and Mr. Holmberg for their comprehensive briefings.
We also appreciate the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Marsudi, Foreign Minister of Indonesia, who was
with us here this morning.
Peacekeeping has always been one of the
essential tools available to the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That has been the case since the early 1950s, and
peacekeeping missions have been remarkably
successful in many ways. At the same time, in recent
years much has changed. The objectives and functions
of United Nations peacekeeping have changed
considerably over the years, and that has of course
had a significant impact on the training and support
required for peacekeepers. United Nations missions can
now be tasked with a much wider range of protection
activities, which can include military activities such as
ceasefires, withdrawals of foreign forces, cantonment
and force disarmament and demobilization. They may
also have to deal with national reconciliation, refugees,
humanitarian relief and local administration as well
as numerous other tasks. All of that means that the
mandates for peacekeeping missions must be carefully
and effectively defined, with clearly designated aims
and proposed achievements.
Investing in training and capacity-building
activities is critical to improving both the safety and the
performance of peacekeepers. Training and equipment
determine performance. Ethiopia, for example, has
well-established military and civilian training systems
for peacekeeping deployment. We strongly believe that
risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers can
be controlled and managed though effective training
and appropriate manoeuvres. That can also be applied
to enhancing the capacity of peacekeepers to deal
with threats to civilians, whether in or outside their
operational areas.
In addition to training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers, providing peacekeeping missions with
realistic mandates and sufficient resources remains
critical to their success. All missions need a combination
58/69

07/05/2019

of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping personnel and
the capacity to use equipment effectively to facilitate the
implementation of the mandate. Another requirement
is strong and competent leadership at all levels, along
with proper coordination, and that must also include
United Nations Headquarters. All of that is very
necessary for adequate peacekeeping performance. In
that connection, I want to emphasize that the Security
Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries,
Member States and the Secretariat must work together
to provide the necessary conditions for the deployment
of well-trained and properly equipped uniformed
personnel. The commitment to supporting the effective
development and provision of peacekeeping training
must include meeting the requirements for preparing
personnel prior to their deployment.
On the one hand, United Nations peacekeeping
missions are facing growing demands for greater
professionalism and delivering ever-increasing results.
That is simultaneously coupled with demands that
they ensure cost-effectiveness and operate with fewer
resources. That is simply not realistic. Mandates and
resource requirements for missions must be balanced
if they are to achieve their aims. It is only then that
the Security Council, the Secretariat and contributing
countries can assess and identify problems, address
gaps and determine the actual impact of delivery
and performance. The fact is that the capacity to
finance peacekeeping and the associated political
processes, and support it with the adequate provision
of technological capabilities, can make the difference
between success and failure for a mission. I want to
emphasize that Ethiopia understands from extensive
first-hand experience that peacekeeping operations
must be provided with adequate financial and human
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of
their mandated tasks. That must include the provision
of equipment and other assets. Gaps in capacity
and capability are major impediments to creating
peacekeeping operations that are fit for purpose.
Innovative approaches such as triangular
partnerships and co-deployments may help to change
some of the mistaken views of the performance of
troop- and police-contributing countries. For example,
Ethiopia is working closely with various partners,
including Indonesia, to prepare itself more effectively
for current and future global and regional peace and
security challenges. I want to underscore a comment
about the challenges we are facing made in the report
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8521

by former United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz entitled
Improving security of United Nations peacekeepers:

sets, capacities and roles. Training and capacitybuilding activities should start at the national level and
be supported and coordinated regionally and globally.

“The blue helmet and the United Nations flag no
longer offer ‘natural’ protection. Peacekeeping
environments now feature armed groups, terrorists,
organized crime, street gangs, criminal and
political exploitation and other threats.”

At the national level, Member States should ensure
that personnel are properly trained and screened
in order to enable them to best meet United Nations
standards. Viet Nam has endorsed the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and is ready to provide well-trained and
-equipped personnel. The predeployment preparation
and capacity-building of personnel are crucial to
their safety, security and effective performance. This
preparation must include adequate awareness pertinent
to the deployment environment, such as historical,
religious, ethnic, social, cultural and political
particularities. In-mission training can provide updates
later. The core predeployment training materials are
extremely useful and should continue to be updated
by the United Nations, with the assistance of relevant
countries and regional and international organizations.

Ethiopia has seen that first-hand in the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
we believe that the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative will provide a new impetus for
addressing the evolving challenges of peacekeeping
more effectively. I can also assure the Council that
Ethiopia is determined to remain at the forefront in
providing support for peacekeeping, including in
partnership with other troop- and police-contributing
countries. It will continue to supply well-trained
and -equipped uniformed personnel, with a greater
participation of women. Ethiopia currently has 800
women peacekeepers deployed in various missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to express my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and the
other briefers for their valuable insights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and the Kingdom of Thailand,
on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
The emerging challenges in the world today require
United Nations peacekeeping operations to be able to
respond in a faster, more timely and more effective way
to complex situations. At the same time, the safety and
security of United Nations personnel must be improved.
In that context, we share the view that adequate training
and capacity-building for peacekeepers is increasingly
important. Women peacekeepers must be given special
attention in order to equip them with particular skill

At the regional level, collaboration in training
and capacity-building can focus on the sharing of
information and best practices. Together with other
ASEAN countries, Viet Nam has been hosting
the Triangular Partnership Project for the Rapid
Deployment of Enabling Capabilities, organized by
the Department of Operational Support of the United
Nations Secretariat, with a view to strengthening the
capacities of peacekeepers in the region and beyond.
ASEAN countries contribute 5 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers. There is much to share and
learn from each other, including through strengthened
cooperation among peacekeeping training centres.
At the global level, the United Nations system
should continue to employ its whole-of-system
approach towards training and capacity-building,
especially through the partnership of shared
responsibility between the Security Council, the troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Training materials, standards and funding should be
up-to-date and supportive of countries’ peacekeeping
endeavours. At the same time, improving the security
and safety of United Nations personnel must be the
Organization’s top priority when working with all
countries and partners.
In conclusion, training and capacity-building are
crucial for the success of peacekeeping operations, and

19-1324759/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Viet Nam affirms its commitment to working with the
international community in this endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): With
the growing responsibilities of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in increasingly challenging
environments today, the widely endorsed Action for
Peacekeeping initiative recognizes the critical need
to rethink the way mission mandates are crafted and
implemented. Deploying better-trained and betterequipped personnel to the field is an important way of
coping with these mounting challenges. In this regard,
today’s open debate on enhancing the capabilities of
peacekeeping operations is timely, and I would like to
commend Indonesia for its leadership in moving this
important issue forward.
Today, I wish to make four points on training and
capacity-building. First, to deliver customized quality
training, training programmes should be designed on
the basis of a thorough and in-depth analysis of both
the mandate and local context where the mission is
operating. The analysis could include the host country’s
priorities; threats to the safety of peacekeepers;
overall capability of the mission, especially the gaps;
composition and capacity of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs); and the command and control of the
mission, to name just a few elements.
To this end, it is critical to strengthen the capacity
of the Secretariat for data collection and analysis, as
well as planning and review. The Security Council
can also engage with relevant stakeholders, including
TCCs, missions and host Governments for this purpose.
In this regard, we welcome the Secretariat’s efforts
aimed at developing an integrated performance-policy
framework and comprehensive performance-assessment
system in accordance with resolution 2436 (2018).
Better assessment of whole-of-mission performance
and capabilities would help address capability gaps,
propose corrective actions and direct resources where
most needed.
Secondly, the Secretariat and Member States
should ensure that all personnel — both civilian and
military — are properly trained and equipped. Some
TCCs may have too-limited resources to adequately
train and equip their peacekeepers. It is our collective
responsibility to provide them with the necessary
support in terms of training and capabilities, while
60/69

07/05/2019

holding them accountable to proper conduct and
delivery of mandates. In this regard, we welcome the
efforts of the Secretariat and Member States to provide
the relevant support to TCCs through innovative
approaches, including triangular partnerships and light
coordination mechanisms.
With more than 600 peacekeepers currently
deployed in South Sudan and Lebanon, the Republic
of Korea has been consistent in its efforts to properly
train and equip its peacekeepers. And at the last
Peacekeeping Ministerial, we pledged to host five
United Nations training courses for other interested
TCCs and provide all-terrain, mine-resistant vehicles
to support peacekeeping operations in Africa. This
year, we will also host a senior mission leaders course
to train prospective leaders.
Thirdly, peacekeepers should be better trained
for engaging with the local community, and training
guidelines should be produced for this purpose. Long
guided by the conviction that genuine peace stems
from the minds of people, Korean peacekeepers have
been working hard to win the hearts and minds of local
people. Such efforts have helped deliver on mandates,
while enhancing their own security. Many of today’s
conflicts escalate from local disputes over land,
resources and authority over a district, and community
engagement would help to address these local conflict
dynamics. In this regard, mission personnel should
be encouraged to possess in-depth knowledge of
host societies, cultures and institutions, as well as a
command of local languages. This resonates with the
strong call of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for a shift towards a people-centred
approach for more effective peace operations.
Finally, building the capacity of the host country’s
security sector is as important as — or even more
important than — the training and capacity-building of
United Nations peacekeepers. It would help accelerate
the exit strategy of the mission, while preventing
relapse into conflict after its withdrawal.
Training and capacity-building are only a part of the
puzzle to achieve safer and stronger peace operations.
As set out in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
they need to be looked together with other issues in a
holistic manner. It is for this reason that we welcome
the initiative of the Secretariat to create a web-tracking
tool to monitor the progress of the implementation of
the initiative. The Republic of Korea, together with
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Ethiopia and Norway, as chairs of the Group of Friends
of Peace Operations, will continue to support the
Secretariat’s efforts to translate the commitments of
Member States pursuant to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative into concrete actions.
In closing, I would like to assure the Security
Council that, as the tenth largest financial contributor
to the United Nations peacekeeping budget and the
next host of the Peacekeeping Ministerial, the Republic
of Korea remains committed to strengthening the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to extend my delegation’s sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for Indonesia’s presiding over the
Security Council this month. I would also extend our
sincere gratitude for your having convened this timely
and important debate.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Thailand on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), respectively.
Malaysia reaffirms its support for the central role
played by the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers and to the devoted
men and women who have served or are serving with
unwavering dedication and great distinction in our
endeavours to keep peace.
As United Nations personnel are often deployed in
volatile and perilous locations, they must have the right
aptitude, strong survival skills and unquestionable
competency if they are to be effective. This is important
owing to the more comprehensive peacekeeping
mandates we are seeing today, which encompass the
necessity to protect civilians, address sexual violence
and overcome challenges to human rights, inter alia.
Malaysia therefore believes that a common training
module prior to their deployment is vital for the safety
and security of our peacekeepers.
“People, machines and methods” are three elements
embedded in Malaysian peacekeeper training and
capacity-building. We believe the right people with the
right machines coupled with the right methods allows
United Nations peacekeepers to perform as demanded.

S/PV. 8521

“People” focuses on men and women’s ability to
operate in a peacekeeping environment in which they
are expected to fully engage in winning the heart and
minds of the local population.
“Machines” refers to a combination of capabilities
and technology that will be employed during the
conduct of operations to enable our peacekeepers to be
more effective, alert, aware and efficient.
Meanwhile, “methods” are doctrines, tactics,
technique, procedure and skill sets that every
peacekeeper must possess during his or her day-to-day
undertaking. This element will be further reinforced
during predeployment training and is specifically
tailored to each mission’s requirements.
In addition, Malaysia strongly believes that women
peacekeepers play a vital role in the success of a
mission. To demonstrate Malaysian women’s active
participation in support of United Nations efforts in
maintaining world peace and security, Malaysia is
currently deploying four female military observers
from the rank of Captain to Lieutenant Colonel; that
figure is 75 per cent higher compared to the previous
year. Further, Malaysia has also consistently deployed
40 female peacekeepers in our battalion in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Besides that, there
are about 25 female operators who are currently being
deployed at the Malaysian mission field hospital for
humanitarian assistance in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh.
As all of us are well aware, each peacekeeping
mission is unique and distinct. We need to take into
account various challenges on the ground — such as the
mission’s components, environment and coordination
among various stakeholders, particularly the host
nation — in our collective efforts to ensure better
peacekeeping operations. Malaysia also believes that it
is important for us to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations peacekeeping operations with
regional and subregional organizations for greater
peacekeeping performance.
To conclude, Malaysia reiterates its support
for enhancing and strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We reaffirm our full
cooperation with all stakeholders because we sincerely
believe that it is only by working together that we
can ensure that all peacekeeping missions are fit-forpurpose and cost-effective.

19-1324761/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

07/05/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.

Performance should be the primary basis for the rotation
of contingents from different TCCs/PCCs.

Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, Nepal congratulates
and commends the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important debate to accord peacekeeping the
priority it deserves.

Sixth, the gender perspective should be incorporated
into training, and specific training should be developed
for female peacekeepers. Zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse should be strictly ensured.

With a contribution of over 140,000 troops and
police since 1958, Nepal is proud of being a reliable
and credible partner of the United Nations in its
peacekeeping operations. However, this unwavering
stand has its own cost. In its journey of peacekeeping,
Nepal has lost 74 brave compatriots in the noble
cause of international peace and stability. This loss
always reminds us of the importance of training and
capacity-building to ensuring the safety and security of
the peacekeepers.

Seventh, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations should be revitalized to make it more
effective in providing policy guidance to peace
operations,
considering
current
peacekeeping
challenges. Similarly, the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Operational Support
should assume an active role in ensuring common
standards of the peacekeeping training provided by
different national, regional and international training
centres. In this regard, Nepal offers its national
peacekeeping training centre to serve as a regional
centre of excellence in its region.

In that context, my delegation wishes to make the
following points concerning the safety, security and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers:
First, the mandates of peace missions should be
clearly communicated to the peacekeepers on the
ground and clear expectations of their performance
must be spelled out.
Second, the mandates and the peacekeepers’
capacities must be continuously aligned in view
of evolving ground realities, with the Secretariat
deploying mobile training support teams of experienced
peacekeepers from troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs), as may be necessary, to provide
training on the mission-specific mandates, rules of
engagement and the use of force, among other things.
Third, mission-specific performance indicators
should be drawn in the light of the mandates, ground
realities and timely availability of appropriate resources,
as well as obstacles and shortfalls.
Fourth, performance should be considered as
a leadership responsibility and mission leadership
should be held accountable for the whole-of-mission
performance, as well as for monitoring the performance
of the troops and police. Accordingly, the outstanding
performance of the peacekeepers should be rewarded to
boost their morale.
Fifth, at no time should the absence of national
caveats make any contingent prone to unreasonable
tasking, deployments, rotations or scapegoating.
62/69

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
urgency of timely reimbursement to the TCCs/PCCs,
without which capacity-building and improving the
performance of peacekeepers would be affected in a
highly adverse manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Sir, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and for
having taken the initiative of convening this important
debate on investing in peacekeeping operations,
training and capacity-building. In so doing, Indonesia
is demonstrating its commitment to an improved and
robust peacekeeping operation through the enhanced
capacity and professionalism of peacekeepers. We
highly appreciate the invaluable contribution of
Indonesia to peacekeeping operations in Africa.
Also, let me pay tribute to our personnel in green
and blue helmets serving in African Union (AU)
and United Nations peace operations under extreme
circumstances to protect civilians and sustain peace.
Certainly, today’s debate is timely, as it is taking
place against the backdrop of an ever-increasing
engagement on the ground by the United Nations,
in close partnership with regional and subregional
organizations, for conflict prevention, management
and resolution. We cannot overstate the urgent need
to look at the overall operations of peacekeepers and
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

agree on practical measures to enhance their capacity
and efficiency to address the challenges they face in
maintaining peace, security and stability. Against this
background, allow me to focus my intervention on the
following three points.
First, the African Union attaches great importance
to this issue for multiple reasons. As Council members
are aware, currently 7 out of the 14 peacekeeping
missions are in Africa. Peacekeeping operations alone
account for approximately 80 per cent of all authorized
uniformed personnel approved for United Nations
peacekeeping missions. As of 31 December 2018,
African States represented 18 of the top 30 contributors
of uniformed personnel in peacekeeping operations.
Almost 50 per cent of all uniformed peacekeepers come
from AU member States and, as of 31 December 2018,
the African region contributed 63.4 per cent of women
in United Nations peacekeeping.
Therefore, Africa deserves to be supported by all
means to address the gaps that need to be overcome in
peacekeeping, as well as the difficulties our peacekeepers
face every day while they navigate the difficult terrain
of their mandates, less equipped and with only their
determination. Our peacekeepers deserve to be better
enabled and qualified to face their difficult assignments
and discharge their responsibilities effectively.
Secondly, the AU has exerted serious efforts in
enhancing the performance and effectiveness of our
peace support operations, including our approaches in
ensuring the protection of civilians. AU peace support
operations have been entrusted with mandates that
include the protection of civilians and engagement
in combat operations to ensure that those mandates
meet the type of robust and comprehensive responses
required to address conflict challenges — in line
with AU doctrine — and noting the volatile contexts
and asymmetric threats that peace support operations
personnel are exposed to.

S/PV. 8521

response to, sexual exploitation and abuse in peace
support operations. Both policies aim to promote the
professional conduct of AU peace support operations
personnel and reinforce the AU’s comprehensive efforts
to protect civilians. They also reinforce the Peace and
Security Council’s directive that the mandates of all
peace support operations should include the protection
of civilians.
In addition, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union issued a directive in May 2018 that
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
be incorporated into the African Union’s work on the
protection of civilians and implemented within the AU’s
broader compliance and accountability framework.
That directive will enable the African Union to ensure
a level of comprehensiveness that will continue to help
us to guarantee performance and effectiveness.
My third, and final, point is that we would like to
underscore the important elements that, in our view,
can boost the performance of our peacekeepers to
effectively protect civilians and discharge their other
important duties. First, troop- and police-contributing
countries should provide the best of their personnel and
capabilities for peace operations. Secondly, mandating
authorities like the United Nations and the African
Union should provide realistic mandates and all the
prerequisite means to enable our missions to effectively
implement their tasks and protect civilians, while
assisting countries to move from conflict to sustainable
peace, and thereafter to engage in exit strategies.

The African Union has been consistent in striving
to guarantee joint training and human rights standards
in its peace support operations in line with the
AU’s compliance and accountability framework for
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, and conduct and discipline.

That brings me to the issue of financing and the
need for the Security Council to respond positively to
the AU’s long-standing and legitimate calls for access to
United Nations assessed contributions to fund African
peace support operations. We remain convinced that,
by providing responses to multiple threats to peace
and security, those operations are doing so on behalf
of the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call on the Security Council to take a fresh look at
that issue in view of the ongoing efforts by the African
Union, including the recent operationalization of the
Peace Fund.

In partnership with the United Nations, the
African Union adopted two important policies in
November 2018, on conduct and discipline in peace
support operations; and on the prevention of, and

In conclusion, we recognize that neither the United
Nations nor the AU alone will be able to guarantee the
highest level of performance and effectiveness of AU
peacekeepers. That is why we embrace the Secretary-

19-1324763/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
call for an enhanced strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations to provide
the means for effective performance, which, together
with the support of our member States, should give us
the optimal ability to implement required mandates
and tasks.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and for organizing
this very important open debate. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
informative and highly pertinent remarks.
My delegation associates itself with statements
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
Sustaining global peace requires a focused, wellcoordinated approach, particularly as it relates to
post-conflict situations. Having been the recipient of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission, Cambodia knows
very well the difficulties that accompany a country’s
transition from conflict to a stable and prosperous
society. Cambodia remains committed to international
peace and security through its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts. Over the past decade,
Cambodia has contributed thousands of Blue Helmets
to United Nations peacekeeping operations worldwide.
We have deployed our peacekeepers in different
fields, ranging from engineering, demining and military
police to military observers and military officers. Our
peacekeepers have served across the world in some of
the most demanding situations, including the Central
African Republic, Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Lebanon, Mali and Chad, among other missions.
Cambodian peacekeepers do their utmost to safeguard
and protect local populations. Peacekeeping duties
demand the highest sacrifice from those who serve.
Regrettably, nine Cambodian peacekeepers have lost
their lives. In that connection, greater efforts must be
made to prevent peacekeeper casualties, including by
providing increased training.
It is impossible to ignore that, as peacekeeping
operations are becoming increasingly complex,
64/69

07/05/2019

peacekeepers are finding themselves in challenging
situations, in which they lack sufficient logistical
support and financing. To alleviate the risks posed
to our peacekeepers and ensure the effectiveness of
operations, peacekeeping missions must be accorded the
necessary resources and provided with access to modern
technology and information. Providing peacekeepers
with adequate resources, including through reliable
funding, is of paramount importance. For peacekeeping
missions to be successful, all peacekeeping operations
must have access to predictable, steady financing
streams. The human and economic cost of conflict is
enormous. After all, preserving peace for the future is
a much better deal than resolving conflicts without end.
To ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and the people they serve, United Nations
peacekeepers must be adequately trained. Cambodia
fully supports the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and, having endorsed the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, is fully engaged
in the predeployment training of its personnel, which
focuses on developing the capabilities that are required
for them to effectively perform their duties.
My delegation considers the training of
peacekeepers as an integral part of mission success and
an investment in learning, improved performance and
the effective fulfilment of mandates. Cambodia has two
predeployment training facilities that are supported by
the United Nations, the United States, France, China,
Japan and India. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to those countries for their
valuable support.
In that context, senior management training
should be strengthened to ensure that peacekeepers
are commanded by capable and competent leaders.
Such training should cover understanding mission
mandates, the United Nations system, international
humanitarian law, dispute resolution skills and strategic
analysis, particularly as it relates to challenges within
specific missions.
Peacekeepers should be provided with improved
training on communications, including courses in
English and French, as well as training on negotiation
and cultural sensitivity. The integration of training
efforts should be encouraged, while retaining a focus
on clearly defined strategic priorities in peacekeeping
operations. Such synergies will enhance learning
methods and promote the knowledge of those who serve.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In conclusion, Cambodia is committed to working
with the United Nations and its partners to ensure that
peacekeepers are provided with critical training and
development resources to enable them to perform their
tasks successfully in the future. Consistent financing
and capacity-building resources will promote further
positive change in peacekeeping operations, ensuring
the safety and security of those who serve and the
people they protect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Brink (Australia): I would like to begin by
thanking Indonesia and Foreign Minister Marsudi
for the choice of the topic for this open debate, which
enables all of us to focus in a concrete way on achieving
the peace that we seek.
As the demands of modern peacekeeping grow
more complex, training and capacity-building must
keep pace with emerging requirements. Effective
partnerships, improved information-sharing and
reporting mechanisms are the foundation for better
peacekeeping performance. Peacekeeping is not a
static phenomenon. Today’s missions operate in a very
different environment from 1948, when Australia first
deployed to support a United Nations peace operation.
Australia welcomes progress to implement the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which we see as
a blueprint for enhancing performance, safety and
security. We must continue momentum and translate
rhetoric into action. Sustaining peace demands
innovation. Today, successful mandate implementation
requires a continual evolution of training and significant
improvements to joint planning and analysis.
On partnerships, Australia recognizes their power
to improve peacekeeping capability and performance.
Strong partnerships at the bilateral, multilateral and
regional levels provide the best opportunity to address
key training and capability gaps.
Since 1993, Australia has deployed instructors to
support the development of peacekeeping capabilities
in other countries. Mobile training teams are a costeffective way of sharing the experiences of troopcontributing countries and building capacity. The
Australian Defence Force Peace Operations Training
Centre also provides high-quality multinational
training. Australia has sought to increase the
participation of women in peacekeeping, and we fund

S/PV. 8521

women from a range of countries to attend peacekeeping
training courses.
Australia’s peacekeeping cooperation with Viet
Nam is one example of an effective partnership in
practice. Together, we have worked to improve language
capabilities to prepare medical personnel to deploy to
South Sudan. Our emerging partnership with Fiji and
New Zealand will also aim to strengthen capability
through training and shared expertise.
Improved information-sharing is also critical to
allocate resources effectively against the needs of
troop-contributing countries. The Secretariat’s light
coordination mechanism is a welcome step towards
better coherence of training and capacity-building
efforts. Improved access to the latest developments
in peacekeeping policy and lessons learned will
allow Member States to provide more targeted and
mission-specific training.
Australia sees great potential in online training as a
mechanism to bring predeployment training to a wider
audience. We have supported the Peace Operations
Training Institute’s development of an e-learning
programme, which we consider to be a valuable example.
Finally, Australia supports efforts to embed an
integrated performance framework across missions and
enhance data-driven reporting. A clear understanding
of mission effectiveness will highlight where training
efforts can be focused to improve performance.
Evidence shows that well-trained and well-equipped
personnel give peacekeeping missions a greater chance
to succeed. Australia looks to all Member States and
the United Nations system to work together to ensure
that training and capacity-building efforts meet the
demands of modern peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Security Council presidency
of Indonesia for this month and thank the Indonesian
leadership for arranging this timely debate and for
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4
earlier this morning.
Peacekeeping has been a flagship undertaking of
the United Nations over the past 70 years and remains
one of its most visible contributions to multilateralism.
In the maintenance of international peace and security,

19-1324765/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

07/05/2019

we take pride in our modest contribution of troops and
police to United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
currently have over 6,700 peacekeepers in 10 different
peacekeeping missions around the world.

for peacekeepers to work in different appointments
and responsibilities. Keeping that in view, we train
our peacekeepers to suit any particular United Nations
peace-support environment.

We are also gradually increasing our female
peacekeepers, in keeping with our commitment
to the United Nations. Since 2010, we have been
sending 150 to 200 female peacekeepers every year.
So far, Bangladesh has deployed over 1,600 female
peacekeepers, and in 2018 Bangladesh stood fifth
among the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the
police-contributing countries (PCCs) in contributing
female peacekeepers. We currently send female
peacekeepers with all contingents.

I would now like to highlight three aspects of
training and capacity-building.

There have been several efforts in recent years to
strengthen United Nations peace operations. Of late, the
United Nations has unfolded many initiatives to face the
many challenges by which that multilateral endeavour
is beset. Bangladesh reiterates its strong support
for such efforts, including the Secretary-General’s
initiatives on peace and security reforms, the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, the Department of Peace
Operation’s (DPO) uniformed gender-parity strategy
and the shared commitments laid out by the Council.
Bangladesh has always strongly supported the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy against all
forms of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers.
Our Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina, is a member of the
Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. We
are also party to the Secretary-General’s voluntary
compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse.
Peace support operation training is an evolving
concept. Every field situation is unique, as are the
mandates and dynamics of conflict. In Bangladesh,
while setting our training module, we follow the
guidelines of DPO. We provide generic training to
our officers in their capacities both as observers
and as contingent members. In addition, mindful of
context-specific requirements, we provide tailor-made
predeployment training, including language courses.
Those are useful tools in winning the hearts and minds
of local populations.
We train our officers and men in a way that, in
addition to their security duties, they must be able
to understand the role of other agencies involved in
the mission and support the political objective of the
mandate. We receive requests from the United Nations
66/69

First, on priorities for training needs, Bangladesh
organizes contingents for deployment based on the
United Nations format for 6 months. During that
time, contingents continue rigorous training, as per
United Nations-specified training curriculum. At the
Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support Operations
and Training, the training curriculum consists of
predeployment training, the potential observers
and staff officers course, the warrant officers and
non-commissioned officers peace support operations
course and the contingent members course. The
training curriculum is regularly reviewed, as per the
latest guidelines and policies of the Integrated Training
Service of DPO. The Bangladesh Institute of Peace
Support Operations and Training is also working to
incorporate the newly formulated United Nations
Military Units Manuals.
We are also aware of the barriers for women, including
sexual exploitation and abuse. We have therefore made
awareness of sexual abuse and exploitation cases an
important component of our predeployment training.
Considering the improvised explosive device (IED)
threat, Bangladesh also conducts IED training. We are
also providing training to our peacekeepers to handle
modern equipment, such as mine-protected armoured
personal carriers and medical-related training.
Secondly, partnerships are critical to the success of
United Nations peace operations. In many missions, the
United Nations continues to work alongside regional
organizations and bilateral partners for the delivery
of mission mandates. That is also true for training and
capacity-building initiatives. We believe that training is
not only an important component of peacekeeping, but
a shared responsibility as well.
On our part, last year Bangladesh and Germany
together conducted a training-of-trainers course on
IEDs. In December 2018, Bangladesh also hosted
a seminar on achieving operational readiness, in
collaboration with the United States Pacific Command
and DPO for the TCCs from the Asia-Pacific region.
The aim of the seminar was to achieve and enhance
operational readiness in peacekeeping operations.
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Bangladesh will also conduct a comprehensive
protection of civilian’s course from 9 to 20 June in at
the Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support Operations
and Training, under the supervision of the Integrated
Training Services of the United Nations Headquarters,
in which officers from 14 countries are expected to
participate. Bangladesh is committed to continuing
such collaborations.
Thirdly, on practices, despite our continuous efforts
to develop troop capacities, there remain training gaps
in the areas of human rights, the safety and protection
of troops and civilians and gender violence. Sharing
relevant experiences from other missions and the
recommendations of senior mission leaders is therefore
very important. There is also need for more data and
understanding on why instances of sexual exploitation
and abuse are occurring and whether the revision
of existing guidelines is required. Evidence-based
reports are also required to see whether any particular
mitigation measure can be put in place.
Training United Nations peacekeepers remains a
complex endeavour, as peacekeepers work in a foreign
country with a complex cultural and political situation.
Such training therefore requires cooperation and
partnerships among a range of stakeholders of various
standards. While the United Nations takes the lead in
instituting guiding principles for training and capacitybuilding, it is the responsibility of the individual
TCCs to prepare their peacekeepers for deployment
in the field. Strong collaboration is therefore a must
among the Secretariat, Member States, TCCs, PCCs
and the Security Council to ensure the comprehensive
management of training needs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and its excellent initiative of convening
this open debate, which allows us to discuss the central
issue of the training and capacity-building of staff
within peace operations.
Allow me also to acknowledge the brilliant
briefings delivered this morning by Secretary-General
António Guterres, Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues
Martins Filho, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization in the Democratic Republic

S/PV. 8521

of the Congo, and Mr. Björn Holmberg, Director of the
Challenges Forum International Secretariat.
Today’s open debate is in line with our common
desire, reaffirmed unequivocally in support of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, to place the performance
of peace operations at the centre of our concerns. That
very commendable ambition necessarily reflects the
need to dedicate to such operations well-trained and
well-equipped troops, with sufficient training in the
basics of humanitarian law.
Today’s exercise is all the more timely as
Blue Helmets now work in very complex security
environments, marked by an unprecedented level
of violence, exacerbated by asymmetrical threats,
endangering their own lives and those of the people
they are mandated to protect. Only with high-quality
operational readiness can peacekeepers properly
address such vulnerabilities and maintain moral
authority over negative forces. As a major contributor
country, Senegal has made a paradigm of that priority.
I would like to briefly share some of its good practices
in that regard.
First of all, the training of units in Senegal is
aimed at meeting the requirements for permanence,
comprehensiveness and adaptation to threats. The
methods are regularly evaluated and updated. Indeed,
the operational conditioning of units is systematic.
At the individual level, it allows for the maintenance
and consolidation of the specific capacities of core
activities. Collectively, the intrinsic value of the units
is assessed annually on the basis of strictly objective
criteria, taking into account, among other things, the
cohesion of units, their ability to serve, maintain their
equipment and build resilience to adversity. For peace
operations, therefore, regardless of the environment or
context of engagement, Senegal always has a wide range
of eligible units. Those selected to form contingents
are trained for at least four months in one of the five
tactical training centres located in Senegal, which best
reflects the conditions in the deployment mission.
The preparation of contingents is completed with
modules familiarizing them with the United Nations
standards of conduct, cross-cutting issues related to
gender, sexual abuse and exploitation, the customs and
habits of the host country and so on. Senegal’s tactical
training centres allow units to be trained for various
types of environments. The infrastructure currently
available is sufficient for meeting the needs of our

19-1324767/69

S/PV.8521

United Nations peacekeeping operations

military and police units alone. However, an ambitious
project is under way to increase their number, which
could eventually open them up to friendly contributing
countries in our subregion or elsewhere.
Lastly, the training modules are managed in a
dynamic process, as they are constantly enriched by
feedback from returning and readjusted contingents.
We take this opportunity to thank the Policy, Evaluation
and Training Division of the Department of Peace
Operations and all partners who work tirelessly to
build capacity through the many training programmes
they offer to contributing countries. However, while
the challenge of performance-oriented training remains
well understood, the Department of Peace Operations
nonetheless loses a key lever for quality control
of the troops at its disposal, by leaving the entire
training and certification process for contingents to
contributing countries.
The Department of Peace Operations may be
aware of that shortcoming as it now requires, prior to
deployment, a written document in which contributing
countries certify that all members of the contingent have
received adequate training and that none are subject to
allegations of sexual abuse and exploitation or ongoing
legal proceedings. However, that formal document
commits the contributing countries only in theory, as
it neither guarantees the contingent’s ability to cope on
the ground nor provides assurance that its members will
comply with the United Nations standards of conduct
during their stay in the mission.
To ensure better quality control of the operational
preparedness of contingents, it is essential that the
Department of Peace Operations be more involved in
the process by agreeing with the contributing countries
on the various training programmes, taking into
account the specificities of the area concerned and the
prerequisites for the unit and by ultimately confirming
the suitability of the contingent through a systematic
predeployment validation inspection, on the basis of
criteria agreed with the Member States.
In the same vein, we must consider the use of
modern technologies, where necessary. The experiences
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
68/69

07/05/2019

in the Central African Republic have shown that the
responsible use of such tools has a positive impact.
For its part, Senegal remains ready to share its
unique experience in the area of peacekeeping, including
through South-South and triangular cooperation. It
remains convinced that it is also essential to increase
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations,
in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). In addition,
taking into account the growing commitment and
quality of French-speaking countries in peacekeeping
operations, as well as the establishment of such
missions in that group of countries, primarily in
Africa, my delegation reaffirms the need to promote
multilingualism in the context of the missions.
In conclusion, as a major troop- and
police-contributing country, Senegal welcomes
the continued concern among actors, including
the Council, in the spirit of triangular dialogue, to
make peacekeeping operations more effective and
capable of meeting pressing current and future needs
and challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): Peacekeeping remains
the flagship agenda of the United Nations enterprise.
Peacekeeping operations and missions come with
high expectations. They have long been the signature
and most popular image of the United Nations. The
missions’ ability to protect not only civilians but also
United Nations peacekeepers and personnel is the
standard by which United Nations peacekeeping is
measured, affecting its legitimacy and credibility. Even
as the greatest credit to the United Nations has come
from peacekeeping, its biggest and deepest stains have
come from failing in the same.
Peacekeeping should not decide political outcomes,
but it does commit to establishing humane conditions
where they have ceased to exist. While a mission may
produce a political outcome, the containment or even
defeat of the murdering elements is acceptable because
it stops the carnage and rapine. Life and human dignity
are United Nations peacekeeping’s absolutes.
Today’s open debate, under the presidency of
Indonesia, is therefore a timely follow-up event after
the successful 2019 United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial a month ago. Continued dialogue and
debates on the subject are key to ensuring that the
19-13247

07/05/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Action for Peacekeeping initiative will succeed after
achieving near consensus on 24 mutual commitments
last September.
The Philippines welcomes the efforts of the
Department of Peace Operations to establish clear
performance standards and assessments based on regular
evaluations of military units, including on command and
control, the protection of civilians, conduct, discipline
and training. They enable an objective assessment
of whole-of-mission performance — civilian and
uniformed components, staff and leadership — through
data collection and analysis.
The Philippines reaffirms that peacekeeping
operations must be measured by the mandate to protect
civilians as the core criterion of success, with child
protection and combating sexual exploitation and abuse
as key elements. Predeployment training should be
tailored to respond to particular country-specific or
context-specific challenges of protecting civilians with
clear definitions of the responsibilities, opportunities
and constraints that will be faced by peacekeepers
in the field. But again, the safety of civilians is an
absolute and in no case shall it be sacrificed for any
other consideration.
Our Department of National Defence takes a strict
approach to cases of misconduct. The Armed Forces
of the Philippines makes sure that all its peacekeeping
contingents are deeply instilled with guidelines for
proper behaviour and conduct in the United Nations
mission area. As part of its predeployment and
in-mission training of personnel, the Armed Forces of

S/PV. 8521

the Philippines imposes the most stringent measures
in the selection of candidates and implements a system
of rewards and penalties for well-performing and
misbehaving personnel. The Philippines wishes to
submit the following.
First, the Philippines encourages Member States to
host centres of excellence in each region to support the
trainers in delivering training packages to troop- and
police-contributing countries, consistent with United
Nations standards and approaches.
Secondly, the Philippines believes that threat
analyses and data should be shared with other missions
to improve the safety and security of peacekeeping
personnel and, foremost, that of civilians.
Thirdly, on the ability and authority of the Force
Commander to appropriately respond to emergency
situations on the ground without the need to consult with
mission legal advisers, the Philippines supports the call
to limit national caveats from host States addressed to
Force Commanders overseeing peacekeeping missions.
Fourthly, the Philippines supports the increased
deployment of women United Nations peacekeepers,
including in the highest posts. There is no debate
about their pre-eminent qualification for any aspect of
peacekeeping operations.
The Philippines has never failed in its peacekeeping
commitments and commits to a larger presence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

19-1324769/69
