United Nations

S/PV.6217

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6217th meeting
Friday, 13 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-60612 (E)

*0960612*

S/PV.6217

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Liechtenstein, the
Netherlands,
New
Zealand,
Spain,
Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by His Excellency Mr. Ranko Vilović, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism;
His Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004); and myself, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and Taliban and associated individuals and
entities.
I shall first like to give the floor to Mr. Ranko
Vilović, who will make a joint statement on behalf of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Thereafter,
he will give a briefing in his capacity as Chairman of

2

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): On behalf of the Chairmen
of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), which deal with the issue of
terrorism, I would like to give an update on the
continued cooperation among the Committees and their
expert groups.
During the past six months, the Al-Qaida and
Taliban 1267 Sanctions Committee, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540 Committee
and their respective expert groups have increased
cooperation, as requested by the Security Council in
recent resolutions pertaining to the three Committees,
notably in resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and
1822 (2008).
The three Committees attach great importance to
coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups, namely, the Monitoring Team, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the 1540 Committee experts. The Committees
welcome the continuing efforts of the expert groups to
develop common strategies on areas of common
concern, to organize joint workshops, to coordinate
their participation in conferences and joint country
visits, and to exchange information on their activities.
The Committees encourage their expert groups to
further enhance their exchange of information and
coordination with regard to capacity-building,
assistance requests and the delivery of technical
assistance activities. In that context, I would also like
to recall that cooperation and coordination would be
facilitated by the co-location of the experts in the
framework of the Capital Master Plan.
The three expert groups have continued to
implement the common strategy on dealing with
non- or late-reporting States through exchanges of
information and joint visits, when appropriate, and in
assisting Member States in submitting their responses
to the three Committees on their implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Under that
strategy, the three expert groups have jointly
participated in two workshops organized by the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. One of those was a
workshop for 11 States from the Middle East region

09-60612

S/PV.6217

and the other was for 13 States from the Caribbean and
Latin American region. An expert from CTED
participated in the regional workshop for Central
American States organized by the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which was held in Costa
Rica from 8 to 10 September. Those workshops
continue to provide an excellent opportunity for the
three expert groups to assist Member States in
understanding the differing but complementary roles
and mandates of the three Committees.
The expert groups have continued to cooperate on
issues regarding the implementation of relevant
resolutions by States of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Experts from CTED and the 1540 experts attended the
subregional workshop on counter-terrorism, legislative
initiatives and international cooperation held in Suva,
Fiji, from 1 to 2 June 2009. They also attended the
annual meeting of the Pacific Working Group on
Counter-Terrorism, which was also held in Suva, on
3 June 2009.
In addition to those workshops, the three expert
groups are exploring the use of common video
conferences. The Committees believe that such
workshops and interactive discussions with officials
from capitals are very important tools for enhancing
dialogue with Member States, to help improve
understanding of the distinct, although connected,
mandates of the three Committees and to assist
Member States in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions.
After presenting the common strategy to engage
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, entities and agencies, which is still
under consideration, the Monitoring Team, CTED and
the 1540 Committee experts have continued to work on
a common approach to relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations. The expert groups also
continue to coordinate their visits to Member States, to
explore whether those visits could be conducted
jointly, and to coordinate their participation at relevant
conferences. When an expert group does not participate
in a visit, they exchange information on the Member
State that is to be visited. In addition, the three expert
groups also share their reports on their visits, whenever
possible. Since the last joint meeting, Monitoring Team
members have participated in one CTC visit, which
was their fifteenth joint trip.

09-60612

The three expert groups also continue to
contribute to each other’s work and coordinate it
within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which was
established to ensure overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and to help implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The expert
groups contribute to the work of several CTITF
working groups, and the Monitoring Team and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) have
assumed leading functions.
In addition to the abovementioned activities,
there are regular meetings of the expert groups in New
York. Moreover, when CTC organizes briefings in the
framework of its official meetings, the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Committee experts are also invited
to participate. The Chairmen of the 1267 and 1540
Committees, the Executive Director of CTED, the
Coordinator of the Monitoring Team and members of
the 1540 Committee Expert Group attended the Eighth
Meeting of the Heads of Special Services, Security
Agencies and Law Enforcement Organization to
discuss counter-terrorism matters in Irkutsk, Russian
Federation, from 23 to 25 June 2009. The Chairmen
and expert groups of the CTC and 1267 Committee
participated in the open meeting of the 1540
Committee for comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), organized
by the 1540 Committee together with the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and held at United Nations
headquarters from 30 September to 2 October 2009.
The three Chairmen and respective expert groups also
jointly participated in the International Workshop for
National Counter-Terrorism Focal Points on the theme
“Better linking national and global counter-terrorism
efforts”, which took place in Vienna on 12 and
13 October 2009. As more than one hundred
representatives from Member States were present at
that workshop, the participation of the three Chairmen
was a useful opportunity to raise awareness about the
mandates and current activities of the three
Committees.
On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table has been issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees and their expert
groups. That table has served as a useful tool for
Member States, as it has helped them to better

3

S/PV.6217

understand the specificities and complementarities of
our work. The updated table has been posted on our
respective websites and will be distributed today.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors continue to be a
threat to international peace and security. Cooperation
is a crucial element in the efforts to counter the threat
of terrorism, including the threat from nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons for terrorist purposes.
The three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
and their respective expert groups are committed to
continuing to cooperate and coordinate their work,
within their respective mandates, in order to contribute
to an effective and efficient approach within the overall
United Nations framework and within the broader
efforts of the international community. In this respect,
the Committees look forward to receiving further
guidance from the Council on areas of common interest
in order to better coordinate counter-terrorism efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Vilović for his
briefing.
I once again ask the Permanent Representative of
Croatia to take the floor to deliver a second statement,
in his capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001).
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), I have
the honour to brief the Council on the work of the
Committee since the previous briefing, provided on
26 May 2009.
During the past six months, the Committee has
pursued its activities in accordance with its programme
of work. Last June, the Committee adopted and
submitted to the Council an interim review of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), in
which it assessed the assistance received from CTED
in its efforts to promote and monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), with special
emphasis on the areas identified in resolution 1805
(2008). The Committee also included recommendations
on the future work of CTED.
Regarding the fundamental part of the
Committee’s mandate, I am pleased to report to the
Council and to the wider membership that the
Committee has finalized the analysis and adoption of

4

the preliminary implementation assessments of all
Member States except one, whose assessment should
be adopted in the near future. This stocktaking exercise
is a multi-year process that has required the continuous
engagement of the Committee, in its various
compositions, and the continuous expert support of
CTED. I should like to commend all those involved in
this effort. The cooperation of Member States has also
been instrumental, and I call on them to remain
committed to the dialogue with the Committee and
CTED in this ongoing exercise.
In this context, let me remind the Council that
stocktaking is carried out in stages, both at the level of
three subcommittees chaired by France, the Russian
Federation and Viet Nam, respectively — and at the
level of the Committee as a whole. The Committee
deliberates upon the recommendations prepared by
CTED with respect to every Member State. The
Committee may then request additional information on
identified shortfalls in a particular Member State’s
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) or invite the
Permanent Representative to a meeting of the relevant
subcommittee, at which the Member State may be
reminded of its obligation to implement the resolution.
Alternatively, the relevant subcommittee may ask why
a particular Member State has been unable to respond
to the Committee’s communications, or it may
encourage the Permanent Representative to explore
avenues for CTED to acquire new updates or additional
information. The Committee has already finalized 46
files within the framework of the current stocktaking
exercise. More will be completed this year, and the
current exercise will be completed in 2010. In this
regard, I wish to stress that the Committee and CTED
stand ready to assist Member States, wherever
possible, in the preparation and submission of their
responses and further information on their efforts to
implement the resolution.
CTED has also prepared and submitted to the
Committee an updated version of its annual survey on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
Member States. This global survey is an assessment of
the implementation of the resolution by Member
States, broken down by region and subregion. It also
draws conclusions about progress made in this regard
and about any possible gaps in implementation in key
areas, notably counter-terrorism legislation, counterfinancing of terrorism, law enforcement, border
control, international cooperation and human rights.

09-60612

S/PV.6217

The
global
survey
also
contains
priority
recommendations, with respect to each region, for
future action by the Committee. It is currently before
the Committee and should be submitted to the Council
before the end of 2009.
The Committee has continued to organize and
conduct an intensive schedule of visits to Member
States, with their consent. These country visits are a
fundamental component of the Committee’s efforts to
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). In accordance with the more flexible
approach introduced under its revised organizational
plan, CTED, acting on the Committee’s behalf,
conducts not only comprehensive visits aimed at
analysing all aspects of a Member State’s
implementation efforts, but also shorter, more targeted
visits that focus on one or two specific aspects of the
resolution. The revised plan also calls upon CTED to
conduct regional visits and missions aimed at analysing
examples of good practice or addressing regional
vulnerabilities.
Pursuant to this more flexible approach, the rate
of visits has increased significantly, thereby enabling
the Committee to engage more deeply with a wider
range of States from all regions of the world. Over the
past six months, for example, the Committee has
concluded successful full-fledged or focused on-site
visits to Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Ghana, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, New Zealand, Oman and
Uzbekistan.
In September, the Committee initiated, on the
basis of a CTED proposal, a series of thematic
discussions of all major areas of implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Background documentation for
those discussions was prepared by CTED. The
Committee has already held in-depth discussions on
technical assistance and on international legal
cooperation. Before the end of 2009, the Committee
will discuss issues related to border security, arms
trafficking, law enforcement and best practices in the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).
The Committee and CTED have also worked to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance. In this context, the Committee continues to
look for opportunities to match current and potential
donors with recipients in order to enhance the dialogue
between the donor community and recipient States and

09-60612

to further the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee has, in particular, enhanced its
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
of the Group of Eight (CTAG) by meeting with local
CTAG representatives within the framework of most
visits and by promoting a broader overall dialogue
between CTED and CTAG.
The Committee also maintains on its website a
technical assistance matrix and a directory of
assistance programmes. Corresponding to the
Committee’s request that CTED work to strengthen
regional cooperation on counter-terrorism in South
Asia, the Executive Directorate recently held two
workshops in this region. First, acting jointly with the
World Bank, it held a workshop for parliamentarians in
Pakistan on the importance of legislation on combating
the financing of terrorism. Secondly, acting together
with donors and other relevant partner organizations, it
facilitated a regional workshop for police and
prosecutors on cross-border cooperation, held in
Bangladesh.
In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to remind them that any
measures taken to combat terrorism must comply with
all their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. In this regard, CTED ensures that
there are relevant human rights references in all PIAs,
that relevant issues are raised in the course of the
country visits, and that outreach activities are
undertaken with potential donors — including donors
already engaged in capacity-building activities on a
broader basis — to help them focus their work on
enhancing institution-building and strengthening the
rule of law.
The Committee has also continued to include in
its dialogue with Member States discussion of their
efforts to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far,
a total of 104 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
This represents an increase since our previous report to
the Security Council. The Committee will continue to
encourage those States that have not yet done so to
submit the relevant information to the Committee as
soon as possible. The Committee also continues to
encourage Member States to become parties to and
implement the 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments.

5

S/PV.6217

With respect to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Committee and CTED
continue to participate actively in and support all
relevant
activities
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF). CTED co-chairs
the Working Group on Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism and also participates in the work
of two other CTITF working groups, which deal with
countering-financing of terrorism and with human
rights and counter-terrorism. In view of the close
coordination between the staffs of CTITF and CTED,
the Committee supports the co-location of the CTITF
secretariat and CTED an a permanent basis. This would
promote closer collaboration between the two bodies
within the framework of their respective mandates,
save resources, and ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness in their common work.
The Committee and CTED continue to engage
actively with the other Security Council subsidiary
bodies working on counter-terrorism issues, namely,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and its Monitoring Team, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts. As a result of two recent workshops
for non- or late-reporting States, organized by the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, four States were able to
provide updates to the Committee on their
implementation efforts, and two visited States were
better prepared to receive the Committee’s on-site
visits. CTED has also continued to invite experts of the
other two bodies, as well as other relevant United
Nations entities and international and regional
organizations, to join its visits to Member States. This
practice continues to be highly valuable with respect to
overall cooperation between the Committee and other
counter-terrorism bodies, whether inside or outside the
United Nations system.
The Committee, through CTED, has also been
intensifying its work with international, regional and
subregional organizations in an effort to broaden and
deepen its constructive dialogue with those
organizations and to enhance cooperation, informationsharing and exchanges of expertise. In the reporting
period, the Committee has heard briefings by
representatives of several relevant organizations and
United Nations bodies, including the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the President of the Financial Action Task

6

Force and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, and the Committee is
a crucial instrument of the international community in
its efforts to address this scourge. The work of the
Committee greatly benefits from the constructive
engagement of its members. Support from and
cooperation with Member States remain a vital part of
the Committee’s work, with respect in particular to the
stocktaking exercise, and notably the identification of
the challenges faced by Member States in combating
terrorism and of areas in which the Committee can help
strengthen their capacities. I should therefore like to
thank all Member States for their willingness to engage
in constructive dialogue and for their essential
contributions, which enable the Committee to support
the Security Council in its efforts to respond to the
threat of terrorism.
Finally, I should like to express the Committee’s
gratitude to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of
CTED, and his team for their invaluable assistance. I
also greatly appreciate the continuous support provided
by the Secretariat.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Croatia for the joint statement he has
delivered on behalf of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), and for his briefing in his capacity as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001).
I now give the floor to Mr. Jorge Urbina,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica): As Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to brief the
Security Council on the main developments in the
work of the Committee covering the six-month period
since the last joint briefing on 26 May 2009
(S/PV.6128). The focus is mainly on the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and on the open meetings
that were held in that framework from 30 September to
2 October 2009. The Committee also carried out other
activities
regarding
outreach,
assistance
and
cooperation with relevant organizations.

09-60612

S/PV.6217

In response to a request made by the Security
Council in resolution 1810 (2008), the Committee
decided to conduct a comprehensive review and to
report the outcome to the Council by the tentative date
of 31 January 2010. The review is a process using the
Committee as a forum for all States and relevant
intergovernmental bodies to share experiences and
express their views on various aspects of
implementation of the resolution. The mandate for
conducting the review, as presented to the Council in a
modalities paper (S/2009/170), outlined three
objectives: first, to assess the evolution of risks and
threats; secondly, to address specific critical issues that
have not yet been resolved; and thirdly, to identify
possible new approaches for the implementation of the
resolution.
In order to facilitate that task, the Committee
invited inputs from the wider membership of the
United Nations and relevant international and regional
organizations, and identified eight specific elements to
be examined with the benefit of substantive
background papers prepared by the Committee’s group
of experts. The topics included: assessing the impact of
the resolution, including through measures taken after
its adoption, such as the establishment and
enforcement of appropriate criminal or civil penalties
for violations of export control laws and regulations;
conducting a regional analysis of implementation;
assessing existing examination tools and creating new
ones to address gaps in implementation; evaluating, as
appropriate, the impact of national implementation
measures on individuals and due process standards;
and developing methods for improving cooperation
with individual States, international and regional
organizations and relevant entities within the United
Nations system. Special emphasis was placed on
assessing the level of cooperation with the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001).
During the three days of open meetings,
comprising a general debate and three interactive
thematic sessions, participants addressed the broader
issue of risks and threats of the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery.
The
interactive
sessions
provided
opportunities to debate specific issues emerging from
the analysis of challenges and options for action,
including those presented in the background papers. I
would also like to mention the fact that, during the

09-60612

comprehensive review, a side event gathering
representatives of relevant industries, academic
institutions and non-governmental organizations,
offered an overview of areas in which civil society can
add value to official efforts to implement the
resolution.
The broad participation during the comprehensive
review included formal statements on specific issues
made by the representatives of 41 States and 21
intergovernmental organizations and other entities. On
the basis of the sharing of experiences and the
articulation of views and proposals made during the
review process, the 1540 Committee is currently
preparing an outcome document with recommendations
to enhance the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
(spoke in Spanish)
Since May 2009, the representatives of the 1540
Committee and its group of experts have actively
participated in 20 workshops and other meetings held
outside United Nations Headquarters to promote the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Those
outreach activities were held throughout the world: in
Africa and the Middle East; in South-Asia and East
Asia, including the Pacific Island States; in Latin
America and the Caribbean; and in Eastern and
Western Europe. The level of representation varied in
accordance with the types of issues included in a
meeting’s agenda and the extent to which aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) were
addressed.
The 1540 Committee has continued to participate
in the following four types of outreach activities. First
are regional workshops devoted specifically to
resolution 1540 (2004) and organized by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).
One such workshop was held on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), focusing on capacity-building
in terms of border and export controls; it was held for
the Central American States in San José, Costa Rica,
from 8 to 10 September. The Committee expresses its
thanks to the Government of Costa Rica, as host; to
UNODA, as the organizer; and to the European Union
and the Governments of United States of America and
Norway, as sponsors of the event.
Secondly, regional workshops have been
organized in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies. Following the experience in Africa in 2007 and

7

S/PV.6217

2008, the experts of the 1540 Committee cooperated
with the Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in organizing, together with the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), two regional
workshops on a common strategy for countries of the
Middle East and the Caribbean. Those workshops,
aimed at addressing the problems posed by submitting
reports or other responses to the three Security Council
Committees, were held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates, from 28 to 30 June and in Basseterre, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, from 7 to 9 July. The Committee
thanks the UNODC for its sponsorship of and role in
organizing those events, as well as the Governments of
the United Arab Emirates and Saint Kitts and Nevis for
hosting the workshops.
Thirdly, regional workshops have been organized
by Member States, in cooperation with the 1540
Committee. Among the new thematic outreach
activities are the regional workshops on the
implementation aspects of resolution 1540 (2004), held
by Member States with the cooperation of the
Committee’s group of experts and the UNODC. The
Government of Sri Lanka hosted a regional workshop
from 23 to 25 June in Colombo, organized by the
Government of the United States, in cooperation with
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in South
Asia, focusing specifically on border and export
control issues. The Governments of France and the
United Arab Emirates facilitated the holding of a
regional workshop on 5 and 6 October in Abu Dhabi,
sponsored by France’s Foundation for Strategic
Research and the Emirates Centre for Strategic Studies
and Research. Its subject was the problems posed by
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the
Gulf region, with particular reference to measures to
account for and guarantee the security of related
materials, as referred to in operative paragraph 3 of the
resolution. The Committee expresses its thanks to the
sponsors, organizers and hosts of those workshops.
Fourthly, meetings have been organized by other
organizations or by Member States. Most of the other
conferences and workshops to which the Committee
and its experts have been invited have addressed a
variety of subjects of interest to the 1540 Committee.
The subjects of the meetings have ranged from more

8

general issues related to proliferation threats to more
specific threats of nuclear, chemical or biological
terrorism; from problems in proliferation financing to
export controls and the prevention of illicit trafficking;
and from the implementation of relevant international
instruments by means of domestic legislation to the
facilitation of assistance for capacity-building. The
sponsoring organizations have included the Regional
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
the Caribbean Community, the European Union, the
Financial Action Task Force, the League of Arab
States, NATO and the Pacific Islands Forum, as well as
the UNODC. The sponsoring or co-sponsoring
Governments have included Argentina, Austria,
Canada, Chile, China, Japan, New Zealand, the
Russian Federation, Singapore, Switzerland, Turkey
and the United States. The wide-ranging sponsorship of
the workshops has provided new opportunities for the
1540 Committee and its experts to raise awareness
about the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) in
various contexts and to initiate a network of
relationships.
In addition to regular dialogue with workshop
participants from individual countries, one event was
held on the eve of a workshop in Chile at which the
1540 Committee experts held intensive consultations
with officials from the host country on the issue of
national legal frameworks.
Another aspect to be developed is the design of
country-specific missions to facilitate States’
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to include
identification of priority areas and assistance
requirements to facilitate implementation.
(spoke in French)
As encouraged under resolution 1810 (2008), the
Committee is intensifying its efforts to develop its
clearing-house function for channelling assistance to
Member States. To that end, the Committee’s working
group on assistance met to outline a strategy on
moving forward. By taking stock of requests for
assistance, the Committee’s experts have been
authorized to engage in follow-up dialogue with the
States concerned to encourage the submission of more
developed and specific requests using the assistance
template, as appropriate, as was done with the most
recent requests.
The close cooperation developing among the
1540 Committee, the 1267 Committee and the 1373

09-60612

S/PV.6217

Committee was outlined in the joint statement
delivered on behalf of the three Committee Chairmen.
We look forward to furthering those joint efforts,
especially in engaging relevant intergovernmental
organizations to enhance cooperation in the areas of
common interest, such as information exchange and
technical assistance. The cooperation of the 1540
Committee with other entities of the United Nations
system is also important. In this regard, we recognize
the
special
role
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force as a catalyst of cooperation
and coordination in relevant areas.
As Chairman of the 1540 Committee, in October
I visited three headquarters of international
organizations in Europe. I had fruitful discussions with
the Secretary General of the World Customs
Organization in Brussels, which will serve as the basis
for more detailed dialogue at the expert level. A
meeting in The Hague with the Director-General of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
resulted in a mutual understanding about the need to
identify specific areas for collaboration.
My second visit to International Atomic Energy
Agency headquarters in Vienna gave me the
opportunity to participate in detailed discussions with
senior officials from different divisions, in the context
of the nuclear security programme of the Agency. An
exchange of letters will outline the steps needed to
build closer relationships. On 13 October, I met in
Vienna with representatives of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to discuss
cooperation with that regional organization.
The President: I thank Ambassador Urbina for
his briefing.
I will now give a briefing in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Ten years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999), the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and the Taliban persists worldwide, and especially in
South Asia. At the same time, over the years this threat
has evolved considerably and we must ensure that the
existing sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban remains a relevant and effective tool in
countering terrorism. The current review pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008) is an effective instrument to

09-60612

ensure that the Committee’s consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban remains dynamic and accurately reflects the
current threat.
As the Council is well aware, in paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008) the Security Council directed
the Committee to review all the 488 names that were
on the consolidated list at the date of the adoption of
that resolution in order to ensure that the information is
as accurate as possible and that the listings remain
appropriate. The review process is one of the key
priorities of the Committee and a main focus of its
work.
In my last briefing to the Security Council in May
(S/PV.6128), I outlined the procedure for review.
Today, I would like to report on the progress achieved
so far, as well as on the current status of the review
process in the Committee.
As of today, the Committee has initiated the
review of 422 names, which were subdivided into four
groups, by sending these names to the respective
designating States and States of citizenship and/or
residence for review. The remaining 66 names will be
sent to reviewing States in the coming days. Once all
replies from reviewing States for a particular name on
the consolidated list have been received, and following
a one-month period in which each member of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team can provide
further input, the name is placed on the Committee’s
agenda. When reviewing names in a Committee
meeting, each name is introduced by the Monitoring
Team and the Committee subsequently conducts a
thorough discussion of that entry. In particular, the
Committee evaluates all available information and
considers whether listings remain appropriate. It does
so on the basis of the “associated with” criteria for
listings set out in relevant resolutions. The Committee
also considers updating the consolidated list and/or the
narrative summaries.
During the review process, the need for further
information or clarification occasionally becomes
apparent, and the Committee and the Monitoring Team
use that opportunity to engage with reviewing States in
an effort to resolve any questions that have arisen.
Such follow-up discussions reinforce the review
process and also serve to improve the quality of the
list.

9

S/PV.6217

At the time of my last briefing, the first five
names had been placed on the Committee’s agenda. As
of today, the Committee has discussed a total of 71
entries. In 50 cases, the listing was confirmed to
remain appropriate, while eight names, including wellknown cases such as Vinck, Sayadi, Nada and
Barakaat, have been de-listed as a result of their review
pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). For 13 names, the
review is still pending as the Committee is of the view
that further information is necessary for it to conclude
its considerations.
In order to be able to successfully complete the
review process by 30 June 2010, the Committee very
much depends on the active cooperation and assistance
of Member States. Prompt replies are crucial, since the
review of a particular name in the Committee can be
undertaken only after the replies from all reviewing
States have been received. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all States that have provided the
Committee with information, and I would also like to
call upon all reviewing States to do their utmost to
provide their valuable information in a timely manner.
It is my personal commitment to ensure that the
review process is conducted seriously and thoroughly.
The experience of the past several months has shown
that all members of the Committee share this
commitment and devote great efforts to this task, and I
am grateful for that.
In the spirit of transparency, I intend to continue
to regularly update Member States and the broader
public about the progress of the review, including
through periodic briefings, press releases and updates
on the Committee’s web page.
I now wish to say some words on the narrative
summaries of reasons for listing. With the assistance of
the Monitoring Team, the Committee continues to
make narrative summaries of reasons for listing of all
entries on the consolidated list accessible on its web
site. Since the beginning of this year, a total of 164
narrative summaries have been approved for
publication on the Committee’s web site. The
Monitoring Team has prepared the first drafts of
another 294 narrative summaries, which are currently
being reviewed by the designated States.
As of today, the consolidated list has 504 entries:
397 individuals — 255 associated with Al-Qaida and
142 associated with the Taliban — and 107 entities
associated with Al-Qaida. Since my last briefing, the

10

Committee has added to the list the names of five
individuals associated with Al-Qaida. During the same
period, the Committee approved the de-listing of nine
entries — five individuals and four entities — of which
eight were in the framework of the review. I would like
to underscore that, apart from the review pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008), listed individuals and entities
continue to have access to the focal point for de-listing.
Despite considerable progress, several challenges
regarding the consolidated list remain. There are
numerous entries that have very few identifiers and do
not contain sufficient information to allow for the
positive identification of the party concerned. For
example, for a number of individuals there is no full
name and no date of birth. For those entries, the
application of the sanctions measures is very difficult.
Another challenge concerns deceased persons.
The Committee knows about several individuals who
are reported or believed to be dead but who are still on
the list. In 27 cases the information about the death is
published on the consolidated list. The Committee is
currently discussing the possibility of a more flexible
procedure for the de-listing of deceased persons where
no assets are identified. At the same time we are
addressing the question of how best to ensure that the
remaining assets of deceased persons will not fall into
the hands of other listed persons. The review is an ideal
opportunity to check those entries, add additional
identifiers and remove from the list names for which
listing is not considered appropriate anymore.
In addition, in the last years, the sanctions regime
established under resolution 1267 (1999) has also
encountered increasing criticism by a number of States
and individuals because of procedural and human
rights concerns, especially regarding the right to be
heard and the lack of a review mechanism of, or
possibility to appeal against, the Committee’s
decisions. National and regional courts are confronted
with a growing number of lawsuits. Currently there are
about 30 court cases around the world. The Committee
is aware of those challenges and, as mentioned in
resolution 1822 (2008), is committed to continue
improving its procedures in order to introduce more
elements of fairness and transparency in placing
individuals, groups and entities on the list and for
removing them, as well as for granting humanitarian
exemptions.

09-60612

S/PV.6217

I would also like to draw attention to the ninth
report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team (S/2009/245) and the Committee’s
position on the recommendations contained therein,
which was submitted to the Security Council in August
and has been posted on the Committee’s website (see
S/2009/427). In particular, the Committee focused
great attention on recommendations on how it might
improve the fairness and transparency of its
procedures, as well as on those recommendations
seeking to enhance the rapid dissemination of
information, required for the effective implementation
of sanctions measures. The Committee believes that the
implementation of these recommendations can further
improve the credibility, effectiveness and efficiency of
the sanctions regime.
The tenth report of the Monitoring Team
(S/2009/502) was submitted to the Committee at the
end of July. The Committee is currently considering
the Team’s latest 21 recommendations and will, in due
course, submit a report to the Security Council with the
Committee’s position vis-à-vis those recommendations.
Following the practice of previous Chairmen of
the Committee, I held an informal open briefing for all
interested Member States on 18 June. That briefing
offered an excellent opportunity to interact informally
with Member States, who are the Committee’s most
important partners in improving implementation of the
sanctions measures.
On 28 October, the Committee met with
Mr. Martin Scheinin, United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism. The members of the Committee had a
constructive exchange of views with Mr. Scheinin on
issues related to the fairness and clearness of the
Committee’s procedures, in particular regarding listing
and de-listing.
Since my last briefing, I have made two trips in
my function as Chairman of the Committee. In June
2009, upon invitation by the Russian Federation, I
participated in the eighth Meeting of Special Services,
Security
Agencies
and
Law
Enforcement
Organizations, held in Irkutsk, Russian Federation. On
8 and 9 October, I visited the European Union
institutions in Brussels, Belgium, where I held
consultations regarding the implementation of the
sanctions measures by the European Union and its

09-60612

27 member States. The visit was an excellent
opportunity to discuss the challenges that the
implementation of the sanctions regime is currently
facing in European Union member States, in particular
following recent rulings of the European Court of
Justice.
Following my visit to Brussels, I also participated
in an international workshop of national counterterrorism focal points which took place in Vienna,
Austria, on 12 and 13 October. The conference was
attended by more than 100 representatives from
Member States and representatives of about 40 national
and international organizations, and it provided a
useful opportunity to increase awareness about the
work of the Committee.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the Committee welcomes the Security
Council’s encouragement, set forth in paragraph 30 of
resolution 1822 (2008), for Member States to send
representatives to meet the Committee for more indepth discussion of relevant issues or for voluntary
briefings on their efforts to implement the sanctions
measures. The Committee is ready to listen to ideas
and concerns and looks forward to continuing its
cooperation and dialogue with all Member States.
Before concluding, I would like to take the
opportunity to thank the members of the Monitoring
Team, and in particular the Team’s coordinator,
Mr. Richard Barrett, and the secretariat of the 1267
Committee for their invaluable contribution to the
work of the Committee, especially in the light of the
enormous additional workload created by the review
process and the drafting of narrative summaries.
Since I last briefed the Council, the review of the
consolidated list pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008) has
begun to bear fruit: not only, as I said, have eight
names been removed from the list as a direct result of
the review, but the review has also led to the
improvement of the quality of a number of entries
remaining on the list. This exercise has served to
refocus the commitment and energy of reviewing
States, which have responded to a mammoth task with
both seriousness and enthusiasm.
The full implementation of resolution 1822
(2008) constitutes an important stage of the
Committee’s work, and I believe that the current
review process will also induce the Committee
members to look at existing procedures and practices

11

S/PV.6217

in a new light and to consider further steps towards
both improving due process and strengthening the
regime. It is essential to continue to improve the
Committee’s procedures in order to make the 1267
sanctions regime a stronger and more effective tool.
The successor resolution to resolution 1822 (2008),
which is due at the end of this year, will provide the
next opportunity to take further steps towards ensuring
fair and clear procedures, improving the working
methods and thus strengthening the regime. It is to be
hoped that the new resolution will seek to address the
current challenges of the regime and reflect some of
the lessons learned during the review. We fully count
on the support of all Member States involved as the
Committee moves on to the next stage of its work.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you and the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Costa Rica
for your detailed briefings on the activities carried out
by the three Security Council Committees, as well as
for the joint briefing on cooperation among them.
The progress that has been made in the area of
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees since May is well known, especially with
respect to their expert groups. However, Mexico
believes that there is still much that we can do to
improve cooperation among the three Committees
themselves, respecting of course the scope of their
respective mandates. On the 1373 Committee — the
Counter-Terrorism Committee — we would like to
express our satisfaction at the progress that has been
seen in the stocktaking exercise, more specifically the
joint efforts of the Executive Directorate and
Committee members with respect to the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments. We reaffirm our support

12

with a view to a successful conclusion in 2010 of the
process under way.
We also thank the Executive Directorate for the
global survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States, which was recently
submitted to the Committee. We are certain that its
consideration by the Security Council will contribute
significantly to identifying the progress achieved and
the challenges that remain in moving towards the full
and consistent implementation of the 1373 regime.
Mexico is especially pleased at the thematic
debates being held within the Committee, and we
commend the Committee Chairman for the impetus he
has given to these debates. In our view, dialogue
between members of the Committee and the experts of
the Executive Directorate is necessary to foster better
understanding of the various aspects of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Given the
multifaceted nature of international terrorism, the
struggle against this scourge must be strengthened in
an integrated manner. Thematic debates will, without a
doubt, contribute to that goal.
Mexico should like to reiterate that the
facilitation of the assistance that the Committee
provides to all States through its Executive Directorate
should always include an aspect related to the
strengthening of the rule of law. Ensuring that those
responsible for implementing the obligations contained
in resolution 1373 (2001) do so in a manner which
pays due attention to the law, and in particular to
human rights, will lead to the strengthening of the
international counter-terrorism regime. Legitimacy and
effectiveness are not mutually exclusive; on the
contrary, they go hand in hand.
With respect to the 1267 Committee on Al-Qaida
and the Taliban, Mexico too wishes to express its
gratitude for the work carried out by the Chairman of
the Committee and his team. We also express our
appreciation of the efforts of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team. Progress made in the
review process established under resolution 1822
(2008), as well as the updating and publication of the
narrative summaries, are significant achievements. The
efforts to transform the consolidated list into a dynamic
instrument have started to yield very satisfactory
results.
There are still, without a doubt, a number of
obstacles yet to be overcome, many of which are

09-60612

S/PV.6217

discussed in the briefing we have just heard. However,
we are convinced that the genuine progress we have
made should serve as an impetus for us to continue our
efforts towards a more transparent regime that pays
more attention to the fundamental principles of
legality, including due process. The upcoming review
of resolution 1822 (2008) offers us a fine opportunity
which we cannot miss.
With regard to the activities of the 1540
Committee, Mexico welcomes the open debate which
took place from 30 September and 2 October, in the
context of the comprehensive review on the
implementation of that resolution. The debate
presented a welcome opportunity for greater interaction
between members of the Committee and the rest of the
membership — in itself a praiseworthy event. The
number of delegations that participated in that debate
and the quality of their statements demonstrated the
importance that they attach to the fulfilment of the
complex obligations derived from resolution 1540
(2004). During the comprehensive review process, not
only did we identify the progress achieved and the
challenges that remain, but we also began to address
new themes. For example, the Committee dealt with
the impact of the measures adopted for the
implementation of the resolution on individuals and
due process. This is of fundamental importance for
guaranteeing that measures adopted in this context are
in keeping with the obligations of States to fully
respect human rights.
Mexico believes that the 1540 Committee should
now begin to study proposals that were made during
the open debate so that it can present a set of specific
recommendations to the Security Council which would
help to promote better implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In particular, Mexico believes that there
are important opportunities for improving the
Committee’s tasks in the area of assistance to States in
order to help build their national capacity to implement
resolution 1540 (2004).
In a more general sense, I should like to
acknowledge once again the excellent efforts shown in
the promotion activities carried out by the 1540
Committee jointly with the Office for Disarmament
Affairs, in particular through the holding of regional
workshops. Mexico had the opportunity to participate
in the workshop held in Costa Rica mentioned by the
Chairman of the 1540 Committee. These workshops
are a very useful tool for promoting better

09-60612

understanding of the obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). There is no doubt that this cooperative
approach taken by the Committee in its work should
continue.
World public opinion is aware of the grave threat
posed by terrorism to international peace and security.
Fighting it while maintaining full respect for
international law, in particular for human rights, is not
only a legal and moral imperative, but is also key to
ensuring the future success and full effectiveness of the
counter-terrorism regime, in which the Security
Council plays a crucially important role.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I should
like to thank each of the Chairmen for their briefings.
Their dedicated leadership is central to the
effectiveness of the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees.
Today we have an opportunity to focus on the
accomplishments of the three Committees over the past
several months.
The United States supports the important role the
United Nations plays in reinforcing national and
regional counter-terrorism efforts. As President Obama
said in his address of 23 September to the General
Assembly,
“[The United States has] set a clear and focused
goal: to work with all members of this body to
disrupt, dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and its
extremist allies — a network that has killed
thousands of people of many faiths and nations
and had plotted to blow up this very building.”
(A/64/PV.3, p. 9)
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, the United States
appreciates the leadership and personal commitment
you have displayed as Chair of the 1267 Committee.
We also commend the work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, which has played a
vital role as an independent and objective fact-finding
body. Countering the threat posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban remains one of the most important challenges
facing this Council. Without the efforts of Member
States to work collectively, the world would be much
more vulnerable to terrorist attacks.
What can we do to ensure that the 1267 regime
remains a vital and effective multilateral tool to
respond to this threat? First, we can reaffirm the
international community’s commitment to full
implementation of the 1267 measures. The 1267

13

S/PV.6217

regime can only function well if States actively
participate in the regime, such as by proposing new
names for listing. Secondly, we should continue our
efforts to ensure that the consolidated list is as accurate
and up-to-date as possible, ensuring that our
procedures for imposing sanctions are fair and clear.
Resolutions 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008) introduced
new measures to help the Committee confirm the
accuracy of the list. The Committee has worked to
implement what is perhaps the most significant
measure of resolution 1822 (2008). The review of
every name on the consolidated list by June 2010 will
continue in the coming months. The United States is
committed to ensuring that that review is meaningful
and is working with Member States to finish the review
on time.
Thirdly, we should continue our efforts to ensure
that the sanctions are applied in a fair and transparent
manner. Resolution 1822 (2008) and its predecessors
introduce significant enhancements to ensure fairness.
In the coming weeks, the Council will negotiate a new
resolution to renew the mandate of the Monitoring
Team of the 1267 Committee and will take the
opportunity to enhance the regime and to improve our
ability to counter the Al-Qaida and Taliban threats. The
United States believes that the new resolution should
take additional steps to ensure that the process for
listing and de-listing individuals is as fair and
transparent as possible. We believe that there is room
to improve the way in which the 1267 Committee
decides to list individuals and how it considers requests
from those seeking to be removed from the list.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I would like to thank Ambassador Vilović for
doing an exceptional job of guiding the Committee’s
work. Ambassador Vilović fostered greater efficiency
in the Committee’s work. As this is the last time that he
will report on his Chairmanship, we wish him well and
thank him for his leadership.
The United States welcomes the significant
improvement in the performance of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
under the leadership of Mike Smith. We are pleased to
see more engagement by CTED outside of New York in
capitals and with experts in the relevant ministries on
the ground. That is where the United States would like
CTED to place even more emphasis. We applaud
CTED’s work in South Asia and we encourage CTED

14

and the wider United Nations to explore similar
opportunities in North Africa.
The United States welcomes efforts to develop a
more holistic United Nations counter-terrorism
programme that is more integrated with the wider
United Nations effort to promote international peace
and security. That involves working with States around
the world to build the capacities needed to confront a
range of interrelated transnational security challenges,
including terrorism. That effort involves not just the
Security Council, but also the General Assembly and
other relevant United Nations bodies. In that context,
the United States looks forward to further participation
of the Security Council Committees and their expert
groups with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. We welcome the recent visit by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Ms. Pillay to the CTC and her constructive
recommendations
for
strengthening
existing
approaches to underscore the role of human rights in
the fight against terrorism in the work of the CTC and
the CTED.
Regarding the 1540 Committee, I would like to
take a moment to praise Ambassador Urbina for his
leadership and enthusiasm in guiding the work of that
important Committee. As Chair of the 1540
Committee, Ambassador Urbina has promoted greater
transparency and supported a range of ideas to make
the Committee’s work more effective and relevant.
Since the Ambassador too is making his last
appearance in that capacity today, we wish him well
and thank him for his leadership. He will leave behind
a Committee with a strong mandate and a clear vision.
In the six months since those three Committees
addressed the Council, the world has seen a growing
interest in the work of the 1540 Committee. With the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1887 (2009) on
24 September, this Council sent a loud and clear
message that resolution 1540 (2004) is an essential tool
for building the non-proliferation regime. Resolution
1887 (2009) affirms the need for full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), welcomes the work that the
1540 Committee has done to date on funding
mechanisms, and reinforces the Security Council’s
commitment to ensuring effective and sustainable
support for the Committee’s activities, including
capacity-building. Within a week of adopting
resolution 1887 (2009), the Committee conducted its
comprehensive review of the status of implementation

09-60612

S/PV.6217

on resolution 1540 (2004). That three-day event
offered an inclusive forum in which all States and
relevant intergovernmental bodies could share
experiences and express their views on various aspects
of implementation of the resolution.

the sanctions regime established in accordance with
resolution 1267 (1999) through measures that help the
sanctions regime to be more consistent with the
international standards of due process, international
law and the respect for human rights.

The success of the 1540 Committee lies in its
ability to move forward with its work programme to
fully implement the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). We urge the Committee to streamline the
assistance request process in order to make requests
more transparent and to ensure that requests are
answered in a timely and efficient manner. As part of
that effort, the United States is committed to the
establishment of a voluntary fund to help provide the
support and expertise necessary to facilitate
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Last year, an important step was taken through
the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008), which includes
various innovative elements enabling progress in the
area of transparency and clearer and fairer procedures,
including the publication of narrative summaries and a
review of all the names on the consolidated list. In that
regard, we endorse and commend the commitment of
the Chairman of the 1267 Committee, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, in implementing that review, and we
recognize his particular interest in that process in
producing a more dynamic and realistic list.

In conclusion, regarding all three counterterrorism related bodies, there needs to be more crossfertilization among them. Good practices in one should
be adopted more regularly by the others. That does not
happen often enough. We would especially like to
commend the successful outreach efforts of the 1540
Committee, including through the unprecedented threeday open meeting that the Committee organized this
fall as part of its comprehensive review, as well as its
successful efforts to reach out to civil society and to
involve it in the Committee’s work. All the Council’s
counter-terrorism related committees should remain
mindful of the need to enhance the transparency of
their work and make it more accessible to the wider
United Nations community, national actors, regional
organizations and civil society. We encourage further
engagement by the three Committees with Member
States on a broad of range of issues to ensure that the
Committee’s work is fully understood and relevant to
Member States’ own efforts to combat terrorism.

The increasing number of trials around the world
seems to confirm the need to provide the regime with
an independent apolitical review mechanism that
would come from within this Council, not from
judicial, regional or international bodies outside it.
With that in mind, Costa Rica has worked with
Germany, Denmark, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Sweden, Switzerland, Belgium, Finland and Norway to
produce a working document with a number of options
to improve the due process within the sanctions
regime. We urge the Security Council and the
membership of the Organization, in general, to
consider those options, in particular with a view to the
resolution that we are due to negotiate next month to
renew the sanctions regime.

Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank my fellow Chairmen for the briefings on the
work of their Committees. In my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, I would like
to make some brief comments on the work of the three
Committees.
With respect to the 1267 Committee, Costa Rica
believes that the effective use of selective sanctions is
a useful tool of the Security Council to tackle the threat
of terrorism. For that reason, it has been a priority for
our country, as a member of the Council, to strengthen
the legitimacy, the credibility and the effectiveness of

09-60612

With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate are
important elements of the efforts of the United Nations
to combat terrorism. We would like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Ranko Vilović and Mr. Mike
Smith for their leadership of the Committee and the
Executive Directorate, respectively. In our view, it is
especially important to guide the efforts of the
Committee in the direction of strengthening its work
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, as well as the practice of holding
informal meetings with representatives of Member
States in order to identify whether any technical
assistance is necessary, and of promoting national
capacity-building.

15

S/PV.6217

We also welcome the fact that visits by the
Executive Directorate are carried out with a flexible
approach, adapted to each State, and that during each
visit it is emphasized that all measures adopted by
Member States to combat terrorism should comply
with
human
rights
standards,
international
humanitarian law and the law on refugees. Costa Rica
would like to see that a human rights expert is involved
during every visit, and that more resources are
allocated to this area.
I have just a brief comment on the 1540
Committee, which I have had the honour to chair for
the past two years. I would like to emphasize how
important Costa Rica felt it was to conduct the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). During the review,
international, regional and subregional bodies of
Member States, as well as academic and industrial
organizations, non-governmental and private-sector
organizations, had the opportunity to present their
comments, make suggestions and assess progress in
implementing the resolution. During this exercise, six
meetings, open to Member States, were held, three of
them in an interactive format. The change in perception
of the work of the Committee was confirmed, and we
hope these meetings contributed to that. What initially
was seen as something imposed by the Council and
exceeding the powers granted it by the Charter is now
seen as part of a broad process of international
cooperation aimed at achieving a common goal.
The conduct of the comprehensive review,
particularly the open meetings, is an example of the
importance of greater transparency and inclusiveness in
the working methods of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies. We were honoured to coordinate the Committee
and its expert group during this unprecedented
exercise. However, the real value of innovations in the
working methods of the Council and its subsidiaries, as
has been shown throughout its history, is that they
should become standard practice, and we hope that the
Security Council will repeat this kind of exercise in the
future.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Ambassadors Urbina and Vilović,
and you, Mr. President, for today’s briefings.
International terrorism remains one of the
principal threats of our time. The appalling attack on
United Nations personnel in Kabul on 28 October was

16

a tragic reminder of the threat faced daily around the
world by the Organization and its personnel. We offer
our condolences to their families and friends.
We welcome the progress made by the CounterTerrorism Committee under the leadership of
Ambassador Vilović and with the strong support of
Mike Smith and his team. The current stocktaking
exercise is an opportunity for dialogue with States
whose implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is
inadequate. This is not just a bureaucratic exercise. It
should be used to focus on specific challenges
identified by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). Linked to this,
preliminary implementation assessments should be
made more user-friendly, so that they can better focus
technical assistance. We are pleased that focused visits
have given CTED greater flexibility and allowed it to
conduct more and better targeted visits, focusing on the
main issues of concern. This has allowed CTED to
draw out examples of good practice to share more
widely. We also welcome the strengthening of relations
between CTED and the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group, including through more focused local donor
meetings.
Ambassador Urbina’s leadership of the 1540
Committee will be much missed when he steps down
as chairman. We welcome the Committee’s work on the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). It
was useful to hear views from the wide range of States
and international organizations at the open meeting of
the review, and we look forward to its final outcome
document,
which
should
contain
practical
recommendations for improving implementation. We
want to see the emphasis now shift further towards
effective implementation in those States with more
serious deficiencies. Improving the delivery of
assistance will be critical. We were pleased that the
first meeting of the working group on assistance took
place earlier this month, and hope this will create
momentum for a more effective 1540 assistance
strategy. The effective organization of the
comprehensive review, and the improving work on
delivering assistance, show the benefits of the new
1540 Committee working group structure.
Through the United Kingdom’s Global Threat
Reduction Programme, we have committed up to $750
million towards countering the spread of weapons of
mass destruction, in support of the objectives of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have undertaken work in

09-60612

S/PV.6217

18 countries on projects covering physical protection
work, improving the security of materials, contributing
to the reduction in chemical weapons stocks, and
supporting sustainable employment for former
weapons scientists. We also continue to support the
IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and we have doubled our
2009 contribution to $6 million.
We welcome the substantial advances that
resolution 1822 (2008) made to the 1267 Al Qaida and
Taliban sanctions regime. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee continues to work hard to ensure that the
resolution is implemented efficiently and effectively,
and I would like to pay tribute to the Monitoring Team
and you, Mr. President, for the work done in this
regard. But the Committee has more to do to help make
the regime more robust and sustainable. In particular,
we need to safeguard the fundamental rights of those
designated on the list, and work on improving the
credibility of the overall list. As you pointed out in
your report, Mr. President, the key to this is the
de-listing procedure. We must be able to demonstrate
that it is possible for those designated to come off the
list when they no longer pose a threat to international
peace and security. That process needs to be more
transparent and merit-based. Individuals should be
provided with clear, reasoned and timely responses to
de-listing requests.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
working with our Security Council partners on the
forthcoming resolution to address these issues and we
hope to see a stronger and more effective sanctions
regime as a result.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Thank you for
organizing this joint briefing, Mr. President. We thank
Ambassador Vilović, Chairman of the 1373
Committee, Ambassador Urbina, Chairman of the 1540
Committee, and you, Mr. President, in your capacity as
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, for your insightful
briefings.
Uganda
welcomes
the
continued
close
cooperation among the three committees. This
cooperation is necessary for improved performance in
developing common strategies and coordinating
activities. As we have heard, this cooperation has had a
stimulus effect by helping to focus on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).

09-60612

We welcome the progress made by Member
States in their completion of the analysis and the
adoption
of
the
preliminary
implementation
assessments. That is indeed a significant achievement
on the part of the 1373 Committee, and we are
encouraged that the Committee will support 100 per
cent completion by all Member States. We applaud the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
for the work it has done in this regard.
We support the ongoing dialogue between
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance. This dialogue offers
an opportunity for Member States to candidly exchange
views with the Committee on the practical measures
necessary to implement resolution 1373 (2001). In fact,
the partial compliance or non-compliance by Member
States to fully implement Security Council resolutions
is often due to the lack of technical capacity to do so.
Terrorism, together with the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction among non-State actors,
remains one of the major threats and challenges to
international peace and security. In this regard, we
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the coordination of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force within the collective efforts
undertaken to combat terrorism. The continued
cooperation of the three subsidiary bodies with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force is a step
in the right direction and should be encouraged.
We welcome the report by the Chairman of the
1540 Committee on behalf of the three subsidiary
bodies, which confirms that a comprehensive review,
as requested by the Council, is under way. I wish to
reiterate Uganda’s support for the comprehensive
review. It is necessary that the review assess the
evolution of risks and threats, identify practical
approaches for the implementation of the resolution as
well as the challenges on the ground that are impeding
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The debates and thematic sessions referred to in
the briefings are invaluable. We thank the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the UNODC for
organizing workshops here in New York and at the
regional and subregional levels. These workshops
provide a better understanding of Council resolutions,
which ultimately helps in their implementation.

17

S/PV.6217

We share the view that the consolidated list
remains an instrument useful to the United Nations in
its effort to combat terrorism. However, the credibility
of the consolidated list will be undermined if the
existing gaps are not addressed in a timely and
effective manner. Therefore, we are encouraged to hear
that the 1267 Committee is committed to improving its
procedures by introducing additional elements of
fairness and transparency, which will contribute to the
effectiveness of the Committee.
Finally, Uganda would like once again to thank
the Chairpersons of the three subsidiary bodies and the
associated monitoring groups and experts groups for
the good work that they have done.
We assure the Council of Uganda’s continued
cooperation in working for a secure and peaceful
world.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
the three distinguished Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We highly appreciate the
valuable work undertaken by these Committees.
Today, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and the proliferation of the weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose serious threats to
international peace and security. No country is immune
from such cross-border threats. In other words, there is
no room for complacency. We should therefore act in
an even more steadfast manner and strive to increase
the effectiveness of our endeavours.
As Ambassador Mayr-Harting said, the 1267
sanctions regime has, in the last decade, proven to be
an effective tool in countering Al-Qaida and Taliban
terrorists and other individuals and entities affiliated
with those groups. We believe that the regime has been
instrumental in preventing many possible terrorist
attacks through the action of placing more than 500
names on its consolidated list.
At this stage, we need to concentrate our efforts
on further strengthening the sanctions regime. In this
regard, the rulings of national and regional courts
concerning some of the names on the list constitute a
priority area that requires further and careful attention.
The follow-up resolution to resolution 1822 (2008),
which is to be adopted before the end of this year, will

18

provide a good opportunity to take the necessary steps
in this respect.
In this context, Turkey will pursue a constructive
and flexible approach, so that the principles of due
process and fairness are taken into consideration, as
called for by some court decisions and without
prejudging the final decisions of the 1267 Committee.
We are also looking forward to concluding the
review process of the consolidated list in June 2010.
With the active contribution of the Monitoring Team,
the Committee has already reviewed a significant
number of the names. We hope that with the
finalization of the review process, the consolidated list
will better reflect the current threats and thus become a
more credible instrument in coping with the challenges
that the Chairman has indicated in this context.
With
respect
to
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee, we are pleased that, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Vilović, it has been doing
a remarkable job in terms of monitoring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). I would also like to acknowledge Mr. Mike
Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, and his professional and
hardworking team for their support and contributions
to the work of the Committee.
That having been said, there are still deficiencies
in the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), stemming from the lack of either political
will or capacity. In our view, one of the main
challenges of the Committee is to make sure that
Member States fully understand their obligations
pursuant to those resolutions and take the necessary
measures to implement them. In this regard, the
dialogue between the Committee and Member States
should be intensified, so as to make it possible for the
Committee to carry out its monitoring and assistance
tasks more effectively.
For our part, Turkey will actively strive to
achieve further progress in this direction. We are
grateful to the Chairman for the good example set forth
by the Committee. Our focus will be on practical
measures that could be taken either to expand the scope
of some of the already existing arrangements or to fill
in the identified gaps in implementation.
Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
emerged as an important component of the global

09-60612

S/PV.6217

non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes. We
are pleased that the level of implementation of the
resolution has improved remarkably under Ambassador
Urbina’s able chairmanship of the 1540 Committee and
thanks to the diligent work carried out by the Expert
Group. That said, Turkey continues to support a
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Comprehensive review, in our
opinion, is a continuous process. Our efforts should
therefore continue unabated.
We believe that the country visits and outreach
events such as conferences, seminars and workshops
organized at the regional and subregional levels are
also highly beneficial. Thus, we support the
continuation of such activities within the framework of
all three Committees.
Before concluding, let me emphasize again that
countering terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction in an effective way can only be
achieved through seamless cooperation among all
Member States in an integrated approach. I would like
to reiterate the determination of my country to continue
to actively take part in the work of all the three
Committees and to lend every support.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish at the outset to thank the Chairmen of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) —
Ambassadors Vilović, Mayr-Harting and Urbina,
respectively — for their informative briefings and for
their work to strengthen international cooperation in
combating terrorism.
The Russian Federation favours increased
cooperation and coordination among the three Security
Council Committees. The main direction for this
coordination effort was set out in their joint statement.
We consider future cooperation among the Committees
and their expert groups to be a key prerequisite for
enhancing the Security Council’s effectiveness in
combating the global threat of terrorism.
I turn now to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. With the assistance of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Committee has made significant progress in its
dialogue with States on the basis of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments relating to resolution

09-60612

1373 (2001). We note the growing role of the CTC
subcommittees under the chairmanships of the Russian
Federation, France and Viet Nam.
Country visits continue to be an important tool
for the CTC, and the experience of the past six months
has confirmed the effectiveness of such visits,
including regional, repeat, focused and comprehensive
visits. I note the cooperation between CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of Eight
during such visits. These endeavours have enabled the
Committee to clarify the provisions of the Global
Implementation Survey relating to resolution 1373
(2001).
We also note progress in the dialogue between the
CTC and Member States concerning resolution 1624
(2005), which relates to the ideological fight against
terrorism and, in particular, to putting an end to
incitement. A hundred Member States have already
submitted reports to the Committee on this.
We wish also to commend CTED, under the
leadership of Mike Smith, for its assistance to the
Committee. In June, in accordance with resolution
1805 (2008), an interim review of the work of CTED
took place. It assessed the efforts of the CTED, and the
Executive Directorate received high marks in all areas
pertaining to its mandate. We endorse that positive
assessment. We further support CTED’s participation
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and we commend CTED for its assistance
to the Task Force’s working groups on integrated
assistance for countering terrorism, tackling the
financing of terrorism and protecting human rights
while countering terrorism.
We continue to consider the 1267 Committee to
be among the Security Council’s most effective and
capable counter-terrorism mechanisms. We express
grave concern at the increase in terrorist activity and
the expanded role of the Taliban and its extremist
ideas, both within the territory of Afghanistan and
beyond it. In our view it is unrealistic to claim that the
link between the Taliban and Al-Qaida is growing
weaker and that by using flexible sanctions, we could
drive a wedge between them or somehow isolate socalled intransigent Taliban. We think that it is
inappropriate and dangerous to attempt to establish
political contacts with leaders of extremist groups,
especially in contravention of the Security Council’s
sanctions regime. We call upon all States to strictly

19

S/PV.6217

implement measures against individuals on the
sanctions list established in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the guiding
principles of the work of the 1267 Committee.
We welcome the efforts of the Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in
keeping the consolidated list up to date and ensuring
that it reflects the true face of today’s terror threat. At
the same time, we consider any attempts to accelerate
or facilitate de-listing in breach of existing procedures
to be unconstructive. We support the sensible idea of
increasing the transparency of the Committee’s
procedures, in order to avoid doubts about the
legitimacy of the imposition of sanctions, including
those raised by regional or national courts.
It is important not to allow the role of the
Committee in monitoring the implementation of
sanctions to be weakened, in particular with respect to
exemptions from financial embargo. We call upon
States to submit, in accordance with resolution 1735
(2006), requests for listing individuals and
organizations linked to the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
including those that finance their terrorist activities
with the proceeds from sale of illicit drugs.
Full and conscientious fulfilment by all States of
their obligations is necessary for a successful outcome
in our efforts to combat the real and ever-changing
threat to international peace and security posed by the
Taliban and Al-Qaida. The Russian Federation has
consistently favoured full implementation by all States
of resolution 1540 (2004) and of the subsequent
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), which were
intended to ensure that weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery and related materials do
not fall into the hands of non-State entities, especially
terrorists.
The aims of resolution 1540 (2004) have lost
none of their relevance. The gravity of the threat of the
possession by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction
was mentioned by many participants in recent open
meetings of the 1540 Committee, which were held as
part of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution. The 1540 Committee
has a central role to play in consolidating and
enhancing the effectiveness of international efforts in
this sphere.
The Committee has done very good work during
the reporting period. Eight meetings were held, and

20

considerable work went into preparing and organizing
them. Six of these were open meetings with the
participation of a number of Member States and
international and regional organizations. Without
doubt, this practice enhances the transparency of the
work of the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies.
It is our expectation that the review process soon
to be completed will give fresh impetus to further
stepping up international efforts to combat the
proliferation of threats and risks, with the 1540
Committee playing a coordinating role. It is important
that the Committee continue to increase its assistance
to States in complying with the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) and, to that end, that it coordinate the
broadest possible international cooperation, in
particular as part of the extensive informational and
awareness-raising programmes in which it participates.
We are prepared to continue to support such
measures, including in the context of our constant
cooperation, on issues related to the mandate of the
1540 Committee, with members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States. Russia will continue to take
purposeful measures to attain the goals set out in
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish at the outset to join previous speakers in
thanking the Chairmen of the three Security Council
Committees and in expressing appreciation not only for
their extensive briefings but also for the efforts that
they have made along with their fellow members of the
Committees and their subsidiary bodies.
These briefings have shown that positive and
near-common efforts continue to be made by the three
Committees under review. Cooperation has also
continued among the Committees, as was made clear in
the joint statement that we heard earlier. Programming,
structural and procedural improvements to the working
methods have also continued to move ahead. A
comprehensive review of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions is also under way.
National capacity building assistance has continued,
especially for developing countries. Special efforts
have also been made to promote transparency and
respect for human rights. We call for the strengthening
of those initiatives, which merit our full appreciation.
However, we would like to reiterate that such
initiatives will be incomplete unless they are enshrined
within the sound and comprehensive context that has

09-60612

S/PV.6217

been unanimously approved, namely, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The time
has come to complement our efforts to combat and
prevent terrorism. It is also time for the United Nations
and it various organs to address seriously another very
important dimension of the Strategy, that is, the root
causes of terrorism.
I do not believe that there is any controversy
about the fact that occupying peoples lands, offending
their cultures and civilizations and denying them their
legitimate right to resist occupation provide fertile
ground for acts of violence. Such issues cannot be
marginalized by continuing to follow an approach of
double standards, leveling accusations and adopting
temporary palliative measures. Nevertheless, all we can
do today is to evaluate the efforts of the three
Committees. In that regard, I shall keep my remarks
brief.
We welcome the conclusion by the CounterTerrorism Committee, chaired by Ambassador Ranko
Vilović, with the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED), which is chaired by
Mr. Mike Smith, of the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments of States’ implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). We hope that pending cases will be
completed next year. We also look forward to receiving
the annual review of the implementation of the
resolution before the end of this year. We commend the
visits undertaken by the Committee to several States,
including Libya. My country would like to place on
record its appreciation for CTED and for its expertise
and efforts to improve its counter-terrorism activities. I
would like to reiterate my country’s readiness to
cooperate with CTED and other relevant international
bodies and efforts.
We would also like to welcome the progress that
has been made in the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), under your wise
chairmanship, Mr. President. We also welcome the
review that has been carried out of the names listed on
the consolidated list. The Chairman spoke about the
challenges facing the completion of that process, as
well as about arriving at a sanctions list that cannot be
challenged through the legal system. There are still
names of persons who are long dead on the list. There
are also names whose listing is no longer appropriate,
including persons who have not been positively
identified. That truly hinders the ability of States to
implement sanctions. It can also lead to arbitrary

09-60612

implementation merely by virtue of the suspicion
associated with a given name. We stress the need for
the speedy conclusion of that process and for the
inclusion of sufficient identifying primary information
for the de-listing of any names for which there are no
credible grounds for inclusion on the list.
We welcomed the adoption of resolution 1730
(2006), as well as the establishment of a focal point to
receive requests for de-listing. However, we believe
that this important step still calls for further
complementary measures to set forth transparent and
procedurally fair standards. We also encourage the
Committee to continue to grant exemptions pursuant to
resolution 1452 (2002), so as to steer clear of the
abhorrent concept of collective punishment and to
avoid harsh sanctions that are not based on the
principles of international law and justice and have an
impact on families. Moreover, we stress the need for
the Committee to review sanctions that hinder the
speedy granting of exemptions. In particular, we urge it
to review the use of suspensions to obstruct requests
for exemption.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank Ambassador Urbina for the progress
made thus far, especially with regard to the
non-proliferation obligations imposed on all States.
Many States, including Libya, have provided the
information required under the resolution. We continue
to urge all States to do the same. We fully understand
the grave danger posed to international peace and
security by all sorts of weapons of mass destruction.
We regret to note that the current mechanisms are
insufficient and not universal, for their provisions have
not been incorporated into national legislation.
We once again reiterate that we renounce
weapons of mass destruction. We believe that the total
elimination of such weapons continues to be the best
way to prevent them from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. We also believe that the two
objectives of disarmament and non-proliferation
require sustainable and irreversible progress.
In conclusion, my country, which has suffered the
tragedies of international terrorism, continues to
support the work of the three Committees and their
subsidiary bodies, including any effort that contributes
to our collective goal of eliminating the causes and
manifestations of terrorism so that we can live in a

21

S/PV.6217

world where there is genuine security and safety for all
peoples.
Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to express my delegation’s gratitude to
Ambassadors Vilović and Urbina for their briefings on
the work of the Committees over which they preside. I
would also like to thank them for the important work
they carry out as the Chairs of those Committees.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.
We know the threat that terrorism poses to States
and peoples. It affects the civilian population, who are
the primary victims of terrorism. It is indeed an
intolerable threat against which we have no choice but
to unite and act together. France will continue to fulfil
all its responsibilities in this respect.
As the United Nations so bitterly discovered
recently, the Organization itself is also a target. We
would like to pay tribute here to all the United Nations
staff members who have fallen victim to terrorism. We
remember in particular the men and women who were
wounded or killed in Kabul on 28 October. We also
welcome the United Nations determination to not give
in to terrorist blackmail and to persevere in its mission
in Afghanistan.
The United Nations now has a solid framework
within which to fight terrorism, but we all know that
terrorists will take advantage of any loophole in the
system. That is why it is crucial for the Security
Council
Committees
established
pursuant
to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
with the support of their respective expert groups, to be
able to implement the corresponding resolutions and
enjoy the full support of all Member States.
Resolution 1822 (2008) has made it possible to
improve the operation and procedures of the 1267
Committee, in particular through the revision of the list
of persons and entities subject to sanctions. This is an
enormous task that will enable the list to give us an
accurate idea of the state of the threat. We hope that the
renewal of resolution 1822 (2008) will be an
opportunity to continue these improvements, and we
believe that the resolution deserves to be more widely
known by the public.
The work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to review the implementation of resolution

22

1373 (2001) is crucial. That is why it must be very
clear that the resolution is binding and that all States
must comply with it. France has done its share in this
regard. Of course, some States lack the means to
implement the resolution. In such cases, they can and
should benefit from technical assistance. Here, I would
like to welcome the effective work of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
quality of the dialogue it has achieved with States
aimed at helping them to honour their obligations. I
would also like to thank CTED for having organized
seminars on the regional situations that correspond to
the priorities in the fight against terrorism. In that
respect, the work of the 1373 Committee must be
focused on the most strategic issues and give us a
precise and dynamic understanding of the situation.
I would like to say a few brief words on
resolution 1540 (2004). We all know that nuclear,
radiological, biological and chemical terrorism remains
one of the primary threats to our security. We must
therefore continue to work tirelessly in that Committee.
We have to increase its visibility and its effectiveness.
We welcome in this respect the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) carried out on 1 October
under the chairmanship of Costa Rica, which must
serve as a basis for its work in the months to come. We
should also pursue our efforts to ensure effective
implementation of that resolution. To that end, the
Committee’s operations must be improved, as its role is
critical to coordinating assistance requests.
Indeed, we must focus all of our efforts today on
assistance. The working group of the 1540 Committee,
currently chaired by France, will do all it can to make
concrete progress in that area. We must improve the
timeframes involved in dealing with requests, improve
follow-up to offers and carry out specific visits to
certain countries.
We encourage all States that wish to enhance
their capacity to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to make requests for assistance to
the Committee. We also call on all States with the
necessary capacity to assist the Committee in
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
We welcome the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, which has
strengthened the capacity of the United Nations and
helped those involved in the fight against terrorism to

09-60612

S/PV.6217

share their experience and define common priorities.
We believe that the Task Force has become a crucial
tool in our kit, and we must now institutionalize it.
On our part, we will continue to play an active
role within the three Committees and to do our utmost
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to
fight terrorism in all its forms.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Vilović, Urbina and
Mayr-Harting for their informative briefings in their
capacity as the Chairs of the three Security Council
Committees entrusted with combating international
terrorism.
With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
wholeheartedly welcome the efforts of the Committee
and its expert group to implement the Committee’s
programme of work. The comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) undertaken
on 30 September by the Committee was an important
phase of its work five years after its establishment. We
hope that the important recommendations that the
Committee formulated at the conclusion of that
exercise will be rapidly translated into concrete and
effective measures aimed at achieving the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004).
In order to support the initiatives and efforts of
the Committee, we have always believed that the
Committee and its expert group should undertake visits
to willing States. Such visits would enable it to
improve its dialogue with interested States and to
evaluate their implementation efforts and technical
assistance needs. In addition to training and awarenessraising projects, in particular the regional workshops,
such visits will be decisive for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
We also urge the Committee to maintain ongoing,
direct dialogue and exchanges of experience with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
order to better guide its work.
The current sanctions regime against Al-Qaida
and the Taliban has proven to be effective, and the
relevant initiatives undertaken by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) following the adoption of resolution 1822
(2008) only improve that regime by adapting it to a
new international context.

09-60612

Ensuring a reliable and transparent procedure for
adding or removing individuals or entities from the
consolidated list, as well as efforts to streamline
exemptions for humanitarian reasons, reinforce
counter-terrorism activities while respecting human
rights. We welcome the new impetus injected into the
work of the Committee by the effort to ensure reliable
information that will better justify the addition or
removal of names from the list. We commend in this
respect the important role played by the Monitoring
Team through its effective cooperation with all
Member States and other organs and entities of the
United Nations system.
Indeed, the current review of all the names on the
consolidated list is essential and requires the
cooperation not only of the States directly involved,
but also of all Member States in order to achieve,
before 30 June 2010, as required by resolution 1822
(2008), a reliable and uncontested list.
Furthermore, we believe that the success of the
informal meetings organized on 18 June and
28 October to allow States to exchange information
and discuss human rights protection in the
implementation of the sanctions regime clearly
demonstrates the progress achieved by the Committee.
The visits of its Chairman to the Russian Federation,
Brussels and Vienna give added value to the work of
the Committee. This tradition is useful and should be
continued.
We are also convinced that the current
discussions on the recommendations of the Monitoring
Team contained in its tenth report, as well as the
lessons drawn from the review process, will help to
correct deficiencies and make the sanctions regime
more effective, in particular through the imminent
adoption of a new resolution.
Above all, if we want a sustainable and effective
sanctions regime, it is important to prioritize the issue
of technical assistance to countries with undeveloped
capacities in order to prevent them from becoming
ready havens for individuals targeted by sanctions.
Otherwise, all the progress achieved to date will be
largely compromised.
With respect to the 1373 Committee, we are
pleased to note that, with the support of CTED, it has
completed the 191 Preliminary Implementation
Assessments for resolution 1373 (2001). The
preliminary evaluation undertaken in June 2009 of the

23

S/PV.6217

support of the Executive Directorate for the Committee
has resulted in appropriate recommendations, which we
support.
The direct dialogue that the Committee has
launched with the permanent missions of certain
countries in New York; the country visits, including
that to Burkina Faso in February; the training
workshops and awareness-raising seminars in which
the Committee and CTED have taken part; the close
cooperation and exchanges of experience with regional
and subregional organizations, including the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism in
Algiers; and the assessment process for the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) have helped
to paint a clearer picture of the way in which States are
fulfilling their obligations under the resolution and to
formulate recommendations. The revised global survey
of the implementation of the resolution has contributed
to improving the Committee’s regional and subregional
evaluations.
We are convinced that the recommendations
formulated following this exercise, if faithfully
implemented, will help to bridge the gaps in the
resolution’s implementation. The same holds true for
the conclusions reached at the two thematic discussions
on technical assistance and cooperation. Given the
results, the Committee and the Executive Directorate
are to be commended for their work over the past six
months.
In conclusion, because the fight against terrorism
is a complex undertaking that calls for joint efforts, we
welcome the cooperation established among the three
Committees themselves and between them and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Task Force established by the Secretary-General in the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today’s debate. I also wish to join previous speakers in
thanking the respective Chairs of the Council’s three
counter-terrorism Committees for their briefings on
developments during the past six months.
Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to the
international community. Countering terrorism requires
a comprehensive and multifaceted approach, as well as
enduring engagement. The three Committees play a

24

significant role in this context and should continue
their efforts to develop further effective measures.
As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. The
sanctions imposed against individuals and entities
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban under
resolution 1267 (1999) — travel bans, the freezing of
assets and arms embargoes — continue to play a
crucial role in countering terrorism.
In order for the regime under resolution 1267
(1999) to be fully effective, continued efforts to ensure
the credibility of the consolidated list are
indispensable. Japan commends the work accomplished
so far by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) with respect to the
comprehensive review of the list and narrative
summaries of reasons for listing pursuant to resolution
1822 (2008), as well as the improvement in recent
years of its listing and de-listing process. We are also
grateful to the Monitoring Team and the 1267
Committee’s secretariat for their devoted work in these
endeavours.
Japan regards the improvement of the 1267
sanctions regime as instrumental in making its dueprocess improvements and raising its transparency and
efficiency. We continue to support the efforts to
improve the regime in a way that does not compromise
its effectiveness as a counterterrorism measure.
I welcome the good work done by the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
(CTED) in encouraging Member States to fully
implement resolution 1373 (2001). I also pay tribute to
Mr. Smith, Executive Director, and the CTED experts
for their excellent work in counter-terrorism efforts.
We attach great importance to the role of
Committee CTED in identifying specific needs in the
area of counterterrorism technical assistance. In this
regard, we support the stocktaking exercise consisting
in the review of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by all Member States. This exercise contributes,
through dialogue, to identifying the challenges that
Member States face and the technical assistance that
they require. We expect the Committee and CTED to
make further efforts in this area to enhance counterterrorism capacity in all Member States.
It is important to note at the same time that some
countries are not submitting their Preliminary

09-60612

S/PV.6217

Implementation Assessments (PIAs) to CTED in a
timely manner. We would like to stress that all Member
States need to cooperate fully with CTED and make a
determined effort to submit their PIAs by the deadline.

assistance in promoting the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in close cooperation with the
1540 Committee and other international forums,
including the Group of Eight.

In addition, we would like to highlight the
importance of the country visits that have been
conducted by the Committee and CTED. Country visits
are among the valuable tools allowing the Committee
and CTED to ascertain the current situation of counterterrorism in a given country and to assess actual needs
in the area of technical assistance for capacity-building
through direct contact with the relevant authorities. It
is our hope that the Committee and CTED will adopt a
more effective approach by engaging in shorter and
more focused country visits and regional visits in a
flexible manner.

Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
among the three subsidiary Committees to maximize
the functions mandated by the respective Security
Council resolutions. We also commend the contribution
of their work within the framework of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The cooperation
and coordination in this regard should make the most
of the limited capacities and resources available by
avoiding overlaps and duplications.

With regard to technical assistance for capacitybuilding, Japan would like to express deep appreciation
to CTED for sharing information regarding technical
assistance needs with members of the Counterterrorism Action Group (CTAG). Japan continues to
support the coordination mechanism between CTED
and CTAG.
Lastly, we welcome the revised version of the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), which is now under consideration by the
Committee. We hope that the global survey will
contribute to deepening our understanding of the
counter-terrorism measures in both the regional and
thematic aspects.
Japan expresses its appreciation for the strenuous
efforts undertaken by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to promote full
implementation of the resolution, and also appreciates
Costa Rica’s presidential efforts in the Committee. We
highly value the adoption of resolution 1887 (2009) on
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, in which
the Security Council reaffirms the need for full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Japan also
welcomes the fruitful discussion in the open meeting
convened from 30 September through 2 October as part
of the comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Ensuring sincere compliance by Member States
with the provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673
(2006) and 1810 (2008) requires a tailored approach
that takes the specific needs of each respective country
into consideration. Japan will continue to extend its

09-60612

Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Ranko Vilović,
Ambassador Jorge Urbina and you, Mr. President, for
the very comprehensive briefings on the work of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267 (1999),
respectively, during the six-month period since the
previous joint briefing (S/PV.6128), held in May. We
express our appreciation for the implementation of
heavy work programmes by all three Committees in
accordance with their mandates under the respective
Council resolutions. Those achievements would not
have been possible without the professional and
effective support of the three Committees’ expert
groups.
Viet Nam acknowledges with serious concern the
complex developments in the fight against
international terrorism, in particular the evolving
threats posed to international peace and security and
the tragic consequences inflicted upon innocent people
by terrorist attacks. In that context, countering
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by all
means and through all channels, in accordance with
international law, should remain high on the agenda of
the United Nations, including all its competent bodies.
Following the direction of the Security Council
set out in paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the
1267
Committee
has
been
undertaking
a
comprehensive review of all the names on its
consolidated list, making use of that review process to
update the list where possible. We wish to encourage
Member States to lend further cooperation and
assistance in order to ensure the success of the review
process. We share the Committee’s concerns over the
credibility of the 1267 sanctions regime and support its

25

S/PV.6217

continued efforts to address challenges regarding the
consolidated list and to improve its procedures.
In September this year, convinced that promoting
interaction and cooperation between the Security
Council Committees and Member States is key to the
success of their work, Viet Nam facilitated a working
visit by the Monitoring Team of the 1267 Committee to
our country. The visit allowed experts of the
Monitoring Team to exchange views with competent
Vietnamese agencies in relation to the implementation
of the 1267 sanctions regime in the region.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its
part, continues the stocktaking exercise of the
implementation by Member States of the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions. Through a
series of direct conversations between the three
subcommittees and representatives of Member States
that have fallen behind in assuming their reporting
obligation, the Committee has gained a better
understanding of the difficulties faced by many
Member States, which, in many cases, involve a lack of
capacity or coordination, rather than a lack of
willingness or commitment. Another key channel
through which the CTC can monitor and promote the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is visits to
Member States. We recognize that, over the past six
months, the CTC, through its Executive Directorate
(CTED), has been able to carry out visits in various
formats to eight countries. We encourage the CTC to
engage CTED in regional visits aimed at analysing
good practices and addressing vulnerabilities on a
regional scale.
We note the CTC’s efforts to remind Member
States of their obligation to respect international law on
human rights and refugees in countering terrorism and
that, for that purpose, CTED intends to include human
rights references in all Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs). In that regard, my delegation wishes
to reiterate our position — which we have made clear
while considering the PIAs of several countries — that
the human rights concerns raised by the CTC in the
PIAs must be placed in the context of counterterrorism.
My delegation notes that, over the past six
months, the 1540 Committee’s major focus of work has
been to conduct a comprehensive review of the status
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with a
view to reporting the outcome to the Security Council

26

by the end of January 2010. We welcome the
Committee’s efforts, through various forums, to solicit
inputs from Member States, relevant international and
regional organizations and representatives of relevant
industries, academic institutions and non-governmental
organizations in order to improve the implementation
of the resolution. We look forward to the Committee’s
report on the outcome of the comprehensive review.
Although each of the three Committees has a
distinct mandate that determines the framework for its
activities and those of its expert group, we encourage
the Committees to promote, where possible,
coordination and cooperation among their expert
groups with a view to improving the cost-effectiveness
of their work. Along the same lines, we support the
efforts of the expert groups to contribute to and
coordinate their work within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
was established to ensure overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and to help implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In conclusion, Viet Nam continues to recognize
the important role of the three Committees and their
positive contributions to the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions aimed at addressing the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorism.
We wish to reaffirm our consistent support for and
cooperation with the Committees in carrying out their
mandates.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Vilović, Ambassador Urbina and you,
Mr. President, for briefing the Council on the work of
the Security Council Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267
(1999), respectively. China wishes to express its
appreciation for the effective work of the three
ambassadors and their teams.
In accordance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1822 (2008), the 1267 Committee is
undertaking a review of the consolidated list in an
orderly manner. The review process is likely to
improve the completeness and accuracy of the
sanctions list, enhance the relevance, effectiveness and
fairness of the sanctions regime, and reinforce the
authority and status of the Committee.

09-60612

S/PV.6217

We note that the review process is arduous,
requiring the support of all Member States. We
encourage Member States to provide the Committee
with detailed and reliable information and to cooperate
with it so that the review process can be completed on
schedule. We support the Committee’s continued
discussions on how to improve the listing and
de-listing procedures to ensure that the relevant
information contained in the sanctions list truly reflects
changes in the corresponding situations and that the list
becomes a true living document.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with
the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), has carried out an
enormous amount of effective work in terms of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs) and
country visits. China commends their efforts made in
that regard. CTED recently updated and enhanced the
survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States and conducted an overall
assessment of the progress and the gaps in such
implementation. That will be very helpful to the work
of the CTC during the next phase. We believe that lack
of resources and capacity are the major difficulties
facing many States, in particular the developing
countries, in their efforts to implement the resolution.
We hope that through consideration of the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA) and technical
assistance the CTC will continue to strengthen its
dialogue with Member States, while giving full
consideration to the specific difficulties they face,
objectively assess their effective implementation of the
resolution and focus on enhancing Member States’
capacity-building in the fight against terrorism
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001).
The 1540 Committee assisted by the 1540 expert
group, achieved remarkable progress in its
comprehensive review of the implementation of the
resolution, outreach assistance and international
cooperation. China appreciates those efforts and for the
next phase, in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004)
and other relevant resolutions, the Committee should
continue its efforts to carry out its programme of work
in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
China attaches importance to the role of the 1540
Committee and has always participated actively and
constructively in the work of the Committee. We stand
ready to continue to actively support the work of the
Committee in promoting the implementation of

09-60612

resolution 1540 (2004), galvanizing consensus on
non-proliferation and enhancing international efforts
and cooperation in non-proliferation.
Over the past months, violence and terrorist
activities have continued unabated at the global level,
posing grave threats to international peace and security.
United Nations counter-terrorism missions continue to
face many challenges ahead. China believes that, in
view of the grave challenges facing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Security Council
counter-terrorism regime should continue to push for
implementation
of
relevant
counter-terrorism
resolutions, while at the same time paying closer
attention to the needs of the developing countries in
combating terrorism. Respect for their national
counter-terrorism strategies and methods must be
ensured, while assisting them in strengthening their
capacities to combat terrorism.
China urges strengthened coordination between
the three Committees and their experts groups in order
to use resources efficiently and avoid overlap in their
work.
China supports the three Committees within their
respective mandates and actively participates in the
relevant
work
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) to promote the
comprehensive and balanced implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, so that the counterterrorism efforts of the Security Council and the
General Assembly will be mutually complementary and
coordinated. China will continue to maintain the
central role of the United Nations in the global efforts
to combat terrorism.
The President: I give
representative of Switzerland.

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank the Chairmen of Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee
for their very informative briefings. Switzerland
supports the statement to be made by the Netherlands
on behalf of the like-minded States. I will limit myself
to highlighting a few political and legal challenges that
Switzerland is facing.
Many States in Europe and elsewhere face major
political and legal challenges in implementing the 1267
sanctions regime. In Switzerland, a decision by the
Swiss Parliament requested the Swiss Government to

27

S/PV.6217

cease implementing sanctions against individuals
included on the 1267 list in cases where certain criteria
had not been considered.

the necessary acceptance in national and regional
parliaments and will be able to withstand appeals in
national and regional courts.

Parliaments are not alone in being increasingly
concerned by the issue of reconciling United Nations
targeted sanctions with human rights principles. The
Kadi and Al Barakaat ruling of the Court of Justice of
the European Communities of September 2008 is well
known. Switzerland itself is a defendant in a case
before the European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg. The applicant there is challenging the
legality of our domestic measures implementing United
Nations sanctions, but is in fact attacking the United
Nations sanctions system as a whole. According to the
tenth report of the Monitoring Team, other cases are
pending in other countries.

Switzerland remains committed to its efforts to
safeguard and further enhance the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the sanctions system as an invaluable
element in the fight against terrorism. We therefore call
upon the Security Council to take into account the
concerns expressed in that respect when it adopts the
new resolution at the end of the year.

Member States’ Governments find themselves in
a serious dilemma when parliaments or courts
challenge the legality of domestic measures that
implement United Nations targeted sanctions. Member
States today may risk having to choose between the
option of satisfying obligations imposed by the
Charter, or acting in conformity with decisions of their
parliaments or courts upholding human rights. The
Council could still remedy this problem if it introduced
the necessary changes. If it does not, there is a risk of
uneven application of United Nations sanctions, which
would undermine the credibility and efficiency of the
entire system.
Switzerland and its like-minded partners have
approached the members of the Security Council in
recent months in order to exchange views on a broad
range of options to improve the current listing and
de-listing procedures. I would like to highlight in
particular, the proposal to create an independent expert
panel on the de-listing issue.
While bearing in mind the unique role of the
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, we believe that such an expert panel would
not weaken the Council’s authority. This opinion is
shared by, among others, the Monitoring Team in its
tenth report. Such an expert panel, appointed by the
Security Council, would assist the Committee in the
consideration of de-listing requests. It would be up to
the Council to decide upon the competencies of the
panel. One element is clear: the greater the
independence and the effectiveness of the panel, the
more likely it will be that targeted sanctions will find

28

The President: I
representative of Sweden.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia align themselves
with this statement.
International terrorism continues to be one of the
most dangerous threats of our time. Over the past
decade, terrorist networks have proven capable not
only of inflicting massive casualties and human
suffering but also of destabilizing entire societies and
States. The attack in Kabul on the 28 October reminded
us once again that terrorism has become a direct and
increasingly serious threat to the United Nations and its
personnel as well. The men and women who were
killed in the Kabul attack deserve our deep gratitude
for serving the United Nations and its principles under
dangerous circumstances and for paying for that noble
cause with their lives. The European Union extends its
deepest condolences to their families and friends.
Arresting terrorists, disrupting their plots and
eliminating their sources of financing are essential in
keeping the threat at bay. The European Union will
continue to support firm multilateral action against
terrorism and is committed to implementing and
improving
the
multilateral
counter-terrorism
framework. The effectiveness of our measures is
founded on their credibility and perceived legitimacy.
The European Union is actively engaged in the
ongoing discussions about enhancing the design,
implementation and effectiveness of sanctions. We
welcome the continuous efforts to ensure that fair and
clear procedures within the 1267 regime are enhanced.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1822
(2008) last year was an important step in that direction.

09-60612

S/PV.6217

We welcome the specific measures taken to improve
the listing process on the basis of that resolution, such
as providing statements of case for new listings and
publishing narrative summaries of reasons for listings.
Another major step forward is the review of the 1267
list; it has already shown significant results. Further
improvements on many points, and especially with
regard to de-listing, are necessary. The resolution to be
adopted by the Security Council in December presents
an important opportunity. The tenth report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2009/502) offers a valuable basis for this effort.
In response to resolution 1822 (2008) and the
demands of the European Court of Justice, the
European Union is in the process of modifying its
procedures for implementing the 1267 regime. With
these improvements, the European Union hopes to
meet the due process requirements set out by European
courts. Further improvements at the United Nations
level are also called for in order to ensure the effective
implementation of the United Nations sanctions
regime.
Our collective ability to curb terrorism ultimately
depends on the abilities of individual Member States.
The strengthening of legal frameworks and the
bolstering of national capacities to respond to terrorist
threats are of vital importance. The European Union
and its member States are among the main providers of
capacity-building measures in the rule of law and
counter-terrorism areas under resolution 1373 (2001).
We continue to support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and its Executive Directorate
(CTED), and we will continue to make significant
contributions to their work as well as to the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
The European Union welcomes the results of the
interim review of the work of CTED, as set out in
resolution 1805 (2008). We support the ongoing
stocktaking of the implementation process with its
special focus on countries that have not regularly
reported to the Committee and the ambition to
strengthen cooperation with regional specialized
organizations. We also encourage deeper integration of
human rights in the CTC’s and CTED’s work with
Member States.
It is difficult to imagine a more frightening
scenario than terrorists using nuclear, biological or

09-60612

chemical weapons. Resolution 1540 (2004) provides a
strong legal basis for our diplomatic, legal and
financial efforts to prevent non-State actors, including
terrorists, from acquiring those types of weapons and
their means of delivery. The European Union Strategy
against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction underlines our commitment to the highest
export control standards. We continue to provide
significant assistance to third countries. The European
Union, in addition to its member States’ individual
contributions, plans to spend around €300 million on
cooperation to counter proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons and
materials in the period 2007 to 2013.
We also welcome the comprehensive review
process through which Member States were recently
invited to share views and experiences on the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee is an important clearing house, matching
assistance offers and requests, a role that should be
further developed.
In order for sanctions and other measures aimed
specifically at terrorists to be effective, they must
comply fully with all aspects of international law and
be combined with efforts aimed at addressing the
conditions conducive to terrorism. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy stands as the most
significant expression of our common ambition to
address international terrorism in all its aspects. But
more needs to be done when it comes to
implementation. One concrete step that should be taken
urgently is to institutionalize the Secretary-General’s
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council and its Committees to seek effective,
legitimate and coherent implementation of United
Nations counter-terrorism measures. We will continue
to be a committed partner in the period ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Chairmen of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), for the information they provided.
On numerous occasions, our country has
submitted to the Security Council detailed information
on terrorist acts against Cuba perpetrated by various

29

S/PV.6217

individuals and organizations, as well as on the
conspiratorial protection they are given by the United
States Government. So far, our complaints remain
unanswered.
Last 21 October, the notorious terrorist Santiago
Álvarez Fernández-Magriñá was set free in the United
States. That terrorist had been sentenced for having an
illegal cache of hundreds of arms and ammunition in
south Florida, and for obstruction of justice, having
refused to testify before a federal grand jury on the
illegal entry into the United States of his accomplice,
the well-known international terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles. The truth is that Santiago Álvarez was himself
responsible for smuggling Posada Carriles into the
United States aboard his vessel Santrina, in early 2005,
an act that the Cuban Government denounced at that
time.
That terrorist was found to be in possession of,
among other weapons, an illegal cache of 30 automatic
and semiautomatic machine guns, a rocket launcher,
numerous grenades, over 200 pounds of dynamite, 14
pounds of C-4 plastic explosive and 4,000 feet of
detonating cord — a quantity of illegal arms
unprecedented in south Florida — all to perpetrate
terrorist acts against Cuba. However, the United States
District Attorney’s Office decided not to press charges
of terrorism against him and sentenced him to only
four years of imprisonment, a sentence that was then
reduced to just 11 months.
Santiago Álvarez has a record of terrorist acts
against the Cuban people. To cite only a few examples,
he was a founding member of the south Florida-based
paramilitary terrorist organization Alpha 66; he
enlisted as a mercenary in Brigade 2506, which
invaded Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961; and he was a
key accomplice of Posada Carriles in planning the
failed assassination attempt on the leader of the Cuban
revolution, Fidel Castro, in Panama, in 2000. Álvarez’s
participation in various pirate attacks against Cuba
from United States territory is widely known. On
12 October 1971, he participated in a terrorist attack
against the population of Boca de Sama, in the north of
Holguín Province, during which the perpetrators
murdered two people and seriously wounded a girl.
He tried to insert a terrorist cell into the area of
Isabela de Sagua, in Villa Clara Province, Cuba, in
April 2001, with the purpose of perpetrating acts of
vandalism in the country. Among the missions Álvarez

30

ordered for that terrorist cell was the bombing of the
Tropicana cabaret in Havana. There is irrefutable
documentary proof of his participation in this act.
The international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
who has been rightly rated the most notorious terrorist
of the western hemisphere, is still free in the United
States without being prosecuted for his terrorist acts
against Cuba, despite the fact that the United States
Government has all the evidence necessary to do so,
including what Cuba has provided it since 1998. The
United States Government has limited its action to a
single trial for petty immigration offenses.
The Government of the Republic of Cuba insists
once again the United States authorities fulfil their
international obligation to prosecute Posada Carriles as
a terrorist or to extradite him to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in response to the request made
by that Government on 15 June 2005, some four years
ago.
This terrorist is responsible for the in-flight
bombing of a Cubana de Aviación airliner, claiming the
lives of 73 innocent civilians. Precisely, last 6 October
marked another anniversary of that abominable crime.
Posada Carriles is also responsible for attacks on
tourist facilities in Havana in 1997 and for dozens of
plans financed by the United States Government to
assassinate the Commander of the Cuban revolution,
Fidel Castro Ruz. I should stress that these are only
some of the acts confessed by their perpetrator.
In stark contrast to that case is that of the five
Cuban heroes who, on 12 September 2008, marked
11 years of incarceration in United States prisons for
the sole reason that they fought to against Miami-based
terrorism against Cuba — to prevent terrorists like
Posada Carriles and Santiago Álvarez from committing
terrorist acts against our country.
Cuba supports the position of the 118 States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement against the
unilateral preparation of lists accusing States of
supposedly supporting terrorism, a practice that is not
in accordance with international law or United Nations
resolutions. On 30 April, for the twenty-eighth
consecutive year, the United States Government
included Cuba on a list of States that supposedly
sponsor international terrorism. Cuba vigorously
rejects the inclusion of our country on this unilateral
and spurious list, which is politically manipulated and
motivated, of unsound origin and drawn up by the

09-60612

S/PV.6217

United States Department of State. With the
unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on this list, the new
United States Government is denying the political
rationality it publicly proclaims and following the
mistaken path of its predecessors as it resorts to
political manipulations and flagrant lies against Cuba,
with the aim of justifying at all costs its discredited,
isolated and unsustainable policy against our country.
Those who draw up such lists lack the even the
slightest moral authority to set themselves up as
international arbiters on terrorism or to certify the
conduct of others as good or bad.
The impeccable policy of the Cuban revolution
with regard to terrorism leaves no room for questions
or doubts, least of all from Washington. Cuba
condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism,
in all its forms and manifestations, wherever, by
whoever and against whomsoever committed, whatever
their motivations. What is more, the Cuban territory
has never been used nor will it be used to organize,
finance or carry out terrorist acts against any country.
The United States Government cannot say the
same. Over the past 50 years, the United States
Government has been involved in repeated terrorist
acts which have resulted in 3,478 deaths among the
Cuban people and the maiming of 2,099, as well as
material losses amounting to trillions of dollars.
Cuba has worked tirelessly in the search for
bilateral and multilateral forms of cooperation to fight
international terrorism, based on mutual respect,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and the
sovereign equality of States. In that context, on
29 November 2001, Cuba proposed signing a bilateral
counter-terrorism programme with the United States
Government, without any conditions and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). That
proposal, subsequently reiterated on various occasions,
was rejected by the Bush Administration on the basis
of empty and irrational arguments. If the new United
States Administration genuinely wishes to prove its
commitment to the fight against terrorism, it now has
the opportunity to take firm action, without double
standards, against the various terrorist organizations
that have attacked Cuba for so many years from within
the territory of the United States. It has the opportunity
to let justice be done by releasing, without further
delay, the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters that it has
kept as political prisoners for over 10 years in highsecurity prisons. The President of the United States has

09-60612

the constitutional prerogative to set them free as an act
of justice and to show the commitment of his
Government to fighting terrorism.
The United States Government has the floor. It is
in its hands to stop using the topic of terrorism for
political purposes and to put an end the unfair and
groundless inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries
that supposedly sponsor terrorism.
Cuba reiterates its willingness to make a more
detailed presentation on these questions before the
Counter-Terrorism Committee or submit to it any
additional information or clarification considered
necessary. Double standards cannot prevail. It will be
impossible to eliminate terrorism so long as some
terrorist acts are condemned and others are covered up,
tolerated or justified. As in the past, Cuba will continue
to strictly abide by the provisions of Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and to cooperate with the subsidiary bodies established
pursuant to them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I draw the
attention of the Council to a fuller version of our
statement that has been distributed in the Chamber. I
shall limit my comments to the renewal of the
sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban later
this year.
Efforts to improve the effectiveness and
perceived legitimacy of this important tool in the fight
against terrorism are important. We have, therefore, for
a number of years now, worked together with other
States on this issue. We endorse the statement that will
be made later during this debate on behalf of the group
of like-minded countries by the representative of the
Netherlands. We also recall the discussion paper
submitted by the Group in May 2008. The proposal
contained therein regarding the establishment of a
panel of experts to advise sanctions committees on
requests for de-listing remains as relevant as ever.
We appreciate the progress made by the 1267
Committee through its review process and other
improvements brought about by resolution 1822
(2008), and we applaud your leadership, Ambassador
Mayr-Harting, in this respect. Nevertheless, the lack of
independent elements in the review and in the
de-listing procedure continues to cause concern

31

S/PV.6217

regarding the fairness of the regime, as evidenced in
various legal proceedings cited in the tenth report of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2009/502).
A review panel, as proposed by the group in May
2008, could be a good way to address these concerns,
but we are not wedded to any terminology or any
specific institutional solution. There can certainly be
different ways to achieve the goal of safeguarding
standards of due process and addressing legal
challenges that are potentially detrimental to the
authority of the Council.
With regard to the working paper drawn up by a
group of like-minded countries, I would like to
highlight two important substantive areas. First, any
future mechanism for de-listing should improve the
possibility for the applicant to be effectively heard and,
in particular, to respond to and refute allegations on
which the listing is based. That requires a more
substantive and more interactive dialogue between the
applicants and the mechanism than that which is
currently taking place through the focal point process.
The procedure should be designed in such a manner
that the mechanism can receive all relevant
information, including confidential information, from
the designating and other cooperating States, as well as
from other sources. In order to enable the mechanism
to satisfy the confidentiality conditions set out by a
State, it may be necessary, on a case-by-case basis, to
allow direct interaction between the mechanism and
the capital-based authorities of that State. Finally, it is
crucial that the mechanism be in a position to present
its own findings and recommendations to the
Committee.
Secondly, recent legal developments point to the
need to treat de-listing requests that enjoy the support
of the designating State with particular priority. States
that present names for listing currently assume the risk
that subsequent developments that would warrant
de-listing will not be honoured by the Committee and
that the continued listing will be perceived as the
continued responsibility and fault of that State. Where

32

designating States revoke their support for a listing, the
entry loses its original justification and should be
automatically removed, except, of course, where the
Committee, on the basis of a new designation by a
different State, confirms the entry.
What transpires from the latest report submitted
by the Monitoring Team and from other sources is the
need for the Council to address the issue of fair and
clear procedures head-on. The uncertainties about
whether the future reform will fully satisfy the
multitude of actors that have weighed in on the subject
in recent years do not justify inaction. The practical
challenge of sharing confidential information, which
may make a future mechanism less than perfect, can
also not justify inaction but requires creative
engagement and thinking. The argument that sanctions
are preventive rather than punitive in nature — in itself
a questionable statement — can equally not dispel the
need for fair procedures.
The fairness of sanctions procedures has to be
measured in relation to the impact that such measures
have on the targets. By design and with good reason,
sanctions are intended to hit the targeted individuals
hard in order to prevent them from engaging in terrorist
activities and support. Any person so targeted, rightly
or wrongly, by the Security Council experiences a
massive interference in his or her rights. That fact
alone warrants procedures that give the listed persons
or entities the equivalent level of protection against the
continuation of unjustified listings that would be
required from any State in its autonomous listing
system in implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We have high expectations regarding the ongoing
reform process and we stand ready to contribute to it,
including through individual or collective engagement
with Security Council members.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

09-60612
