Re11olution11 adopted on the reportll of the Fifth Committee

2616 (XXIV). United Nations accommodation
in Bangkok and Addis Ababa

The General Assembly
l. T akes note of the reports of the SecretaryGeneral dealing with United N ations accommodation
in Bangkok46 and Addis Ababa47 and of the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;48
2. Concurs in the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee, contained in paragraphs 29 to 35 of its report;
3. Authorízes the Secretary-General, bearing in
mind those observations and recommendations, to proceed in accordance with the proposals contained in
bis reports. 49
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.
2617 (XXIV). Study oí the nature oí the increases in the level oí expenditure in the
United Nations regular budget

The General Assembly,
N otíng the concem expressed by sorne Member
States regarding the expansion in the level of the
United N ations budget,
Mindful of the need for intensified efforts to bring
about the most economic and efficient utilization of
the resources of the United N ations in the light of
the normal expansion in the activities of the Organization,
Convinced that it is inappropriate to control growth
in programmes through limitations on budgetary levels,
particularly at a time when new areas eminently suited
for international co-operation and action continue to
emerge,
Conscious of the need to have a clear and objective
picture of the various factors that have contributed to
the expansion of the United Nations budget in the
past,
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session an economic and financia! analysis of the nature of the increase in the activities, staff and budget of the United
Nations, clearly distinguishing between the increase in
money terms and that in real terms, taking into
account, to the extent possible, ínter alía, the following factors:
(a) Toe reduction in the purchasing power of the
amounts contributed by Member States to the regular
budget of the United Nations as a result of a general
rise in the cost of goods and services and the rise in
the cost of living at the locations of principal United
Nations offices;
( b) The correlation between:
(i) Toe rise in the contributions to the regular
budgets of the United Nations and the specialized agencies as well as to international programmes within the U nited N ations system
for promoting the economic development of
the developing countries, and
46 Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda itero 74, document A/C.5/1264.
47 /bid., document A/C.5/1265.
48 /bid., document A/7806.
49 /bid., documents A/C.5/1264, para. 15, and A/C.5/1265,
para. 23.

93

(ii) Toe rise in the level of national budgets with
particular reference to the rate of expansion
of the national administrative establishments
and the level and growth of the gross national
product of States contributing more than 1 per
cent of the regular budget of the United
Nations;
(e) Toe growth in the traditional and the new fields
of activity of the United Nations in carrying out its
responsibilities in promoting international co-operation
in the areas of economic and social development;
(d) Toe extent of the increase in the United
Nations regular budget as a result of:
(i) Toe increase in the membership of the Organization;
(ii) Toe increase in the number of working languages;
( iii) Toe wider experience and higher qualifications
of personnel now required by the Organization, particularly for its development work,
because of the growing complexity and interdisciplinary character that the developmental
problems have come to acquire.
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.
2618 (XXIV). New construction and major alterations to existing premises at United
Nations Headquarters

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2487 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968 entitled "Proposed new construction and
majar alterations to existing premises at United Nations
Headquarters", in which it authorized the SecretaryGeneral to proceed, at an estimated cost to the United
Nations of $250,000 in 1969, with the preparation
of detailed plans and specifications on which reliable
cost estimates could be based,
Noting the subsequent report of the SecretaryGeneraPº and the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 51 on proposed new construction and majar alteration to existing
premises at United Nations Headquarters,
Recognizing that there is currently an acute space
shortage at Headquarters, as well as at many other
major United Nations locations, and that the existing
circumstances preclude any immediate relief except
through new construction,
Convinced that the assistance of the host country is
urgently needed to help resolve the considerable difficulties which exist for delegations and staff in New
York in acquiring and retaining suitable and moderately priced office and residential accommodation in
convenient locations,
A ware that man y factors must be considered in
determining the optimum locations at which additional
construction should be undertaken, including the interrelationships between the organizational units of the
United Nations, inflationary pressures, including costof-living factors, and the like,
Convinced also that all the possibilities of relocating
units of the United Nations now or in the near future
in the context of the existing need to build at atl
w /bid., documents A/C.5/1246 and Add.l.
51 /bid., document A/7835.

General AHembly-Twenty-fourth Session

94

4. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a
systematic inquiry into the possibility and desirability
of relocating all or part of certain units of the United
N ations, bearing in mind the efficiency of the operations of the Secretariat, and for this purpose to employ
the early years of the coming decade, in effective consultation with the appropriate government authorities,
in choosing potential locations for United Nations units
other than in already established majar United Nations
centres;
5. Decides accordingly that, befare further construction-beyond that authorized by this and prior
decisions of the General Assembly-takes place in
New York or Geneva, a full inquiry shall be made
into the possibility and desirability of relocating units
elsewhere;
6. Urges the host country to undertake an examination of those conditions which adversely affect the
delegations and staff of the United Nations in New
York and to consider taking all the neéessary measures to alleviate the effect of such conditions;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to reconstitute
and convene on a regular basis the Informal Joint
Committee on Host Country Relations, so that there
will be a continuous interchange of views and exploration of problems between the diplomatic community,
the Secretariat and the Government of the host country on matters of mutual interest, and to report the
results thereof to the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session and annually thereafter;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to thc
General Assembly, at the beginning of its twenty-fifth
session, on ali developments in connexion with thc
present resolution.
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.

majar United Nations locations, have not yet been
fully explored,
Expressing its appreciation to those other sources
that have indicated or may indicate a willingness to
bear a substantial cost of the proposed Headquarters
construction,
W elcoming the assurances given by the Govemment
of the United States of America, as the host country
of the United Nations Headquarters, that it will immediately seek accession to the Convention on Privileges and lmmunities of the United Nations,
1. Decides to authorize the Secretary-General to
proceed with the execution of the Headquarters project on the basis set forth in paragraph 26 of his report, 52 taking into account the related observations
and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report;
2. Further decides that the United Nations budgetary appropriations far the purpose of the Headquarters
project should not in any circumstances exceed $25 million, to be spread over a period of ten years beginning
in 1971;
3. Notes with interest the report of the SecretaryGeneral53 on space requirements and development over
the next twenty years, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to undertake a further study of the optimum
distribution of Secretariat functions between United
Nations Headquarters in New York, the United Nations
Office at Geneva and any other location which may be
appropriate, bearing in mind not only the construction projects in progress or envisaged, but all other
pertinent factors as well, and requests him to submit
the study to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session;
112 /bid., document A/C.5/1246.
113 /bid., document A/C.5/1263.

*
Other

•

*

decisions

Reports of the Economic and Social Council

(ltem 12)

At its 1837th plenary meeting, on 17 December 1969, the General Assembly
took note of chapters XII and XIII of the report of the Economic and Social
Council to the Assembly at its twenty-fourth session. M
Budget estimates for the financia! year 1970

(ltem 74)
Resolution relating to article 66 of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties and the annex thereto

(Item 94 (e))

At its 1825th plenary meeting, on 8 December 1969, the General Assembly
h~ving _ad?pted the draft ~esolution and decision rec_ommended by the Sixth Com:
mittee m 1ts report, 115 dec1ded, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee: 116
M /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.l).
5
~ !bid., Twenty-fourth Scssion, Annexes, agenda item 94 (a) and (e), document A/
7797, paras. 19 and 20.
16 Jbid., document A/7830, para. 19.
