S/2019/822

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2019
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2448 (2018), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2019 and requ ested me to report
on its implementation on a quarterly basis. The present report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic since my report of 17 June
(S/2019/498) and recommendations on the extension of the mandate of MINUSCA.

II. Political situation
2.
Progress was made in implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, with considerable efforts by the
Government, including the establishment of its follow-up mechanisms. Security
incidents and human rights violations linked to the conflict decreased. However,
significant challenges remain, including abuses against civilians and violent clashes
between signatory armed groups. Popular distrust of the Agreement, in particular
within the political opposition, continued as crucial preparations began for the
presidential, legislative and local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021, integral to
an inclusive political process, indispensable to consolidate democracy and vital to
ensure political stability.
Peace process
3.
For the first time since the signing of the Agreement, the Government and 13 out
of 14 signatory armed groups met in Bangui on 23 and 24 August, co -chaired by the
Prime Minister, Firmin Ngrebada, and the Special Representative and Head of Office
for the African Union Office in the Central African Republic. My Special
Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur
Ndiaye, and representatives of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), Angola, Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
Equatorial Guinea participated. The parties agreed, inter alia, to cease violence
against civilians, expedite cessation of hostilities and restoration of State authority
and improve communication. They underscored the need to sanction non -compliant
signatories.

19-17440 (E)

211019

*1917440*

S/2019/822

4.
Most of the Agreement implementation and monitoring mechanisms are
operational, although with limited participation of women. The highest decisionmaking body, the executive follow-up committee, met on 14 June, 31 July and
27 September, focusing on violations of the Agreement. Government and civil society
representatives called on the guarantors and facilitators, including MINUSCA, to play
a more proactive role, including by applying punitive measures against violators,
pursuant to article 35 of the Agreement.
5.
Considerable efforts were made to maintain the signatories ’ commitment to the
Agreement by my Special Representative, together with the guarantors of the
Agreement, namely the African Union and ECCAS. Their representatives conducted
several joint visits, including with the Government, to areas controlled by signatory
armed groups to strengthen their commitment to the Agreement, impressing on them
the need to participate in the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and cease violations of the Agreement.
6.
On 18 June, a joint delegation met with the leader of the Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation group in Ouham-Pendé prefecture to follow up demands by the
Government and international community that the group surrender those involved in
the massacres near Paoua in May and lay down its weapons. The group ’s leader agreed
to start disarmament and demobilization on 29 June, and that was conducted for
58 combatants. He thereafter stalled on his commitments, announc ing his resignation
as military adviser in charge of the Unité spéciale mixte de sécurité for the northwest
on 4 September.
7.
In June, a joint delegation engaged with the leader of UPC in Ouaka prefecture,
urging him to remove illegal barriers, cease illicit taxation and vacate occupied
administrative buildings. UPC lifted five checkpoints and vacated the gendarmer ie
building in Ngakobo. He maintained that the joint security units (Unités spéciales
mixtes de sécurité) should be established before his comba tants would participate in
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme.
8.
On 30 August, a joint delegation travelled to Kaga Bandoro, Nana -Grébizi
prefecture, to engage the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC) lea der.
He expressed his group’s readiness to start disarmament and demobilization but
requested more information on conditions for reintegration of ex-combatants and
reabsorption of members of the national defence and security forces who had joined
armed groups.
9.
On 15 July, the Minister of Justice presided over the inaugural session of the
national committee that oversees the prefectural committees. The African Union and
ECCAS called upon the committee to play a more proactive role in addressing
challenges, including violations. As at 1 October, 15 of 17 prefectural -level
committees and 14 of 17 technical security committees were operational, with
Government and United Nations support.
10. Significant progress was made towards completing the startup phase of the first
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité. On 4 July, the Prime Minister issued a decree
establishing strategic and technical committees for their planning and swift
establishment. A training site is under preparation in Bouar and ex -combatants for the
first unit selected. The European Union Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic completed a “training of trainers” programme for 30 instructors
from the national defence and security forces in August. The first unit will begin two
months’ training in October.
11. The Mission increased efforts to disseminate the Agreement to civil society
organizations, including women’s, youth and religious groups. Three campaigns were
conducted, in collaboration with the United Nations country team. A fter training
2/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

15 civil society organizations, they conducted campaigns across the country to grass roots communities and local authorities, resulting in improved ownership and
understanding of the Agreement.
12. In the margins of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, I held a high-level meeting on the Central African Republic with the
President of the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadéra, the President
of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the Secretary-General
of the Economic Community of Central African States, Ahmad Allam-Mi.
Participants discussed the implementation of the Agreement and highlighted the need
to further strengthen national, regional and international cooperation to consolidate
peace and strengthen development and humanitarian action.
13. From 5 to 7 October, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Smail Chergui, my Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, JeanPierre Lacroix, and the Managing Director for Africa of the European External Action
Service of the European Union, Koen Vervaeke, visited the Central African Republic
to take stock of the implementation of the Agreement. They met with the Gover nment,
political parties and civil society, as well as diplomatic missions and international
organizations. They called on all signatories to respect their commitments; immediately
end violence and promote dialogue; and ensure the rapid operationalization of the
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité. They encouraged the adoption of draft laws
essential to implement the Agreement and hold peaceful, inclusive and credible
elections, emphasizing that they must be held within the constitutional time frame.
The delegation further called for peace dividends to be accelerated and encouraged
progress in deploying security forces and State administration within the framework
of the Agreement. It stressed that those violating the agreement should be sanctioned,
and that MINUSCA use its agile posture to safeguard the integrity of the Agreement.
The delegation underscored the continued support of the international community.
Political developments
14. Developments related to the Agreement and electoral process dominate d the
reporting period, contributing to an increasingly tense political context, characterized
by lack of trust, with some parties seeking to consolidate political advantage.
MINUSCA continued to engage with political and social actors to find consensus on
the electoral process.
15. On 19 July, the National Assembly adopted the electoral code amended after the
decision of the Constitutional Court of 5 June to the effect that some aspects of the
code were unconstitutional. It was declared consistent with th e Constitution on
14 August following the revocation of certain articles, including one requiring
Government members to resign from their posts to be eligible to contest legislative
seats. In addition, political parties are now responsible for ensuring tha t at least 35 per
cent of their candidates are women. President Touadéra promulgated the code on
20 August.
16. Tensions continued between the Government and E Zingo Biani – Front Uni
pour la Défense de la Nation, an opposition coalition comprising politi cal and civil
society and trade union actors created in May to protest government concessions to
armed groups within the framework of the Agreement, among other political and
governance concerns. The group denounced the inclusion of armed group members in
the Government, characterizing it as “high treason”. Attempts by Government
officials to engage the group in dialogue were unsuccessful. The Mouvement des
Requins de Centrafrique, an amorphous group that emerged to counter E Zingo Biani,
announced its dissolution in July.

19-17440

3/21

S/2019/822

17. The former ruling Kwa Na Kwa party held its third convention from 12 to
18 August, during which it announced its departure from the presidential majority and
intention to align with opposition political parties. The party also announc ed that the
former President, François Bozizé, would be its candidate in the upcoming
presidential election, reiterating its demand that the Government allow Mr. Bozizé,
who remains subject to a national arrest warrant and international sanctions, to retur n
to the country.
18. On 30 July, the president of the opposition party, Union pour le Renouveau
Centrafricain, Anicet Georges Dologuélé, publicly deplored corruption in the
Government, in reaction to the findings of a parliamentary investigation into gol d
mining activities by foreign companies in Ouham-Pendé prefecture. The report
highlighted legal anomalies in granting mining permits and negative environmental
and health impacts of mining activities.
19. Abdou Karim Meckassoua, the former president of the National Assembly,
continued to publicly oppose the Government. On 17 August, he claimed that the court
of auditors had exonerated him of allegations that had led to his impeachment as
president. He called for governance reforms, alleging mismanagement of the Assembly.
Electoral preparations
20. The National Elections Authority began preparations for voter registration,
scheduled from January to April 2020. The Government pledged approximately
$2 million of the $49 million required for its electoral operations.
21. On 5 September, the Government and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) signed a project document establishing a basket fund of around
$42 million for United Nations support for the elections. The European Union pledged
$17 million (to be disbursed in March 2020) and U NDP $2 million, leaving a funding
gap of $23 million at the present stage. No additional pledges have been made to date,
entailing the risk of compromising credible and timely elections.
22. As at 1 October, the procurement process for voter registration material, which
usually takes three months, had not started, owing to lack of resources. Delays in voter
registration would result in the entire electoral calend ar slipping. The Government
and partners continue to stress that strong support by MINUSCA is e ssential
throughout the electoral process, given the limited capacity of national counterparts
and the significant technical, logistical, operational and securit y challenges.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
23. Local peace and reconciliation committees were established in Bambari,
Bangassou, Bouar, Bossangoa, Bria, Kaga Bandoro, Paoua and Sibut, reaching a total
of 29 across the country. MINUSCA continued to support local authorities in their
dialogue to, inter alia, reconcile Muslim and Christian co mmunities and facilitate the
return of displaced persons in the third district of Bangui. MINUSCA supported
intercommunal dialogue to de-escalate tensions following clashes between criminal
gangs and local traders in July there. MINUSCA launched a communit y policing
project involving the third district commissariat to enhance community engagement
and build confidence in national security forces. MINUSCA intensifie d support for
intercommunal dialogue in Birao following armed clashes and displacement of
civilians.

4/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

III. Security situation
24. Violations of the Agreement dropped from 230 in April to 104 in September.
However, activity by armed groups in violation of the Agreement continued, including
violence against civilians, illegal taxation and obstruction of State authority. After
abating in June and July, violence renewed in August and September, including in
areas previously unaffected by conflict. The Front populaire pour la renaissance de
centrafrique (FPRC) was responsible for most reported viola tions against civilians,
followed by signatory and non-signatory anti-balaka groups.
25. The most significant clashes since June took place in Vakaga prefecture between
the Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour la justice (MLCJ) and FPRC. On
14 July, they clashed in Am Dafok, and nine combatants were killed. FPRC reinforced
its position in Birao with 80 combatants from Ndélé. On 31 August, FPRC killed the
son of the sultan of Birao, resulting in two days of clashes. One civilian and
24 combatants were killed, and an estimated 13,000 civilians who had sought refuge
near the MINUSCA compound and the airport were displaced. The African Union,
ECCAS and MINUSCA denounced the clashes, demanding an immediate cessation
of hostilities. Despite the engagement of my Special Representative and the African
Union Special Representative with the FPRC military leader, the group attacked
MLCJ positions on 14 September, and an additional 39 combatants were killed. To
date, 24,000 civilians have been displaced.
26. MINUSCA took a robust posture to protect civilians, prevent further fighting
and facilitate humanitarian work, including flying in humanitarian supplies, deploying
a quick reaction force and assessing risks from unexploded ordnance. MINUSCA
reinforced dialogue involving internally displaced persons, local authorities and civil
society. MINUSCA took measures to mitigate the risk of conflict with ethnic undertones
in other areas by reinforcing early warning networks in hotspots, increasing deployment
of protection missions and developing procedures to better protect civilians.
27. Anti-balaka groups, FPRC and the Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique
(MPC) attacked humanitarian organizations seven times between 1 June and
1 October in and around Batangafo, Ouham prefecture. On 4 and 7 August, ex-Séléka
erected two new checkpoints there. MINUSCA deployed a formed police unit on
7 September to reinforce protection at internally displaced persons camps.
28. MPC and FPRC continued to reinforce their presence north of Paoua. On
15 July, suspected MPC combatants ambushed villagers and looted villages in the
region. The movement of civilians and humanitarians between Kouki and Markounda
was restricted during the week of 22 July on account of a dispute over control of a
new mining site.
29. Following a communiqué of 19 July by the FPRC leader, FPRC lifted 18 barriers
around Bamingui-Bangoran and between Bria and Ippy, and vacated 13 public
buildings in Birao, Vakaga prefecture. He issued a press release on 26 July a nnouncing
a permanent cessation of hostilities. During the reporting period, FPRC committed at
least 100 violations against civilians and continued to operate a detention facility in
Kaga Bandoro with MPC. FPRC also continued to illegally detain civilians in Bria.
On 21 June, a senior FPRC leader published a communiqué illegally declaring that
all military movements in Haute-Kotto prefecture required prior FPRC approval.
30. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation continued to carry out military movements
and harass civilians around Boukaya and Nguio-Bouar, despite commitments to cease
hostilities in June. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation reinforced its position around
the Dilapoko, Amada-Gaza and Abba mining sites in June and July and began illegal
taxation in the Baboua area. Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation maintained its

19-17440

5/21

S/2019/822

presence in Bang, Ngaoundaye and Niem-Yelewa, but did not return to Létélé and
Boukaya, from where MINUSCA had expelled them in May.
31. On 26 September, MINUSCA launched an operation against Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation in Ouham-Pendé, Nana-Mambéré, and Mambéré-Kadéï prefectures,
to protect civilians, confine combatants back into designated zones, and compel
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation to comply with the Agreement, in particular with
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. During the operation,
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation elements were expelled from three bases and
equipment and weapons seized, and some 10 combatants were injured, with no
civilian casualties. On 27 September, a MINUSCA helicopter with four peacekeepers
crash-landed near Bouar, killing all on board. On 5 October, Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation attacked a MINUSCA patrol near Niem; no casualties were reported.
32. During the reporting period, UPC reportedly committed at least 40 violations
against civilians in Ouaka and Basse-Kotto prefectures. It increased military
movements and reinforced its position in Alindao: 100 new combatants arrived on
18 June. It re-established its presence in Bambari, after being expelled by MINUSCA
in January. Following engagement by the Government, the African Union, ECCAS
and MINUSCA, the group lifted two barriers along the Alindao -Bambari axis in July
and handed over a police station and a school. UPC continues to operate
approximately 92 barriers. From July to September, UPC recruited combatants in Obo
and Mboki in Haut-Mbomou prefecture. In August, local authorities reported the
presence of UPC elements in Bambouti area, near South Sudan. Following pressure
from MINUSCA, UPC elements returned westward towards their previous positions
in early September. In August, in Mingala subprefecture, UPC elements took over a
mining site, displacing civilians. On 27 September, UPC and anti -balaka clashed in
Bangao village; 15 civilians were killed and 28 structures destroyed, including a
mosque.
33. Bangui remained generally calm, notwithstanding a slight increase in
criminality. In the third district, armed clashes between Arab traders and a cr iminal
gang on 10 and 11 July resulted in 11 dead, including 3 civilians, and 26 wounded.
MINUSCA deployed its joint task force and quick reaction forces to contain the
situation, which was resolved with community-led dialogue.

IV. Regional engagement
34. The fifth session of the joint cooperation commission for the Central African
Republic and the Republic of the Congo was held on 5 and 6 August in Bangui, the
first such meeting in 32 years. Agreements were reached on the fight against wildlife
poaching and trafficking, digital interconnectivity, health, roads and mining. Joint
subcommittees were established on, inter alia, security and defence cooperation and
borders. In the margins, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) facilitated the signing of a tripartite agreement on the voluntary
repatriation of refugees from the Republic of the Congo.
35. The Government of Chad closed its border north of Paoua and around Gore on
24 June, citing rising insecurity and failure to contain cross-border cattle theft. The
border at Bembéré unofficially reopened on 16 September. The Government of the
Sudan closed its border at Am Dafok in late September.

6/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

V. Humanitarian situation
36. The humanitarian situation showed some improve ment, including increased
returns and improved access. The number of people requiring humanitarian assistance
decreased from 2.9 million to 2.6 million, while small -scale returns started in
Mbomou, Haut-Mbomou, Nana-Mambéré, Ouham and Ouham-Pendé prefectures. As
at 1 September, 355,000 persons had returned to their areas of origin, an 18 per cent
increase as compared with the same period in 2018. UNHCR facilitated the return of
7,142 refugees (48 per cent women), mainly in Lobaye Prefecture, a 400 per cent
increase as compared with 2018. Over 90,000 refugees returned spontaneously,
mainly in Sangha Mbaéré, Mambéré-Kadéï, Nana-Mambéré, Ouham-Pendé, Ouham,
Nana-Grébizi, Basse-Kotto, Ouaka and Bamingui-Bangoran prefectures.
37. A fifth of the population remains displaced, with 581,000 internally displaced
and over 605,000 registered refugees as at 31 August. Emergency operations were
required to assist more than 24,000 people newly displaced in Birao. Conditions for
comprehensive and sustainable voluntary returns in safety and dignity remained
precarious owing to insecurity. Protection concerns remain an obstacle to durable
solutions; returnees often found their homes looted, destroyed or occupied.
38. Humanitarian actors continue to operate in a complex, volatile environment. The
relative decrease in clashes in some areas allowed humanitarian workers to
sporadically reach previously inaccessible areas, in particular in Basse -Kotto,
Mbomou, Haut-Mbomou and Haute-Kotto prefectures. As at 1 September, 1.1 million
people had been reached, as compared with 700,000 people in the same period in
2018. The improved access led to a 6 per cent increase in people with acute needs.
39. Access challenges, weak government capacities and lack of development posed
risks for the spread of disease and epidemics. A total of 15 health districts were
prioritized for strengthened surveillance and preparedness further to the Ebola
preparedness plan approved by the Ministry of Health and Population in September.
The humanitarian country team prepared a three-month operational plan to support
the Ministry. MINUSCA is developing risk-assessment and contingency plans for a
possible Ebola outbreak.
40. The country remained one of the most dangerous countries for humanitarian
workers. Three humanitarian workers have been killed in 2019, although a decrease
in the number of incidents affecting humanitarian workers, premises and assets has
been registered since January (188 incidents between January and August, as
compared with 277 during the same period in 2018). The severity of incidents
increased and the number of humanitarian actors wounded more than doubled (28, as
compared with 13 in 2018).
41. The 2019 humanitarian response plan requires $430.7 million to provide critical
assistance to 1.7 million extremely vulnerable people. As at 7 October, it was 52 per
cent funded. International humanitarian assistance remains the primary, or sole, social
safety net for the population.

VI. Protection of civilians
42. In line with its strategy, the Mission strengthened early warning systems,
focusing on threat analysis, community engagement and conflict prevention.
MINUSCA aligned its early warning mechanisms with the dialogue and conflict
prevention role of prefectural implementation committees.
43. The Mission continued to deploy teams to Batangafo, Ouham prefecture, and
Alindao, Basse-Kotto prefecture, where it does not have a permanent civilian
19-17440

7/21

S/2019/822

presence, for early warning and conflict prevention. On 30 June, a team deployed to
Bocaranga, Ouham-Pendé Prefecture, to bolster protection while signatory armed
groups disarmed and demobilized. Since the eruption of the clashes in Birao,
MINUSCA has provided security to displaced persons seeking refuge near its bases
and surrounding area and engaged with the two factions and community leaders to
minimize civilian casualties.
44. MINUSCA expanded its training of uniformed personnel on protection of
civilians. Since January, 98 uniformed personnel have received tactical training. The
Mission conducted predeployment training sessions using an integrated protection of
civilians training module developed by the Mission.

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
Extension of State authority
45. As at 1 October, all prefects and over 90 per cent of sub-prefects were in place
in the 16 prefectures. Progress was observed in sectoral Ministry deployments. A
recent civil servant mapping identified 3,418 (including 386 women) civil servants in
their positions across the country as compared with 1,315 in 2015; this remains
significantly lower than the goal of 6,500 civil servants by 2020 in the national
strategy for the restoration of State authority. The Government continued to face
challenges, including lack of infrastructure, financial resources, in security and
obstruction by armed groups.
46. The Government, with MINUSCA support, disseminated the civil servants ’
charter at the prefectural and local levels. On 24 June, a presidential decree
established resident ministers for all 16 prefectures, to improve State interventions.
MINUSCA facilitated a series of videoconferences between the technical secretariat
of the Agreement’s implementation mechanism and prefects to provide guidance on
policy priorities on the extension of State authority and social s ervices. The
Government’s electronic database for tracking the deployment of civil servants was
established in August with MINUSCA and UNDP support. It will enable the
Government to better control the presence of civil servants and tailor strategic
decisions to future deployments.
Security sector reform
47. In June 2019, the Government concluded, with MINUSCA support, a
nationwide awareness-raising campaign on the military code of justice to increase
compliance by uniformed personnel with legal norms and human rights standards.
The campaign reached 2,448 uniformed personnel, including 456 women.
48. On 25 July, the action plan for the National Commission to Combat the
Proliferation and Illegal Movement of Small Arms and Light Weapons was adopted
by the National Assembly and endorsed by President Touadéra. The United Nations
Mine Action Service supported its development.
National armed and internal security forces
49. The Central African armed forces (FACA) and internal security forces continued
to make progress, albeit slow, in expanding deployment with MINUSCA support.
FACA deployed to Birao and Bria, where they had not been present since the crisis;
1,346 FACA personnel are now deployed in 20 locations, an increase from 855
deployed in 2018 in three locations from the prior period. The local population
reportedly welcomed their deployment. In August, the Government received a
donation of 4,695 weapons from the Russian Federation, which also provided tactical
8/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

training for approximately 175 FACA from units trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic. On 13 August, France
donated 2,800 magazines to complement rifles donated in December. To date, the
Military Training Mission has trained a total of 4,104 personnel. On 24 June, it started
training 1,020 new recruits in Bangui and Bouar, following a nationwide recruitment
campaign.
50. The number of internal security forces deployed outside of Bangui remained
steady, with 1,075 deployed as at 1 October, as compared with 1,024 in June, but also
deployed to areas where they have not been present since the crisis, such as Birao and
Obo. The gendarmes and police officers recruited in 2018 continued to work in
Bangui, owing to a lack of logistics, infrastructure and equ ipment to deploy in the
regions. The 2019 recruitment process is ongoing: of 18,815 applications received as
at 1 October, 24.7 per cent were from women.
51. MINUSCA continued to support the Government in investigating allegations of
criminal offences and misconduct against national uniformed personnel. The Mission
supported human rights vetting and efforts to reinforce national command and control
and oversight. MINUSCA applied the human rights due diligence policy to its support
for non-United Nations forces.
52. During the reporting period, UNMAS built and rehabilitated weapons and
ammunition storage facilities for the national security forces in Bambari, Bangassou
and Bouar. Some 17 FACA personnel were trained in management of specialized
storage facilities and self-sustained ammunition disposal.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
53. National disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation efforts
regained momentum in the west. While Retour, réclamation et réhabi litation
reluctance to enter the process represents a major challenge, during the reporting
period, 356 combatants from five armed groups were disarmed and demobilized; and
235 war weapons, 302 explosives and 11,274 rounds of ammunition collected. Since
December 2018, a total of 583 combatants from seven armed groups – the Front
démocratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC), Révolution et justice/-Belanga Branch,
Révolution et justice-Sayo Branch, Union des forces républicaines fondamentales and
most anti-balaka-associated militia – have disarmed and demobilized. To date, 178
ex-combatants expressed a preference for joining the future Unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité; 83 wished to reintegrate into their communities; and 95 would like to
integrate into the security forces.
54. Further to the Agreement, the Government presented signatory armed groups
with a calendar on 9 August which sets out that the disarmament and demobilization
operations of all 14 armed groups will be finalized by January 2020. Representa tives
of the armed groups present endorsed the calendar, except for Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation.
55. MINUSCA, with partners, completed implementation of all community violence
reduction activities for 2018 and 2019. In August, MINUSCA launched i ts programme
for 2019/2020 in seven priority locations across the country for new beneficiaries.
Justice and the rule of law
56. While the number of first instance and courts of appeal remained steady, the
Court of Appeal in Bouar, with MINUSCA and UNDP support, heard 29 criminal
cases during its August session. of which 27 were adjudicated, includin g two
pertaining to armed groups. The Court sentenced 5 members of the Mouvement
national pour la libération de la Centrafrique to 15 years of forced labou r and 1 FDPC
19-17440

9/21

S/2019/822

member to 20 years. The Bangui Court of Appeal session began on 13 September and
will conclude on 23 October. A total of 16 cases will be heard, including 8 involving
armed groups and 3 on sexual- and gender-based violence.
57. On 20 June, the Special Criminal Court announced that the Special Prosecutor ’s
office had identified 22 priority cases. Four preliminary investigations were opened,
investigating judges seized of three cases transferred from ordinary courts; and
27 complaints received directly from the public. On 6 August, the Special Prosecutor
announced that the court had assumed responsibility for the case against members of
Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation implicated in the massacres near Paoua in May.
MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to support the court under
the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law arrangement, including by establishing a
special legal corps to protect the rights of the accused. The president of the court
appointed three lawyers for the corps; however, none were women.
58. On 18 September, the Government adopted a national justice sect or policy,
following a year-long consultative process supported by MINUSCA and UNDP. It
provides a five-year framework for justice sector reform, elements of which will
support the extension of justice institutions outside Bangui to provide needed legal
and justice services to populations. The reform will also help to implement the justice
and reconciliation provisions of the Agreement.
59. The population of Ngaragba prison reached 1,103 prisoners, more than
quadruple its capacity, posing security, health and other risks for detainees and
corrections personnel. The partial rehabilitation of the Camp de Roux annex, which
holds high-profile and high-risk detainees, continued, with MINUSCA and UNDP
support. On 1 July, the recruitment of 150 new civilian prison officers began, with
UNDP and MINUSCA support. Some 22 per cent of the 3,068 applicants were
women.
60. MINUSCA, under its urgent temporary measures mandate, arrested
90 individuals, including one woman, suspected of committing crimes, including
murder, kidnapping, armed robbery, torture, looting and illegal detention.

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
61. Human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law continued,
although the number of incidents and victims decreased during the reporting period.
From June to October, 304 incidents were reported, affecting 494 victims, as
compared with 597 incidents and 1,077 victims reported during the same period in
2018. Incidents included attacks against civilians, sexual violence, restrictions on
freedom of movement and abductions. Some 70 per cent of recorded human rights
abuses and violations were attributed to signatory armed groups, with FACA allegedly
responsible for others, including the killing of a civilian in Bambari in August.
Transitional justice
62. On 20 June, President Touadéra launched national consultations on the law to
establish the future Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation
further to the Agreement. MINUSCA supported consultations in Bambari, Bangassou,
Bangui, Berberati, Damara and Sibut. The inclusive commission established on
28 May to review the events of the conflict and propose justice-related action to the
Commission received a 90-day extension of its mandate.
63. On 19 July, the President launched a national action plan on the prevention of
hate speech after a five-week public sensitization campaign by the high council of
communication, with MINUSCA support. The plan calls upon authorities, non-State
10/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

actors, civil society and media to prevent the spread of hate speech; identifies
measures to address its root causes; and calls for the establishment of an early warning
and monitoring mechanism. MINUSCA is strengthening these efforts by helping to
develop an integrated response plan to counter public incitement to violence.
Conflict-related sexual violence
64. Conflict-related sexual violence continued, with most incidents of rape of girls
and women allegedly perpetrated by members of signatory armed groups, although
national armed and security forces were also implicated.
65. In June, an awareness-raising campaign on resolution 2467 (2019) on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence was conducted in Bangui with mayors,
neighbourhood chiefs, youth and women’s associations. In August, MINUSCA
organized training on conflict-related sexual violence prevention and response in
Paoua for 57 former members of Révolution et justice-Sayo Branch.
66. Following reports of widespread sexual violence along transhumance corridors
near Kaga Bandoro, the national police and gendarmerie joint rapid response unit to
prevent sexual violence against women and children deployed from 19 to 26 August,
with United Nations support. This resulted in the investigation of 59 cases of sexual
violence involving 264 victims heard. The cases were transmitted to the prosecutor in
Kaga Bandoro for further action.
Children and armed conflict
67. On 24 June, FPRC signed the action plan to end and prevent grave violations
against children for which the group is listed in annexes of my annual report on
children and armed conflict. On 21 August, following four years of dialogue, UPC
signed the action plan. In July, 37 self-demobilized children, including one girl, from
anti-balaka groups, FPRC and Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la
Centrafrique in Bria entered reintegration programmes led by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and its partners.

IX. Socioeconomic situation
68. The Bank of Central African States released a report in July in which it noted
that the Central African Republic gross domestic product growth increased from
3.8 per cent in 2018 to 4.7 per cent in 2019, primarily due to the building and public
works sectors. The projected budget surplus for 2019 stands at 2.8 per cent, as
compared with 0.4 per cent in 2018. However, the inflation rate rose from 1.7 per c ent
in 2018 to 3 per cent in 2019, and currency in circulation decreased from 15 per cent
in 2018 to 9 per cent in 2019. The consequent rise in the prices of goods decreased
the purchasing power of households and negatively impacted the local economy.
69. On 8 July, the joint executive committee of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan, chaired by the Ministry of Economy and the United Nations,
decided to extend the Plan for two years until 2023, to allow full implementation and
complementarity with the Agreement. The implementation of the Plan made progress,
with the disbursement of close to $2.4 billion out of $3.5 billion as at 1 October,
bringing the financial delivery rate to 67 per cent. These disbursements pave the way
for improving delivery of peace dividends to the population, with around 400 projects
ongoing in several social and economic sectors. Its extension will also allow
development actors to focus their efforts on social services and productive sectors.

19-17440

11/21

S/2019/822

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
70. As at 1 October, the strength of the MINUSCA military component stood at
11,299 (4.4 per cent women), including 319 staff officers and 160 military observe rs,
out of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel. It comprises 11 infantry battalions;
2 high-readiness battalions; 1 special forces company; 1 quick reaction force
company; and enabling units, specifically: 1 military police company; 5 engineering
companies; 1 heavy transport company; 3 level II hospitals; 1 level I-plus forward
surgery module; and 3 helicopter units, including an attack helicopter unit. MINUSCA
close air support capacity became limited to casualty evacuation and reconnaissance
after the crash of the attack helicopter in September; three other military helicopters
await repair.
Police component
71. As at 1 October, the strength of the MINUSCA police component stood at
2,048 personnel (11 per cent women), out of a total authorized strength of
2,080, including 398 individual police officers and 1,670 personnel in 11 formed
police units and 2 police support units. Two police support units and six formed police
units are in Bangui under the joint task force; formed police units are depl oyed in
Bambari, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro.
Civilian personnel
72. As at 1 October, 1,389 civilian personnel (25 per cent women), including
204 United Nations Volunteers, were serving with MINUSCA, representing 89 per
cent of 1,558 authorized positions.
Status-of-forces agreement
73. Since June, MINUSCA and the Government have resolved four outstanding
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. In May, MINUSCA and the Government
of Cameroon reached an agreement regarding the supply line fro m Douala to Bangui
further to the status-of-mission agreement, addressing issues of the invoicing of
MINUSCA escorts by Cameroonian uniformed personnel.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
74. Between 1 June and 1 October, 98 security incidents involving United Nations
personnel were recorded, including 7 injured in armed attacks and 20 in road traffic
accidents, a decrease from the same period in 2018. Seven personnel died due to
accident or illness, including 4 in the helicopter crash, to whom we pay tribute for
their sacrifice. The United Nations was targeted by armed attacks 22 times;
non-governmental organizations 35 times. Movement was restricted in some
locations, including areas of Bangui, owing to security risks.
75. MINUSCA continued to support national judicial authorities in the investigation
and prosecution of crimes perpetrated against peacekeepers, including the
30 fatalities. Judicial investigations into the 2017 attacks in Yongofongo and
Bangassou concluded and await adjudication. Judicial investigations are ongoing in
two other cases, while another is under way into the killing of a national staff member
in October.

12/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
76. From 1 June to 31 August, four allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
implicating military personnel were reported; one allegedly occurred in 2019, others
in previous years. A total of 16 allegations were reported in 2019; 2 were found to be
unsubstantiated, 1 was substantiated, and 13 remain under investigation. In 2018,
20 allegations were reported, while in 2017 and 2016, the numbers were 19 and 52,
respectively. Also, from 1 June to 31 August, two allegations of other types of serious
misconduct implicating uniformed personnel were received and are under
investigation.
77. Despite some progress, challenges remain in implementing my zero -tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, including command and control of some
contingents (although some commanders have been replace d); lack of accessibility
and communication in some locations; length of investigations by Member States;
and widespread poverty in the country, which increases vulnerability. To address
challenges, MINUSCA continued to implement a three-pronged strategy focused on
prevention, enforcement and remedial action. All civilian and uniformed personnel
receive induction training upon deployment. In July, a comprehensive risk
management workplan was adopted, following which mitigating measures were
implemented for MINUSCA camps in high-risk areas, including improved lighting
and fencing, improved welfare conditions for military personnel and the construction
of contingent water points.
78. The Mission reached out to local communities through public campaigns and its
toll-free hotline, including 24 community-based complaint mechanisms staffed by
trained community members, including women. These efforts contributed to prompt
reporting of allegations of misconduct against all categories of personnel. The 2018
information-sharing protocol between the Mission and humanitarian community
contributed to timely reception and assessment of allegations, specifically through
UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund, to better coordinate support to
victims. The victim-centred approach was integrated into the training of personnel,
including national investigation officers in military contingents.
Support considerations
79. MINUSCA continued efforts to reduce its environmental footprint. The Mission
installed water efficient taps and flushing systems in ablution facilities. Recycled
water from modular waste water treatment plants is used for non -drinking purposes;
systems to monitor water consumption are being strengthened; and equipment is being
acquired for rainwater harvesting in water-scarce areas such as Bouar and Obo.
Segregation of solid waste at source was initiated at the Mission ’s headquarters and
logistics base in Bangui to reduce waste sent to landfill. A pilot project on
biodegradable waste will be replicated in field offices.
Action for Peacekeeping and performance optimization
80. MINUSCA made progress to enhance its effectiveness in line with my Action
for Peacekeeping initiative to advance lasting political solutions and the political
impact of peacekeeping. United Nations strategic partnerships, in particular with the
African Union, ECCAS, the European Union and other partners, and its strong
political engagement have brought concrete results in support of the political process
and implementation of the Agreement. The Mission is also undertaking significant
efforts to recruit more women. MINUSCA continued efforts to reduce peacekeeper
fatalities. The Force closed two temporary operating bases in the centre on the
grounds of risk management, although their closure may affect protection tasks. A

19-17440

13/21

S/2019/822

short-loop casualty evacuation process launched in August reduced evacuation
decision time.
81. The Force and Police established mechanisms to monitor and improve
performance, including conduct and discipline. The MINUSCA Fo rce has evaluated
seven contributing countries since May, focusing on mandate understanding,
command and control, training and discipline, sustain ment and health, as well as
willingness and ability to protect civilians. All indicated that units are perform ing at
satisfactory level in line with standards required to ensure robustness and protection
of civilians. Further to the violence in Alindao in November 2018, 300 personnel from
the contributing country concerned have been repatriated. The reduced unit r eceived
supplementary predeployment evaluation of training and performance capacity and
was assigned to a new area of operation.
82. MINUSCA took measures to improve mobility, although additional capability is
required, including air assets. Statements of unit requirements for infantry battalions
were revised to include two mechanized companies for protection and mobility. A
quick reaction force deployed to Birao contributed to minimizing civilian casualties,
while a formed police unit deployed to the west protected displaced persons. The
Mission continued to temporarily deploy civilian and police teams to prevent violence
such as in Alindao.
83. MINUSCA scaled up implementation of the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment System. It has improved performance assessments, inter alia, through the
development of a mission-wide results framework and monitoring tools to assess the
extension of State authority and implementation of the Agreement.

XI. Financial considerations
84. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/312 of 3 July 2019, appropriated the
amount of $910.1 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020. As at 4 October 2019, unpaid assessed contributi ons to
the Special Account for MINUSCA amounted to $240 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$3,736.8 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for
the period up to 31 July 2019, while reimbursement of the costs of c ontingent-owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2019, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

XII. Observations and recommendations
85. Over the past year, there has been significant change, the most visible of which
was the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. It has already had a positive impact on the situation, with a decrease
in security incidents and human rights violations linked to the conflict.
86. I would emphasize that the Agreement remains the only viable path for sustained
peace in a country whose people have been devastated by protracted violent conflict.
Central Africans must grasp this opportunity. At the same time, the peace process
must continue, including through local level dialogue and community engagement, to
ensure inclusivity. I call upon the Government to ensure that this inclusivity delivers
the benefits envisaged in the Agreement to the entire population. I hope that the
participation of women will be expanded to further enhance credibility and
effectiveness.

14/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

87. I welcome the constructive engagement of most signatories in advancing the
overdue peace, and the proactive engagement of the guarantors and facilitators. I am
encouraged by the steady steps forward, although I am concerned at reports about
delays in implementing some of the key political and security provisions, as well as
serious violations of the cessation of hostilities. All signatories should be held
accountable to implement the Agreement in good faith and in a timely manner, as well
as non-signatories who obstruct implementation. MINUSCA will continue to use all
means necessary to implement its mandate, including in support of the Agreement and
to protect civilians.
88. All signatory armed groups must immediately cease hostilities and violence
against civilians, humanitarian actors, peacekeepers and State representatives. While
the Agreement has offered many civilians some reprieve from the devastating cycle
of attacks, the levels of violence remain concerning, affecting the most vulnerable, in
particular women and children. Attacks against those who are serving peace in the
country and delivering lifesaving assistance are unacceptable.
89. The violent clashes in Birao between signatory armed groups in a previously
stable part of the country are unacceptable, as is the egregious violence against
civilians in Paoua. Such incidents are destructive to the lives o f many and undermine
trust and confidence in the Agreement. I welcome the robust response by MINUSCA
to such violence, to protect civilians and pursue accountability for serious crimes
against them. I call upon all Central Africans to resolve their dispute s peacefully and
through legal means, including through the follo w-up and dispute resolution
mechanisms of the Agreement at the national and local levels. I welcome efforts made
to pursue community dialogue to prevent conflict, and encourage additional con flict
prevention initiatives, including as led by women.
90. National ownership of the Agreement is essential for its success. I welcome the
efforts of the Government and its partners to ensure that all segments of the population
understand it. Those efforts should be intensified, complemented by dialogue and
confidence-building initiatives to overcome public scepticism about concessions
given to armed groups. Such engagement will resonate only if violations cease and
all signatories abide by their commitments. I encourage national authorities to
advance political reform, specifically legislation pertaining to decentralization, the
status of former presidents and political parties, which assumes renewed urgency with
the electoral period already under way.
91. I welcome the encouraging improvements in the humanitarian si tuation.
Increased returns and improved access, although limited, demonstrate that we are on
the right path. However, too many Central Africans continue to face displacement and
deprivation.
92. Peace cannot be sustained until this trend is reversed. I ap preciate the work of
the humanitarian community, which continues to provide life -saving assistance in a
challenging and dangerous environment. Their operations remain chronically
underfunded, and access challenges impede their work. I call upon the interna tional
community to redouble support for ending this human tragedy and urgently contribute
to the humanitarian response plan.
93. Peace cannot be sustained in the absence of tangible improve ments in the lives
of Central Africans, who have legitimate grievances relating to historic
marginalization and neglect of large swaths of the country. Many communities are
isolated and require significant infrastructure and other investment to access basi c
services. I welcome the extension of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan
until 2023, with generous donor support. It provides an opportunity for laying the
foundation of sustainable peace in a manner that complements the Agreement and
delivers peace dividends. Real development gains must be visible, in partic ular
19-17440

15/21

S/2019/822

economic recovery initiatives to boost the productive sectors and offer the population,
especially youth and women, livelihood and employment opportunities. I reiterate my
call upon the Government and all partners to invest in recovery and development
programmes that complement and eventually replace humanitarian assistance, in
particular in the most remote areas.
94. I welcome the limited, but important, progress made in extending State authority
throughout the country. The State must be present throughout its territory to protect
and provide services to the population and accompany development actors. The
limited capacity of the State outside Bangui must therefore be addressed, including in
the context of the Agreement and taking into account the upco ming elections.
Officials must be empowered and equipped to provide services, while issues of
governance are addressed. Much more is required to overcome obstacles to the
deployment of more national armed and internal security forces outside Bangui,
where communities face the greatest protection concerns. The Government must be
able to perform its sovereign responsibilities of securing the country and protecting
its civilians.
95. Urgent action is needed to overcome delays in implementing the national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme and
establishing the Agreement’s interim security measures. The speedy establishment of
the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité remains crucial to shore up confidence
between signatory parties and to encourage their commitment to the Agreement.
While all armed group members participating in these units will be subject to
disarmament and demobilization, as well as human rights vet ting, it is important to
balance due diligence with pragmatism and flexibility. This is without prejudice to
security sector reform and national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation processes, which will continue simultaneously and i n parallel. These
processes should be strategically and operationally coherent and mutually reinforcing.
96. Continued improvements in the human rights situation, observed since 2017, are
welcome. Many abuses, however, continue to be inflicted on the population. I strongly
condemn all perpetrators of human rights violations, including gender-based violence
and other abuses that disproportionately affect the most vulnerable. Vigilance and the
ability to pre-empt and respond to threats to civilians are essential.
97. The Agreement acknowledges that peace cannot be sustained without justice and
respect for the rule of law. The people of the Central African Republic have long
called for an end to impunity and reasonably expect that perpetrators of human rights
violations and abuses and criminal acts will be held accountable . Strengthening the
penal chain is an integral aspect for the extension of State authority. I welcome
ongoing efforts to deploy justice officials throughout the country. I call upon Member
States and other partners to support the justice sector, including the Special Criminal
Court. I also welcome the decision of the Special Criminal Court to assume
responsibility for the case involving alleged perpetrators of the massacre near Paoua.
The establishment of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation must be expedited, engage affected communities and take a victim centred approach. In this regard, the inclusive commission should aim to complete its
work.
98. The presidential, legislative and local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021 are
essential for consolidating democratic order and the peace process and must be held
in accordance with constitutional timelines. I call upon all political stakeholders to
pursue their ambitions in a constructive manner that advances meaningful dialogue
about the vision Central Africans have for their country without re -litigating the
Agreement. It was important to agree expeditiously on a code of conduct for elections,

16/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

which should align with the national action plan on the prevention of inflammatory
rhetoric and hate speech.
99. I welcome the consensus reached on the electoral code and encourage national
authorities and political parties to actively promote the meaningful participation of
all segments of society, including as candidates. It is the responsib ility of the
Government and national institutions to protect the franchise of all citizens, including
women, youth, the displaced and others who may face obstacles in providing proof of
identity. These elections are an invaluable opportunity for important advances on
issues relating to citizenship and inclusion. The United Nations system, including
MINUSCA, will continue to support Central African stakeholders in creating an
environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process.
100. Neighbouring countries have an essential role in building and sustaining peace,
including as facilitators of the Agreement, and to address transnational threats, which
continue to compromise the stability of the Central African Republic. I call upon the
region to use all the resources at their disposal in actively supporting the peace
process. I therefore welcome the convening of the Central African Republic and the
Republic of the Congo joint commission for the first time in 32 years, as well as that
earlier this year between the Central African Republic and Cameroon. I would
encourage the countries concerned to uphold the agreements reached in a spirit of
good neighbourliness. I would encourage the Central African authorities to continue
ongoing efforts to build partnerships with other neighbouring countries, including
through bilateral mixed commissions. I also call upon countries hosting Central
African refugees to sign the agreements necessary to allow them to p articipate in the
electoral process.
101. MINUSCA’s presence and robust mandate is crucial for the country’s stability.
It plays a central role in supporting the people and Government in building peace in
their country. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of
MINUSCA for one year, until 15 November 2020, at its current authorized military
and police strength.
102. I recommend that the Security Council mandate MINUSCA to provide
operational, logistical and security support for the elections, as well as coordination
of international support, in addition to its current electoral mandate of good offices
and technical assistance, as detailed in my report of 15 October 2018 ( S/2018/922).
MINUSCA will require the necessary resources to perform these es sential tasks. The
Mission’s electoral support alone will not suffice in helping the national authorities
deliver credible and timely elections. I welcome pledges of funding already
committed and appeal to partners to generously support the national electo ral
authority, as well as contribute to the UNDP basket fund.
103. I also recommend that the strong political, technical and operational support of
MINUSCA for the peace process, the implementation of the Agreement and the
extension of State authority be reinforced, and without caveats that could preclude
the Mission from seeking resources commensurate to its tasks. The mobility and
flexibility of the Force will need to be assured, including t hrough additional aviation
assets, within existing authorized troop strength, for the recommended strengthened
mandate, as well as to protect civilians in an evolving context. The coordination and
convening role of MINUSCA will become even more important i n the year ahead.
104. I welcome the strong strategic partnerships of the United Nations with
international partners in the Central African Republic, in particular with the African
Union and ECCAS, including as guarantors of the Agreement, as well as the o ther
facilitators, and other important multilateral and bilateral partners, including the
European Union. These strategic and operational partnerships are crucial to
collectively make a difference on the ground for the country and its people. I call upon
19-17440

17/21

S/2019/822

all international and regional stakeholders to continue to coordinate and cooperate in
a transparent manner and to sustain international attention and support on peace and
recovery efforts.
105. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative
for the Central African Republic, Mankeur Ndiaye, for his leadership. I also extend
my sincere gratitude to all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel, troop and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and multil ateral
organizations, non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their
invaluable support. I pay particular tribute to the essential role played by the African
Union and ECCAS, including as guarantors of the Agreement, as well as the crucial
role of the region, including as facilitators, to continue their strong engagement to
bring sustainable peace to the Central African Republic.

18/21

19-17440

S/2019/822

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic: military and police
strength as at 1 October 2019
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed
Police Units

Civilian
Police

Argentina

–

2

–

2

–

–

Bangladesh

10

18

998

1 026

–

–

Benin

3

5

–

8

–

23

Bhutan

2

2

–

4

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Brazil

3

6

–

9

–

–

Burkina Faso

–

1

–

1

–

38

Burundi

7

13

747

767

–

–

Cambodia

6

6

200

212

–

–

Cameroon

3

7

747

757

280

28

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

5

10

–

15

137

3

Côte d’Ivoire

–

3

–

3

–

45

Czech Republic

3

–

–

3

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

5

Egypt

9

19

986

1 014

140

3

France

–

9

–

9

–

6

Gabon

–

3

450

453

–

–

Gambia

3

3

–

6

–

7

Ghana

5

11

–

16

–

7

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

18

Indonesia

6

8

200

214

140

6

Jordan

3

7

–

10

–

17

Kenya

8

7

–

15

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

–

–

1

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

25

Mauritania

5

8

450

463

277

–

Mexico

–

1

–

1

–

–

Moldova (Republic of)

3

2

–

5

–

–

Morocco

2

12

750

764

–

–

Nepal

5

14

720

739

–

–

Niger

3

7

–

10

–

33

Nigeria

–

2

–

2

–

–

Country

19-17440

Police component

Oman

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pakistan

12

28

1 213

1 253

–

–

Paraguay

2

1

–

3

–

–
19/21

S/2019/822
Military component
Military
observers

Staff
officers

Troops

Total

Formed
Police Units

Civilian
Police

Peru

7

8

202

217

–

–

Philippines

2

–

–

2

–

–

Portugal

–

8

180

188

–

9

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

10

Russian Federation

2

7

–

9

–

–

Rwanda

9

18

1 360

1 387

416

22

Senegal

–

12

100

112

280

36

Serbia

2

3

71

76

–

–

Sierra Leone

2

1

–

3

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

4

Sri Lanka

5

2

109

116

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

4

Togo

4

7

–

11

–

18

Tunisia

2

–

–

2

–

30

United Republic of Tanzania

–

7

435

442

–

–

United States of America

–

8

–

8

–

–

Uruguay

–

3

–

3

–

–

Viet Nam

1

4

–

5

–

–

Zambia

8

14

909

931

–

–

Zimbabwe

2

–

–

2

–

–

Total

161

321

10 827

11 309

1 670

398

Country

20/21

Police component

19-17440

Map
19-17440

Annex II

S/2019/822

21/21
