United Nations

S/PV.6495

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6495

th meeting
Wednesday, 16 March 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-second progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2011/72)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-26479 (E)

*1126479*

S/PV.6495

I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the victims of the
earthquake and tsunami in Japan
The President (spoke in Chinese): Japan was
recently struck by a strong earthquake and a tsunami,
which resulted in injuries, loss of life and significant
damage to property. At the outset of today’s meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Council,
to ask that all those present in the Council Chamber
now stand and join in observing a minute of silence.
We express our condolences to the victims of the
devastating earthquake and tsunami and to their
relatives, as well as our sincere sympathy and
condolences to the Government and people of Japan.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-second progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2011/72)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
Chair of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Jordan, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/72, which contains the twentysecond progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.

2

Ms. Løj: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
twenty-second progress report (S/2011/72) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). Given the Council’s busy schedule, I
will keep my remarks brief. The full text of my
statement will be distributed to Council members.
Liberia concluded voter registration on
12 February. The exercise went well, with no major
security incidents or prohibitive logistical challenges.
The Liberia National Police provided static security
where materials were stored and, with UNMIL
assistance, increased patrols to voter registration
centres. There were some concerns, however, including
reports of political aspirants transporting supporters to
register in counties other than where they resided, and
some reports of attempted multiple registrations and of
registrations of foreign nationals. However, these were
not of a magnitude to undermine the process. Simple
logistics will make it difficult to successfully vote
twice on election day.
It is encouraging that 1.79 million registration
forms were retrieved, representing 89 per cent of the
estimated number of eligible voters — an almost
30 per cent increase from the 1.3 million people who
registered in 2005.
UNMIL provided targeted assistance and
logistical support by airlifting registration materials to
and from inaccessible locations. I would like to
underline how encouraged I am that the National
Elections Commission and other national institutions
maximized their logistical capacities and were
successful in deploying to most of the 19 warehouses
and to all registration centres.
Lessons drawn from this process will be used in
planning the referendum and the general elections later
this year. However, the challenges involved in those
will be significantly greater, as they will be one-day
events and logistics will be complicated by Liberia’s
heavy rainy season.
In terms of funding the $47 million electoral
budget, the response has been positive. However, a
$4 million gap remains in the basket fund managed by
the United Nations Development Programme. I call on
donors to help fill that gap.

11-26479

S/PV.6495

I cannot overstate the importance of successful
elections and a peaceful post-election transition to
solidifying the progress in Liberia. A major piece of the
success will be about ensuring an environment
conducive to healthy political debate and competition.
The National Elections Commission has a major
responsibility in that regard. It must retain its
independence and objectivity in order to instil
confidence in the electoral process. The political
debate is likely to intensify, with several electionsrelated challenges already in the courts. I will therefore
continue to encourage all political actors to express
their ideas, but to do so in a way that does not
undermine trust and confidence in the democratic
system, and UNMIL will continue to employ its
impartial good offices in this regard.
As requested in resolution 1938 (2010), UNMIL’s
consolidation, drawdown and withdrawal benchmarks
have been revised to create a set of transition
benchmarks. They focus on core areas considered vital
to the process of handing over security responsibilities
from UNMIL to the Government. They also outline
contextual areas that have been identified as central to
Liberia’s long-term stability, including the range of
institutional capacities to address the root causes of
Liberia’s conflict.
Work towards planning for the transition of
security responsibilities from UNMIL to the
Government of Liberia has continued apace, and I have
been encouraged by the commitment of the joint
UNMIL/Government
transition
working
group.
However, the process has also illustrated how
significant the challenges still are to Liberia’s security
sector, especially with regard to the logistics,
communications and mobility capacities of the police
and the immigration service. Continued international
engagement and assistance to the process will be
crucial.
Liberia’s inclusion on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
(PBC),
and
the
Government’s decision to identify security sector
reform, rule of law and national reconciliation as
priorities under the PBC, is a major opportunity for
Liberia. Prince Zeid, Chairman of the Liberia country
configuration, will brief the Council on his findings
from his two recent visits to Liberia.
Since the report was issued, there has been
significantly increased focus on Liberia’s border with

11-26479

Côte d’Ivoire. In the first approximately three months
of the Ivorian crisis, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees registered almost
40,000 refugees in Liberia. In just the past 18 days,
however, at least another 50,000 are estimated to have
crossed into the country. The influx has stretched the
resources of generous host communities that were
already living under difficult conditions, and poor
infrastructure and insufficient resources are huge
challenges to the humanitarian response.
A humanitarian flash appeal for Liberia
requesting $55 million was launched in January to
cover an influx of 50,000 refugees. We now have over
90,000 refugees, and the flow continues. The original
appeal is being revised to reflect the increased
numbers, and I cannot emphasize strongly enough the
need for a much more generous response to this appeal.
In addition to the humanitarian challenges, the
situation poses security concerns. Both UNMIL and
Government security institutions have increased their
presence and patrolling along the border, but ensuring
coverage of all vulnerable areas along the over 700kilometre and extremely porous border is proving
overwhelming. These operations have also clearly
highlighted security agencies’ capacity gaps. The
efforts of the Police Emergency Response Unit and the
immigration service to reinforce their presence in key
areas are often paralysed by basic equipment and
logistical deficiencies.
Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6379),
the political and security environment in Liberia has
become more complex. Not only is the election
calendar coming clearly into view, but the situation
along Liberia’s border with Côte d’Ivoire requires
close monitoring for potential security fallouts. Liberia
is much stronger today than it was eight years ago
when UNMIL arrived on the ground. Nevertheless, we
should not take these eight years of unbroken peace for
granted, and continued and increased international
engagement will be needed.
I cannot conclude my remarks without expressing
gratitude to all our troop- and police-contributing
countries. They provide us with the resources to carry
out our mandate. I continue to prioritize the welfare
and care of our troops and police, and I urge the troopand police-contributing countries to continue to
support
us
through
regular
and
improved
predeployment training and in-mission inspections. I

3

S/PV.6495

also attach great importance to strict compliance with
the United Nations policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse, and would like once again to urge contributing
countries to ensure that investigations and action are
promptly followed up and shared with the Mission.

could degenerate either as a result of any further
swelling in the number of Ivorian refugees or if no
assistance were given to the Liberian authorities — in
the form of transportation and communications — to
manage this delicate situation as it exists now.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Løj for her briefing.

While in Sanniquellie, I also met with a number
of traditional leaders to learn about the alternative
traditional land dispute mechanisms used by them.
Many observers, as well as officials both in and out of
Liberia, believe that sorting out the numerous land
disputes would, as a priority measure and in
conjunction with other measures — such as the use of
the Palava Hut discussions, youth employment
programmes and ceremonies to memorialize the
past — be sufficient in leading the country towards
national reconciliation.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Prince Zeid.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein: I am
honoured to present this briefing as Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s configuration for Liberia,
and to be joining the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia and head of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), Her Excellency
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj. Given my current association
with Liberia, I would also like to commend publicly
the superb leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in all areas involving UNMIL’s
work — and there is not a single person I met in
Liberia who does not agree with this assessment — and
to acknowledge the very high quality and caliber of her
two Deputies, as well as the great contributions of the
UNMIL Force Commander and the Commissioner of
United Nations Police. With every visit to the field, I
am also reminded of the extraordinary talents of the
United Nations staff members, and find myself in a
position always of never knowing enough.
I would also like, Mr. President, with your kind
permission to note publicly what I have said privately
to the Council on a previous occasion. What I find
encouraging about the future of Liberia is the great
number of talented and committed officials and public
personalities from the highest levels of Government
through the county and down to the district levels;
from the judiciary and Parliament to the independent
commissions; in the Liberia National Police and the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization; in civil and
religious society, and in the media. I have completed
two visits to Liberia and I have learned enormously
from all of them.
Before I focus on my presentation, may I first
support entirely what the Special Representative has
said with respect to the Ivorian refugees. On
19 February, I visited Sanniquellie in Nimba county —
the worst-affected county — and spoke both to the
representatives of the county and to the senior Liberian
officials who were with me. From all of them, I
grasped fully just how quickly the security situation

4

What became clear to me in the course of my
discussions with these traditional leaders, however,
was the extent to which the problems of Liberia extend
some distance beyond the resolution of competing land
claims. While it is undoubtedly true that sorting out
land disputes would indeed go a long way towards
blunting the lingering ill feelings that exist between the
two principal communities in the country, they will not
remove them. The land disputes have only amplified
what is already there and has existed for a long time; it
does not account for them entirely. The Palava Hut
mechanism is not a sufficient basis for dealing with the
competing historical narratives either. It is a means for
resolving fixed disputes, one that the Liberians place a
great deal of trust in and which has enjoyed broad
success, but it generally works well only until the next
crisis, problem or dispute comes along. If it had been
sufficient to sort out the deeper resentments, Liberia
would not have suffered the upheavals it has over the
course of 30 years.
What is needed is a firm foundation in the form
of a single, uniform historical narrative. The Truth and
Reconciliation Commission proposed the establishment
of a historical commission, and I believe that should be
the centerpiece of and the first step towards the
construction of a unified national memory. The
Government has, commendably, picked this up,
although it has asked the Ministry of Education to
undertake this activity. Most respectfully, I believe,
however, that this requires a much higher profile, and I
will continue to discuss this and other matters relating
to national reconciliation with the Liberian authorities
in due course, including the establishment of an

11-26479

S/PV.6495

archive where all the documents of State are housed
and safeguarded.
Once a memory is established, the Palava Hut
mechanism will have greater meaning as an instrument
of national reconciliation, in that, hopefully, it will also
provide a forum for reckoning, the precursor to
reconciliation. With a well-designed youth employment
programme in place, surely the foundations for a
lasting peace would be more secure. I should add that
we are still awaiting a World Bank assessment of its
own youth employment programme before agreeing to
the pilot project, as provided for in the Statement of
Mutual Assessment.
When in Sanniquellie, I also visited a circuit
court that had recently been renovated by the United
Nations. In speaking to a thoughtful judge who was
that day presiding over a particular proceeding, it came
to my attention that while all cases before the circuit
court were jury trials — unless requested otherwise by
the Counsel for Defence — funds did not exist for the
sequestration or the isolation of the jury, and most, if
not virtually all, trials at that level in Liberia suffer
from this shortcoming. The upshot is clear, therefore:
the justice system remains very prone to potential
contamination. The Liberian authorities, of course, are
well aware of this, and the Law Reform Commission,
whose commissioners appear to be exceedingly able,
will by now have begun drafting, together with the
Ministry of Justice, a new jury law.
I raise this point to underscore the fragility of the
judiciary following the many years of conflict and
instability. The Government is very much committed to
providing judicial services to areas beyond Monrovia,
but it must be careful not to export a system which is,
in many ways, broken. The authorities must, for
example, as a matter of some urgency, put into place a
case-tracking system. In my meetings with the very
capable Minister of Justice, I was informed that there
were also plans to draft a witness protection law and a
law broadening the subject-matter jurisdiction of the
magistrate’s courts, where possible. These steps need
to be supported, particularly as progress is now being
made on the creation of the first hub — of a total five
security and justice hubs — in Gbanga, for which an
initial disbursement of funds from the Peacebuilding
Fund has already been made available. I anticipate that
several buildings within the hub will have been
constructed by the time the configuration visits Liberia
this coming June.

11-26479

It remains a great concern of mine that efforts by
the Liberians to rebuild their court system will require
a considerable amount of time, and so the system itself
will likely remain weak and penetrable in the short
term. There is, however, an idea being promoted within
the Liberian Government — although I hasten to add
that it is still in its infancy — that has generated some
interest, focusing on the establishment of special courts
for serious economic crimes with, potentially, a
specialized police force. In view of the threat posed by
transnational organized crime to Liberia and other
countries of the subregion, I believe this to be an idea
worth investigating in greater detail with the Liberian
Government.
As a general rule, the approach I feel the
Peacebuilding Commission needs to adopt is for us to
take the excellent ideas generated by the Liberian
officials themselves, such as the creation of the hub,
the creation of a historical commission or the creation
of special courts for serious economic crimes, and to
explore with them the manner in which we could most
be helpful.
Finally, prior to my last visit to Liberia, I had
very useful discussions in Washington, D.C., with
officials from the United States Department of Defense
and from the United States State Department, including
the United States Agency for International
Development. I also met with international civil
society actors engaged in Liberia and had very
interesting meetings with the World Bank. I also held
talks in Brussels with European Union officials who
are involved in Liberia and was very much impressed
by their insights. Here in New York, my meetings with
INTERPOL, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the International Centre for Transitional
Justice all were extremely beneficial. In all those
discussions, I was encouraged to find a convergence of
opinion: we all marvelled at how Liberia has achieved
so much since the end of the fighting in 2003, but all
realized fully just how breathtaking the challenges
confronting Liberia still are, and that, ultimately, we
take nothing for granted.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to make this brief statement as the Council
prepares to consider the twenty-second progress report
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)

5

S/PV.6495

(S/2011/72). Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia,
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, and Prince Zeid for their
insightful presentations. My Government appreciates
the committed services being rendered to Liberia by
these two eminent persons, in particular their
respective
contributions
to
the
process
of
peacebuilding and peace consolidation in Liberia.
I would like to also thank the Secretary-General,
the Council, the men and women in UNMIL and the
countries that have contributed them, and the rest of
the international community for their steadfast support
for Liberia. Indeed, many of the Governments which
you, the members of the Council, represent —
including yours, Mr. President — continue to provide
valuable support to Liberia’s recovery. It is only
through this combination of global efforts within the
United
Nations
framework,
strong
bilateral
partnerships and an unwavering commitment of the
Government of Liberia that Liberians can truly
envisage enduring peace, stability and equitable growth
and development.
When the present Government, under the
leadership of President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, assumed
its responsibilities in 2006, the situation in Liberia was
indeed dire. Significant gains have been made since
then, and in some respects Liberia has achieved certain
goals in record time. In other areas, however, progress
has not met expectations, and many challenges remain.
The report under consideration today presents a
balanced picture of progress and constraints, systemic
weaknesses and critical gaps. It confirms, indeed, that
Liberia still has some way to go.
Liberia’s request in May last year to be placed on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission was
underpinned by its acknowledgement of those critical
gaps and a determination to address them. The
Commission’s engagement with Liberia provides a
platform and framework for accelerating action in the
priority areas of the rule of law, security sector reform
and national reconciliation, areas which are inextricably

6

linked to UNMIL’s benchmarks and transition strategy.
It is important, therefore, that activities on both tracks
be carefully synchronized and that decisions be guided
by the realities on the ground.
Liberia has reached a critical turning point.
Critical because Liberians, in a few months’ time, will
be going to the polls to choose their leaders in the
country’s second post-conflict elections. This exercise
is crucial, as it will test the commitment to democratic
governance and the ability to manage democratic
processes in a peaceful manner.
Against the backdrop of this preoccupation with
national elections, developments in neighbouring Côte
d’Ivoire and the spillover effect of a continuing influx
of refugees into Liberia give rise to serious concern.
Not only do these developments present security
challenges, as the Special Representative noted earlier,
they impose a heavy burden on a Government and a
people whose resources are already extremely limited.
Moreover, the cross-border activities heighten the
country’s vulnerability and present risks of
destabilization. We would like to urge the international
community to maintain critical focus on the escalating
crisis in the sisterly country of Côte d’Ivoire, as we
fear that failure to resolve the impasse could
undermine the gains made not only in Liberia, but also
in the West African subregion.
We ask you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council not to allow the situations in Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire to become forgotten humanitarian crises.
There is an urgent need for resources to enable the
humanitarian community and the Government of
Liberia to prepare an effective response to the growing
protection needs of those who have been displaced
internally and externally.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

11-26479
