S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7539th meeting

Tuesday, 20 October 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Jorge
Mr. Baomian Beuryo
Mr. Cabezas Reveco
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Chuzeville
Mr. Obeidat
Mrs. Juodkaitė Putrimienė
Mr. Abdul Razak
Mr. Sheeran
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Repkin
Ms. Jobbins
Mr. Lynch
Mr. Arcia Vivas

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Letter dated 15 October 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/793)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-32468 (E)
*1532468*

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the concept note circulated for this open debate
(S/2015/793, annex), I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements as follows: joint statements, up
to 10 minutes; national statements complementing
joint statements, 2 minutes; and national statements,
3 minutes. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I would like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a normal speed so that interpretation may
be provided properly.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): As we celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations this
year, and as conflicts continue to pose grave threats
in many parts of the world, the Security Council
must remain effective in carrying out the primary
responsibility conferred on it by Member States for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Thailand firmly believes that, in order to be effective,
the Council and its subsidiary bodies must be efficient
and transparent, ensure inclusive participation, and
be accountable. Let me share with the Council the
following views.
First, sanctions are important tools for maintaining
and restoring peace and security. To remain effective
in deterring actions that threaten peace and security,
the Council should exercise the utmost care in devising
targeted sanctions. Sanctions regimes should minimize
unintended economic and social consequences. Thailand
welcomes a research-based approach, including the use
of statistical analysis to evaluate and quantify the impact
and effectiveness of sanctions and to provide valuable
guidance for future policymaking. The application of
clear criteria in the listing and delisting of those on
the sanctions lists is also of great importance. In that
regard, streamlined communications with Member
States would effectively help the latter to address the
increasing number of sanctions-related issues. Another
tool to improve the Council’s effectiveness is the
Security Council’s annual report, which should be more
than a collection of resolutions and statistics and should
include assessments and ways forward.

2/34

20/10/2015

Secondly, it is important to ensure transparency in
the Council’s deliberations. Thailand urges members
of the Council to continue convening public meetings,
thereby engaging the wider membership of the United
Nations, particularly on issues of broad impact and
complexity. Closed meetings and informal consultations
are necessary, but Council members should share
information, developments and outcomes with the wider
membership of the United Nations through frequent
briefing sessions. The Council should also engage
with countries on issues related to their situation that
affect international peace and security. Thailand is in
agreement with the improvements identified by Spain
in the concept paper (S/2015/793, annex) as ways of
making open debates more interactive and productive.
Thirdly, there is no greater threat to the Council’s
credibility and effectiveness than the inability to
respond in a timely and decisive manner to prevent
loss of life through mass atrocities. The Council must
remain committed to its obligations and act to prevent
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The proposal put forward by France and Mexico on
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes elaborated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group are reasonable and commendable.
Thailand lends its support to those initiatives.
Lastly, in addition to working with all Member
States towards the noble goals of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council must also work with
the other organs of the United Nations to enhance
synergies and to avoid the overlapping of mandates.
That aspect will be of particular importance in 2016,
during the selection process for the next SecretaryGeneral. Thailand supports the essential roles of both
the Council and the General Assembly in a transparent
and inclusive selection process, as outlined in Assembly
resolution 69/231.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President. The
debate on the Council’s working methods is timely.
We, as Member States, must work together and with
the Organization to satisfy the growing demand for
effective multilateralism. Those efforts involve every
United Nations body, including the Council.
First, we must acknowledge that today’s security
challenges are different from those of the past. The

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) introduces an integrated
approach to sustainable development by linking
together the five Ps of the Agenda: people, prosperity,
partnership, planet and peace. Its implementation will
require a fresh look at working methods and effective
synergies among the various bodies of the United
Nations. Similar challenges are posed by the need for an
integrated approach to implement the recommendations
stemming from the three major reviews underway on
the future of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and the role
of women in peace and security. Improvements have
already been achieved. Nevertheless, Italy believes
there is room for further improvement. Allow me to
highlight some potential areas.
We believe that the Council could make use of the
tools at its disposal, including informal meetings and
briefings, to foster synergies with the other bodies of
the Organization. At the same time, we share the view
that closer attention should be paid to wider security
issues, which are a matter of concern to the wider
membership. As an example of best practice, allow me
to refer to the open debate held during the New Zealand
presidency of the Council on the security challenges
facing small island developing States (see S/PV.7499).
We fully supported that initiative and followed it up by
organizing a ministerial meeting in Milan on climate
adaptation and food security in small island developing
States. Let me also mention the issue of migration as a
joint integrated challenge confronting us.
Secondly, knowledge leads to prevention. We must
act ahead of crises, rather than react after the fact.
Information-sharing is key, and interaction between
the Council and the Secretary-General can indeed
foster awareness and early warning. Italy is committed
to providing additional support to the Department of
Political Affairs to ensure an effective deployment of
mediation teams where needed. We also welcome the
strengthening of early warning mechanisms, such as
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, the
Rights Up Front Initiative and the role of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. All of them
represent valuable tools whose potential will have to be
fully exploited.
That leads me to my third point, which concerns
the revitalization of Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, in connection with the work of the
Council and the systematic recourse to cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations under

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Chapter VIII. We should collectively renew our focus
on the peaceful settlement of disputes, by promoting
good offices and mediation efforts and by apportioning
work to regional and sub-regional partners.
Fourthly, we must not shy away from debating the
reform of the Council, with a view to making it more
representative, transparent, democratic, effective and
accountable. While the membership is engaged in
seeking a appropriate and comprehensive compromise
solution that includes all five clusters, we believe that
there is scope for action under the current system to
further improve the Council’s working methods.
Bearing that in mind, Italy has endorsed both the joint
French/Mexican initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
to limit the use of the veto on issues linked to mass
atrocities and crimes, as provided for under the Rome
Statute.
My last point is that we should invest in the
preventive power of justice by fighting impunity and
promoting accountability. Improved working methods
are crucial to the Security Council’s ability to fulfil its
responsibilities. As Vice-President of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, I stress the importance of responsible
follow-up to cases referred to the Court by the Council.
We believe that the Council should have a forum where
international criminal justice issues can be regularly
discussed, bearing in mind the various sensitivities at
stake.
In conclusion, the aforementioned is part of Italy’s
commitment to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. Italy will consistently pursue the
goal of a more transparent, efficient and accountable
Council, where elected members can make a bigger
contribution to its work by acting as a bridge towards
non-Council members and their concerns. Enhancing
the transparency and efficiency of the Council’s
working methods should be a constant objective for
all Member States. The general membership of the
Organization can rely on Italy’s strong determination
in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In recent years, notable
improvements have been introduced into the working
methods of the Council, including the holding of more
frequent open debates, public briefings, interactive

15-324683/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

dialogues and wrap-up sessions. Nevertheless, there is,
in our view, always room, as well as the need, for more
transparency and efficiency in the Council’s work.
Mindful of the time limitations today, I will limit my
comments to the matters that we consider to be of the
greatest priority.
First, the work of the Council is a collective
responsibility. Equal participation and contribution
on the part of all Council members, permanent
and elected, in the conduct of activities and the
formulation of outcomes is a fundamental principle.
The Council could benefit from more deliberations
and consultations among its members, as well as the
timely and transparent exchange of information. Such a
collective approach would help to further democratize
the Council’s decision-making process and ensure that
it is more legitimate and effective.
Secondly, We firmly support a more robust
engagement between the Council and the wider
membership of the United Nations, including, first
and foremost, those countries particularly affected
by specific crises. The Council should also enhance
the participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in its decision-making process. We would
like to recall, in that respect, the relevant provisions of
the President’s note in document S/2010/507, and affirm
that consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries should address the political and longterm strategy of the relevant peacekeeping missions.
We also stress the need for practical and more
meaningful partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome, in that regard, the calls by
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
and the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture for a stronger, more
inclusive, global and regional partnership in peace and
security.
Thirdly, it is essential to improve cooperation
between the Security Council and the other United
Nations bodies. That does not pertain only to the
General Assembly, but also to the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1), the ongoing reviews of
peace operations, peacebuilding and the most recently
issued global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) all offer a unique opportunity to draw upon
the broad-based membership of those bodies and to
ensure a more holistic approach to sustaining peace and

4/34

20/10/2015

to reinforcing the linkages between the three pillars
of the work of the United Nations. There is a need for
closer cooperation and interaction among those organs,
while observing a balanced respect for their respective
functions and mandates.
Speaking of transparent and effective cooperation
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council, I wish to address the most important task
that the two organs have to undertake jointly during
the coming year, which is the selection of the new
Secretary-General of the Organization. Last month, the
General Assembly adopted landmark resolution 69/321,
which paves the way for a transparent and merit-based
selection process. By doing so, the Assembly addressed
some of the multiple imperfections that have negatively
impacted the process for the past 70 years. Now,
with this resolution, the responsibility for its timely
and effective implementation falls collectively upon
us. In this connection, Egypt urges the expeditious
commencement of the process through a joint letter
from the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
As we have heard from various speakers today,
the demand for greater efficiency and openness is real,
improvements are overdue, and solutions exist. It is
therefore important to take stock of all the valuable
proposals that were made today by Member States
and to translate them into concrete action. I assure the
Council of Egypt’s support for any measure it takes
towards this goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): Estonia, as a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
Group, aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Switzerland and would like to make some additional
remarks on the issue of the appointment of the next
Secretary-General. My statement is endorsed by the
26 States members of ACT.
As Philip Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield, said
several centuries ago: “Many a man would rather you
heard his story than granted his request”. Although the
wider membership would definitely value reflection
on more suggestions coming from outside the Security
Council, the main goal should be increased ownership
of the Council’s work by all countries.
Estonia cannot speak from first-hand experience
about the complicated everyday work of the Security
15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

Council, since we have never served as one of
its members. But we truly believe in the positive
impact of open and inclusive processes. We saw very
clearly the importance of effective and substantive
communication between the permanent members of
the Security Council and the wider membership during
negotiations on General Assembly resolution 69/321,
on the revitalization of the work of the Assembly.
ACT, with Costa Rica and Estonia in the forefront in
those negotiations, is pleased with the outcome and
consensual adoption on 11 September of the resolution,
which set up a structured process for the selection of
the next Secretary-General.
Of course, implementation is key. Over the
years, we have seen many resolutions adopted but not
implemented on the issue of the selection of the next
Secretary-General. We must change this. As a first
step, a joint letter from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council should be sent to all
Member States calling for nominations. We would hope
to receive this letter in the coming weeks so as to set
in motion the whole process before the end of the year.
The President of the General Assembly has
received a very strong mandate from the resolution on
the revitalization of the Assembly; the elements of the
letter are also outlined therein. Now we are looking for
the Council to do its part. In this regard, we were pleased
to hear about the informal discussions that the Security
Council had under the New Zealand presidency in July.
More generally, our main concern should be
ensuring that the best candidates come forward and
are considered based on concrete selection criteria.
In 1945, the United Nations Preparatory Commission
said that, “The Secretary-General, more than anyone
else, will stand for the United Nations as a whole”. We
want to ensure that all Member States, as well as the
wider international community, have the possibility of
learning about the vision of the candidates presented
and interacting with them.
Additionally, and finally, we believe that after
70 years the time has come to be even more innovative.
Therefore we are of the opinion that in making the
final decision, preference should be given to equally
qualified female candidates. We also look forward to
a thorough discussion at this session of the duration of
the term in office of the Secretary-General, including
the option of a single, non-renewable term.

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): As Article 24 of the Charter
makes clear, Security Council members act on behalf of
the United Nations membership as a whole. This open
debate usefully enables the broader United Nations
membership to inform the Council of its expectations.
Let me briefly highlight a few working-method
reforms that Australia believes should be priorities.
First, with respect to atrocity prevention, proposals
calling for restraint on use of the veto and negative votes
in situations involving mass atrocities are fundamental
working-method reforms which should be supported.
Secondly, concerning conflict prevention, the
peacebuilding review found that the Council should
do better on conflict prevention and that overcoming
fragmentation between the principal organs of the
United Nations would strengthen its work in preventing
conflict and sustaining peace. To this end, the Council
should draw more regularly on the Peacebuilding
Commission’s advice.
The Council should also make better use of earlywarning mechanisms and timely briefings on threats.
The Secretariat should be empowered to bring to the
Council’s attention emerging threats, in line with the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and Article 99 of the
Charter.
Thirdly, a better informed Council is a more
effective Council. The use of a diverse range of briefers
and informal mechanisms such as Arria-Formula
meetings will help ensure that the Council is well
informed.
Fourthly, concerning procedural decisions, the
Council’s general practice of deciding on procedural
matters by consensus is appropriate. But where
consensus cannot be reached on crucial matters, the
Council should not prevent itself from taking the
necessary action. That was the case with the vote that
took place in December 2014 (see S/PV.7353) that placed
on the Council’s agenda the situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Finally, with respect to improved interaction with
the General Assembly, let me note, as many others have
today, that last month the General Assembly adopted by
consensus historic resolution 69/321, which demands
greater transparency in the selection of the SecretaryGeneral. The onus is now on the Council to act soon,

15-324685/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

including by issuing a joint letter by the Presidents
of the Council and the General Assembly to solicit
candidate nominations.
Australia recently announced its candidacy for the
2029-2030 Council term. Working-methods reform in
the interim will help determine whether the Council at
that time will be transparent, credible and effective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
issues of importance to the majority of Member States.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
To ensure that the Security Council is fully enabled
to carry out its responsibilities and that its actions are
owned by the wider Member States, robust cooperation,
communication, genuine consultation and support
vis-à-vis all States Members of the United Nations
is crucial. In that regard, allow me to emphasize six
important points.
First, the Security Council should conduct the
process of dialogue and interaction with States that are
non-members of the Security Council in the context of a
more meaningful and genuine conversation. In addition,
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter should be implemented
fully by taking seriously into consideration the views
of the non-member countries affected in dealing with
conflict situations under the purview of the Council.
Secondly, it is my delegation’s view that the
Council should focus more strongly on Chapters VI
and VIII of the Charter. Therefore, there should be
a strengthened mechanism for consultations with
regional and subregional organizations in resolving
regional security issues of global concern.
Indonesia therefore underscores that the Council,
in this regard, should pay greater attention to conflict
prevention and to the quest for political solutions to
global conflicts.
Thirdly, strengthened, balanced and harmonious
cooperation between the Security Council and the
General Assembly is equally critical. The Council
should also take into account the recommendations of the
General Assembly on matters relating to international
peace and security, consistent with Article 11, paragraph

6/34

20/10/2015

2, of the Charter. A comprehensive and analytical
monthly assessment of the work of the Council would
greatly facilitate the provision of relevant inputs to the
Council by the wider membership, including through
the General Assembly, on peace and security issues of
common concern. Indonesia attaches great importance
to the implementation of General Assembly resolution
69/321 on the revitalization of the General Assembly,
in particular closer collaboration between the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General.
Fourthly, because of the exercise of the veto and
the threat to exercise the veto, the Council has too often
taken no action in the face of mass atrocities and serious
threats to international peace and security. Indonesia
supports the abolishment of the veto. However,
considering the entrenched realities, we welcome any
steps that would strictly regulate the use of the veto.
The Council should determine a workable mechanism
to ensure that the veto will not impede the cause of
humankind and justice.
Fifthly, Indonesia underscores the importance of
enhanced and regular consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries throughout all stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Finally, it is worth recalling that merely improving
the working methods is not a solution to the larger
problem. Our efforts cannot be limited to procedures.
The global citizenry looks to the Council to be
responsive, effective, fair and just in resolving conflicts
in accordance with international law. Regrettably,
lingering cases, such as those of Palestine and Syria,
illustrate all the ways in which the Council has failed.
Indonesia will therefore continue to be relentless
in calling for and contributing to efforts to realize
a democratic, judicious, transparent, accountable
and effective Council that reflects the plurality and
concerns of all people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
is a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group and aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the group. We have been leading the Group’s
efforts to make the Security Council more effective
in preventing or ending atrocity crimes. It is on that
subject that I wish to make the following brief remarks.

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

The people of the world expect the Council to
protect them from genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes — the worst crimes under international
law. Too often, the Council has failed to live up to
those expectations, such as in Rwanda and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the 1990s and in Syria and other places
as we speak. Such well-known examples illustrate the
human and political cost of inaction, but there are many
others, including situations that never even made it on
to the Council’s agenda.
It is for that reason that our group has come together
to prepare a code of conduct for States regarding
Security Council action against atrocity crimes. We
have done so in a process of detailed consultation with
States, the Secretariat and civil society. The product is
a text that reflects the political commitment of States
and that, over time, will help us create a culture of
political accountability, which is needed to make the
Council more effective and legitimate.
By committing to the code, States pledge that,
while serving as members of the Council, they will
support timely and decisive action by the Council to
prevent or end atrocity crimes. As part of that general
commitment, they also pledge more specifically not to
vote against a credible draft resolution submitted to that
end. Eighty-three States from all regions of the world
have already signed on to the code of conduct. That
includes seven members of the current Council and
three of the five States that were just elected to serve on
it starting in 2016. That is an impressive number, and
we are confident that many more States are to follow.
The code of conduct will be launched this Friday,
23 October, by our Foreign Minister at an event open to
everybody. The more States that join the initiative by
Friday, the stronger the call for change in the way the
Council addresses atrocity crimes will be. We therefore
urge all States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the code of conduct within
the next few days, so that they can be reflected in the
original list of supporters.
The code of conduct is an important and serious
political commitment for any State that serves on the
Council. It also represents a minimum standard that
we expect any Council member to live up to, as they
are called upon to collectively exercise the primary
responsibility for international peace and security on
our behalf. We are confident that the code-of-conduct

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

initiative can bring about an essential change in the
decision-making of the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Mr. Carroll (Holy See): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on the Security Council’s working methods and
wishes to raise four points.
First, there is a need for genuine equity among
Member States with regard to the influence that they
can exert. on the decision-making processes in the
various United Nations bodies, including the Security
Council. Pope Francis, in his address to the General
Assembly on 25 September, affirmed that, beyond the
many achievements of the United Nations,
“the experience of the past 70 years has shown
that reform and adaptation to the times are always
essential as we work towards the ultimate goal of
ensuring that all countries without exception can
participate in our decisions and have a genuine and
equitable influence on them” (A/70/PV.3, p. 3).
My delegation believes that Member States would
like to have an equitable share in influence, especially
in the Security Council, the only United Nations body
with the power to make binding decisions. That calls
for greater interactivity; in particular, it requires real
open debates and a willingness to take into account
the views of the wider membership and the actors in
the various conflicts being considered. Such views can
bring greater legitimacy to the Council, helping it to
better shape its understanding of crisis situations and
improving its ability to respond.
Moreover, in order to show greater consideration
of the views of the wider membership, the Council
may want to re-examine its practice of first adopting a
resolution on a matter that is only subsequently debated
by the wider United Nations membership. There are,
doubtlessly, good reasons for that practice. However, it
makes some of the wider membership wonder if their
inputs really matter and if the resolution has already
been decided on and adopted before they are heard.
Secondly, with regard to the question of the
transparency that the wider membership demands
from the Council, we hear that voice getting stronger
lately, not only in the context of the bigger question of
the reinvigoration of the work of the United Nations
as it turns 70, but also in the more immediate context

15-324687/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

of the selection of the Organization’s next SecretaryGeneral. In that regard, it is imperative that the
Security Council and the General Assembly maintain
a transparent working relationship. As laid out in
General Assembly resolution 69/321, the membership
deems that the criteria for qualified candidates must
include proven leadership and managerial abilities,
extensive experience in international relations, strong
diplomatic communication and multilingual skills,
while considering equal and fair distribution based on
gender and geographical balance.
Thirdly, on the question of fairness in the
application of the Charter of the United Nations and
all international agreements and treaties, my delegation
believes that the arbitrary interpretation of existing
laws and the application of double standards in dealing
with the parties in conflict are some of the underlying
causes of the feelings of victimization that turn into
hatred and violence.
Fourthly, the United Nations, and the Council
in particular, would acquire greater authority and
legitimacy if countries could discern clear and
effective criteria for the application of the principle of
the responsibility to protect and for the corresponding
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The responsibility to protect all peoples from
massive atrocities, instances of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is today
widely recognized and accepted. Yet, it is not easy to
carry out that duty in practice because of the prevailing
geopolitical interests and, not least, because actions
under that principle can lead to conflicts with a strictly
literal interpretation of another principle, that of
non-intervention, as enshrined in paragraph 7 of Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Nonetheless,
owing to the unacceptable human costs of inaction,
the search for effective juridical means for practical
applications of the principle of the responsibility to
protect must be one of the most urgent priorities of the
United Nations.
The Holy See strongly supports any initiative
and any step towards achieving a more effective and
concrete application of the principle of the responsibility
to protect, especially in cases of mass atrocities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

8/34

20/10/2015

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).
At the outset, let me express the appreciation of
NAM to you, Mr. President, and the Spanish presidency
of the Council for convening this debate on the Council’s
working methods and for presenting the concept note
(S/2015/793, annex) on the issue. NAM welcomes this
open debate, since it provides an opportunity for the
entire United Nations membership to express their
views on Security Council working methods and
encourages the broader membership to participate in
the debate.
For NAM, transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures.
We regret that the Council has neglected those
important elements on numerous instances. Examples
of that failing can be seen in its reluctance to convene
open debates on some issues of high significance, its
holding of unscheduled open debates with selective
notifications, its practice of repeatedly restricting
participation in certain debates and of discriminating
between members and non-members of the Council,
particularly with regard to the sequence and time limits
of statements allowed during the open debates.
In view of the time limit and the fact that the NAM
position on the subject at hand is reflected in the May
2014 final document of the seventeenth Ministerial
Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, I will
confine myself to the following nine specific measures
that NAM calls for with a view to improving the working
methods of the Council and enhancing its efficiency in
fulfilling its primary responsibility.
First, the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, which have remained provisional for
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve its
transparency and accountability.
Second, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the meetings
should provide real opportunities to take into account
the views and contributions of the wider membership
of the United Nations, particularly non-members of
the Council whose affairs are under discussion by the
Council.

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

Third, closed meetings and informal consultations
should be kept to a minimum and should be the exception
rather than the rule, as they were meant to be. Meetings
should be open, especially when they include briefings
by the Special Envoys or Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Secretariat.
Fourth, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Council should be in accordance with the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and
those organs should function in a manner that provides
adequate and timely information on their activities to
the broad United Nations membership.
Fifth, the annual reports of the Security Council
to the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical, assessing the work
of the Council, including such cases in which the
Council has failed to act, and should include the views
expressed by members during the consideration of the
agenda items. We also call on the Council to elaborate
on the circumstances under which it adopts the various
outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential statements,
press statements or other elements to the press.
Sixth, the Council should, pursuant to paragraph
1 of Article 15 and paragraph 3 of Article 24of the
Charter of the United Nations, submit special reports
for the consideration of the General Assembly.
Seventh, the Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical and
that they are issued in a timely fashion. The General
Assembly may consider proposing parameters for the
elaboration of such assessments.
Eighth, the Council should fully take into account
the recommendations of the General Assembly on
matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with paragraph 2 of Article 1 of the Charter.
Ninth, the Council should cease its ongoing attempts
to shift issues on the agenda of the General Assembly
or the United Nations Economic and Social Council
over to the Security Council and the encroachment by
the latter on the functions and powers of the Assembly.
The Non-Aligned Movement rejects the use of
the Security Council as a tool to pursue national
political interests and agendas, since that practice
aggravates rather than alleviates situations and runs
counter to its mission as enshrined in the Charter. We
reiterate the necessity of non-selectivity, impartiality
and accountability in the work of the Council. The

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

decision by the Security Council to initiate formal or
informal discussions on the situation in any Member
State or on any issue that does not constitute a threat to
international peace and security is contrary to Article
24 of the Charter. In such cases, there is a need for
the Council to remain strictly within the powers and
functions accorded to it by Member States under the
Charter.
In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action
in some cases, while remaining silent and inactive in
others. Furthermore, the Council has increasingly
resorted to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations as an umbrella for addressing issues that do not
necessarily pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security. A careful review of those trends
indicates that the Council could have opted for
alternative provisions to respond more appropriately
to particular cases. Instead of making excessive and
quick resort to Chapter VII, efforts should be made to
fully utilize the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII for
the pacific settlement of disputes. Chapter VII should
be invoked, as intended, as a measure of last resort.
Unfortunately, provisions of Articles 41 and 42 have in
some cases been resorted to with undue speed before
other options were fully exhausted.
Finally, as we approach the process to appoint a
new Secretary-General for the Organization, NAM
underlines its position as elaborated in the Algiers
ministerial declaration of May 2014, along with the
central role of the General Assembly in the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, and
expresses its support for efforts aimed at reinforcing
and strengthening the role of the Assembly in that
regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement just delivered by the respresentative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Singapore has for many years called for
improvements to the working methods of the Security
Council. Our latest proposals are included in the
document on Security Council reform circulated by
the President of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly on 31 July.
As a small city-State, we will not have many
opportunities to be a member of the Security Council,

15-324689/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

but we attach much importance to the issue of the
Council’s working methods and would like to see quick
progress. We therefore thank Spain for convening
today’s meeting and for its concept note ((S/2015/793,
annex) on the theme of this open debate. We would like
to focus on three aspects of the working methods of the
Security Council.
First, to improve its own effectiveness and
accountability, the Council must address the elephant
in the room. Too often in the past, the veto has been
used to prevent action to address genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes that had led to the
loss of many innocent lives. Singapore reiterates
its call to the permanent members of the Council to
refrain from using their right of veto to block Council
action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. If they must, they
should at least explain to the wider United Nations
membership why they cannot support initiatives
aimed at preventing or ending mass atrocities. In
that regard, Singapore supports the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
on Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. We also support the
joint proposal of France and Mexico for the permanent
members of the Security Council to refrain from using
the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We call on all States
Members of the United Nations to do likewise.
Secondly, with respect to transparency and
accountability, the Council has been operating on
provisional rules of procedure for decades. Many of
the current working methods are also captured outside
the provisional rules of procedure in successive notes
by the President of the Council. Given the importance
of the Security Council, that is not ideal. It is time for
the Council to adopt its rules of procedure to improve
the transparency and accountability of its work. That in
turn would enhance the Council’s credibility with the
wider membership of the United Nations.
Thirdly, with respect to inclusiveness, in order
to ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations, the Security Council has been conferred
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, the Council
should not allow that to prevent it from working with
the wider United Nations membership on key issues that
affect all Member States. If the Security Council is to act
for the benefit of the wider United Nations membership,

10/34

20/10/2015

it should engage the Member States in a virtuous cycle
of dialogue and effective decision-making.
Next year, the United Nations membership will need
to decide on the next candidate to lead the Organization.
We call on the Council to work more closely with the
General Assembly, in accordance with their respective
mandates as laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to make the process for selecting the
Secretary-General more open and transparent. Some of
the measures adopted in General Assembly resolution
69/321, such as the joint letter by the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Council
inviting candidates to be presented in a timely manner
with a description of the entire process, are a good start.
We need to take further steps in that direction.
Singapore welcomes opportunities like today’s open
debate to discuss the important issue of the working
methods of the Security Council. We look forward to
a meaningful outcome on this issue that will help to
further strengthen the effectiveness and credibility of
the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on convening this open
debate, which is of great importance to our country, and
to thank you for giving us the opportunity to speak for
the first time as a member-elect of the Council.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group; of
Liechtenstein with regard to the code of conduct; and
of Estonia on the election of the Secretary-General.
In the spirit of the Spanish presidency’s call to refrain
from repeating ideas that have already been raised, I
shall not linger on the issues already covered by the
statements of the delegations just mentioned, but
concentrate on a very important point that my country
wishes to highlight.
Peacekeeping operations are fundamental tools for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
are an instrument to which Uruguay has been committed
for decades through concrete contributions to the
system and through its ongoing contribution to policy
discussions held within the Organization with regard
to those operations. Therefore, as an actor committed
to peacekeeping, Uruguay hopes for success in the
processes currently under way to review or consider
15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

United Nations peace operations, peacebuilding and
resolution 1325 (2000).
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the SecretaryGeneral’s report on its implementation (S/2015/682)
make it clear that the subject of consultations with
troop-contributing and police-contributing countries
remains a priority for improving the effectiveness
of peacekeeping mandates, in particular through
the earlier involvement of those countries in the
process of developing such mandates. The need for
early consultations with troop-contributing and
police-contributing countries in the current context, in
which we are witnessing an increase in direct attacks
on peacekeepers, and when mandates are becoming
increasingly complex, including offensive actions in
some cases, has become increasingly important. This
means that listening to the voices from the ground will
lead to more credible and realistic mandates. Similarly,
the triangular cooperation between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and Member States at large,
in particular the troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries, also needs to be
improved if we are to achieve a true partnership.
As my country has noted in other forums, no
new instruments are needed for consultations to be
conducted in an efficient manner; the challenge lies in
the implementation of the existing ones. The United
Nations Charter, Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1353 (2001), and various presidential
statements establish and refer to these mechanisms,
including provisions for early consultations with TCCs
before establishing or renewing new mandates; ad
hoc meetings at any stage of mandates, at the request
of the TCCs; and information exchange and thematic
discussions. In this regard, we believe that there is room
to improve the use of these tools, such as anything to
do with sharing information, including early access to
the reports of the Secretary-General, which my country
has insisted on in other areas, for example, during our
presidency of the Group of Friends of Haiti when the
first draft of resolution 1542 (2004), for the mandate for
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, was
being prepared.
Finally, the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations is key to improving the
interaction between those who are establishing and
renewing mandates and those that implement them, as
well as with the Secretariat. In this regard, Uruguay

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

remains committed to improving the working methods
for the biennium 2016-2017 in which it will sit as a
non-permanent member of this body.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States.
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for including the issue of Security Council reform on
the Council’s programme of work. I would also like to
congratulate Spain for its assumption of the presidency
for the month of October 2015.
We welcome the concept note circulated by the
Permanent Representative of Spain (S/2015/793,
annex) and take note of the issues contained therein
regarding efforts by the Security Council to improve
its working methods. We take note of the improvement
in the working methods of the Council, including the
use of the informal interactive dialogue, to interact
and engage informally with individual Member
States, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations. We also take note of
efforts to address issues such as penholdership, chairs
of subsidiary bodies, preparation of annual reports and
monthly assessments. We consider these to be modest
but meaningful steps towards improving the work of
the Council.
We note that the main focus of the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters has been on the Council’s
annual report to the General Assembly. We further note
that elected members of the Security Council have not
made much progress in pushing for the implementation
of certain issues and we hope that things will improve
in the future.
We encourage the Council to continue to build on the
important advances made through further improvement
of its working methods by implementing actions
outlined in note 5/2010/507 and subsequent relevant
notes. We remain convinced that cosmetic changes to
the working methods will not advance the fundamental
need for comprehensive reform of the Security Council
and expansion of its membership in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories, as contained in General
Assembly decision 62/557. The status quo continues to
be inconsistent with the principles, purposes and spirit
of the Charter of this great and noble Organization, in

15-3246811/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

that we have a Security Council in which Africa and
other regions remain underrepresented or unrepresented
in both categories.
Our continued participation in this debate is
firmly rooted in our commitment to working with
the entire United Nations membership in achieving
comprehensive reform of the Security Council along the
lines elucidated in the African Common Position. We
therefore reiterate our call for a comprehensive reform
as contained in decision 62/557 and, in that regard, we
stress the interlinkage of the five clusters of Security
Council’s reform.
On two of those clusters — the relationship between
the Security Council and the General Assembly, on the
one hand, and the working methods, on the other — we
have at all times maintained a principled position.
Our position is the one we submitted to the Chair of
the intergovernmental negotiations on 22 April and is
reflected in the framework document; it underscores the
need to uphold the primacy of and full respect for the
provisions of the United Nations Charter that pertain
to the powers and functions of the General Assembly.
The two clusters remain inextricably linked and, while
there has been some convergence of views on how to
improve them, key elements of the reform have not
come to fruition.
Notwithstanding the efforts made by various
delegations, certain proposals that are worthy of
consideration remain on the table. These include how
to improve transparency and access to the Council
and the creation of established rules of procedure for
the Council. We maintain that the Security Council
and the General Assembly must work closely together
within their respective spheres of responsibility to seek
solutions to the plethora of challenges confronting the
international community, with the Security Council
focusing on issues as mandated under the Charter, in
order to foster harmonious interaction and a cooperative
relationship between the two organs. The relationship
between the Council and the General Assembly
remains, for all delegations, a matter of paramount
importance on the reform agenda.
In January, the Security Council underscored
the interlinkages between security and development,
including their mutually reinforcing nature. It is
therefore key that we remain focused on this aspect as a
means for attaining sustainable peace. Maintaining the
balance between the two principal organs of the United
Nations: the Security Council and the General Assembly,
12/34

20/10/2015

is extremely necessary in order to enable the United
Nations to meet existing and emerging threats. It is also
necessary for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1). The role of the General Assembly,
including questions relating to international peace
and security, as provided for in the relevant Articles
of the Charter, need to be enhanced and strengthened
in order to enable it to play its proper role as the most
representative and democratic policymaking body of
the United Nations.
We commend the enhanced cooperation between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council, which has led to a more structured and
effective annual consultation between the two bodies.
We continue to urge for the enhanced coordination
between them in order to ensure predictable and
sustained funding for African Union peacekeeping
operations and to support post-conflict reconstruction
and development on the African continent. Sustained
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations will yield immense benefits in addressing
the present and future challenges to international peace
and security. Despite these positive developments, we
are concerned about the inconsistency of the Security
Council’s decisions by its demonstrated selectivity in
addressing issues that are of grave concern to regional
organizations.
In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council is an integral part of the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council. All five issues
of Security Council reform are interrelated and must
be addressed in a holistic manner. It has been several
decades since the Security Council has been seized
of the matter of the review of its working methods.
The fact that after 70 years the Council’s rules of
procedure remain provisional underscores the urgency
of addressing this issue.
We note that the main thrust of all the positions
of the various groups and delegations has been to
ensure that the Security Council becomes transparent,
inclusive, accountable and accessible in its working
methods. The Group of African States supports those
initiatives. We would therefore like to reiterate Africa’s
readiness to work with all interest groups and Member
States to achieve decisive and irreversible progress, but
as a comprehensive package of reform, not in isolated
silos. General Assembly decision 62/557 continues to

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

be our guiding light. We remain convinced of the need
for comprehensive reform that takes into account the
principles, objectives and ideals of the United Nations
Charter, for a fairer world based on universalism, equity
and regional balance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): While it is
a principal organ of the United Nations, the Security
Council is, however, restricted in its composition. It
acts on behalf of all of us, the Member States — hence
the need for transparency in the Council vis-à-vis the
general membership to which it is accountable.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, we associate ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier on its behalf by the
representative of Switzerland and wish to touch briefly
on the following four complementary aspects.
First, open debates such as today’s can prove very
useful for listening to the general membership’s views
on various subjects and situations relevant to peace and
security and, on the other hand, for enabling Member
States to better understand the measures the Council
adopts and helping to strengthen their commitment
to their full implementation. However, we have to
make open debates more efficient. We should be able
to conclude a productive debate in a single morning
session if we all cooperate in helping to focus on the
messages we deem important. So we support the format
that Spain has proposed for use in future open debates
and, like many others, including Council members,
we will abide by the shorter time allotted. Indeed, the
proposed format builds on presidential note S/2012/922,
which is aimed at increasing efficiency, interaction and
transparency in the outcome of open debates.
Secondly, with their specific knowledge of the
situations and areas they cover, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Economic and Social
Council can bring new and complementary perspectives
to the Council. The Council has already recognized the
importance of interaction with them; that is not new.
What we need to do now is to put that into full practice
and for the presidencies of the Security Council
to promote such interaction through their monthly
programmes of work, regularly scheduling the Chairs of
the PBC and its configurations, and the President of the
Economic and Social Council, as briefers in meetings
or participants in informal dialogues, as appropriate.

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

We therefore fully agree with the statement made on
behalf of other Council members by the representative
of Angola highlighting the crucial role of Council
presidencies when preparing their programmes of work.
Thirdly, concerning the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council specifically, we see
merit in organizing periodic meetings to discuss issues
relevant to both their agendas. We are encouraged to
hear that the next presidency of the Security Council,
the United Kingdom, will continue to focus on
these important interrelations between security and
development. Such interaction could also be channeled
through the subsidiary bodies, such as the Sanctions
Committees and Working Groups, particularly those
on peacekeeping and conflict prevention.
Fourthly, the Council’s consultation with the PBC
and the Economic and Social Council could become
part of a much broader aspect, conflict prevention.
And to respond to the challenge issued this morning
by the representative of the United Kingdom to put
forward concrete suggestions, we propose that the
Council do some thinking on how to make better use
of the subsidiary bodies, including existing Working
Groups, to capture the signs of emerging challenges
to peace and security that are closely connected to
the larger development agenda — such as climate
change, pandemics, illegal trafficking and organized
crime — and submit timely reports on them to the
Council when they deem action to be necessary. I want
to emphasize that we are not talking about endless
meetings that merely prolong decision-making. We
know that the Council is an action-oriented body,
not a debate forum, but the inclusion of these bodies’
perspectives in Council meetings can, if efficiently
conducted, be extremely important to more coherent
decision-making in the United Nations.
The diversity of the United Nations is its strength.
Today, security is linked to many aspects that we
see dealt with across the United Nations system. The
Security Council should not insulate itself from such
experience, indeed, it can only benefit from it. We hope
that the members of the Council can reflect on that fact
and establish a practice that allows such interaction to
occur regularly, without of course overburdening the
Council’s already heavy workload.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

15-3246813/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

Ms. Çalışkan (Turkey): We would like to join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, and today’s
briefers.
The issue of the Council’s working methods is one
that has a direct impact on our Organization’s most
critical undertakings. Although we consider the subject
to be one of the main components of Security Council
reform, there is still room for further improvement
before we reach general agreement on the matter. That
said, at the outset we would like to state that many of
the challenges we face daily in the Organization are
a result of a lack of transparency, accountability and
effectiveness in the Council and of its undemocratic
nature. To some degree, we can only address these
problems by increasing the number of elected members.
The use of the veto is one of the most pressing
issues we have to tackle. It is almost impossible to tell
whether a country is motivated by the desire to maintain
international peace and security or by national interest.
In any case, the result is inaction on the part of our
Organization’s principal body, whose primary task is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives of France
and Mexico, as well as of Liechtenstein, on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aimed at limiting the use of a negative vote
by permanent or non-permanent members in cases of
mass atrocities. We support both initiatives. However,
we do not think that the idea of a code of conduct for
non-permanent members can be meaningful unless the
permanent members also embrace it.
Our discussion of working methods also covers
the relationship between the Council and other bodies
of the United Nations. One particularly important
topic on today’s agenda is the selection process of
the next Secretary-General, an issue connected to
the relationship between the Council and the General
Assembly. This year we are witnessing a thorough
discussion of the matter that includes civil society
as well as Member States. The General Assembly’s
recent resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of its
work, includes landmark provisions, as others have
mentioned. However, since it includes no references to
deadlines or numbers of candidates to be recommended
by the Council, we think the current situation has a long
way to go in addressing the structural shortcomings of
the process.

14/34

20/10/2015

Regular and more substantive interaction between
the Council and other United Nations bodies, including
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, would not
only augment the Council’s transparency, openness and
inclusiveness but would also enhance the efficiency of
the United Nations system in general.
Needless to say, the dialogue between the Council
and non-Council members is one of the critical aspects
of our discussion today. Although we are cognizant of
the need for the Council to conduct its own deliberations
during its decision-making process, we think there is
much room for improvement in terms of increasing the
transparency of its work. In that regard, scheduling more
informative briefings and Arria Formula meetings,
ensuring that draft resolutions, presidential statements
and information on the work of the subsidiary bodies,
as well as their reports, are made available in a timely
manner, and, last but not least, reducing the frequency
of closed meetings are what we need if we are to have
meaningful interaction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Spanish delegation
for organizing today’s important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for his briefing and to commend Ambassador
Gaspar Martins of Angola for his leadership in his
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Brazil has long advocated that the Security Council
should be more transparent, more accessible to the
other Member States of the United Nations and more
accountable to the broader membership on whose behalf
it acts. The Council should carry out its work in an open
and public manner as often as possible. In line with the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, Brazil has
also been calling for countries with a special interest in
a substantive matter under consideration by the Council
to have their views fully taken into account and to be
allowed to participate in its consultations. That applies
particularly to those countries on the Council’s agenda,
but also to troop- and police-contributing countries. We
understand that this is an important topic that should

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

addressed as the review process for peacekeeping
operations and special political missions progresses.
In the context of discussions on the review, the
consultations among the Security Council, the troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
should become more institutionalized. In this regard,
the positive experience of the Group of Friends of Haiti
could be replicated. This body should also consider
new ways to improve the participation of regional
and subregional organizations in its decision-making
process. We have also long advocated that the Security
Council should spend more of its time and effort on
prevention. In this context, allow me to welcome once
again the strong emphasis given by the High-level
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, chaired
by President José Ramos-Horta, to the primacy of
politics and to preventive diplomacy, and underline the
importance of translating the Panel’s recommendations
into concrete strategies.
There is wide recognition that voting in the
Security Council should be carried out in ways that
favour our Charter responsibilities with respect to
collective security. There are currently two initiatives
under discussion by member States that touch upon
this issue — one by France and the other by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group. We welcome the French proposal on the veto,
as that initiative reflects the widespread perception
that the Council has not been able to adequately fulfil
its Charter responsibilities in certain particularly
problematic situations. The ACT code of conduct also
points to the necessity and urgency of updating the
working methods of the Council. The code can be seen
as a constructive contribution to the debate on voting
patterns to the extent that it highlights the fact that the
international community’s response to mass atrocities
should not lie at the sole discretion of permanent
members. We believe, however, that such a code should
also address certain other aspects relating to prevention
and accountability.
The twenty-first century provides us with abundant
and tragic evidence that the resort to military force
more often than not increases civilian suffering and
vulnerability. Therefore, it would have been important
for ACT’s code to emphasize two notions in particular.
The first is that military action is a measure of last
resort that can take place only in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and after a judicious
analysis of its possible consequences. The second is

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

that decisions authorizing the use of force should rely
on enhanced procedures for monitoring and assessing
their implementation in order to ensure compliance
with the original mandate and with international law.
Apart from the United Nations membership, many
civil society actors are expressing a strong interest in
the process of selecting the next Secretary-General.
Important initiatives outside the United Nations — such
as, the “1 for 7 Billion” campaign and a proposal by
the group known as The Elders — have been launched,
calling for more transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection process. This is a topic closely related to
the working methods of this organ and, in particular,
to its relationship with the General Assembly. Brazil
supports a more active role for the General Assembly
in nominating the Secretary-General, in accordance
with article 97 of the Charter and in line with our
commitment to democratic and transparent procedural
practices.
Regarding the relationship between the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies, closer
cooperation is needed not only with the General
Assembly — particularly concerning the issue of
Security Council encroachment on the Assembly’s
prerogatives — but also with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Brazil believes that the Council should make better use
of the advisory function of the PBC. As I can testify
from my own experience, there is scope for additional
value added to the Council’s deliberations when Chairs
of PBC configurations are invited to informally meet
Council members, before a situation they follow closely
is up for consideration.
One of the most easily implemented recommendations
of the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture, contained in its
report “The challenges of sustaining peace”, is for the
Security Council to regularly request and draw upon the
advisory, early-warning and preventive roles that the
PBC can play to enrich the peacebuilding dimensions
of mandates. We take this opportunity to encourage all
Member States, not least the members of the Council,
to fully engage in the intergovernmental phase of the
peacebuilding architecture review, which was recently
launched by the two co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia.
When discussing the working methods of the Security
Council, one cannot help but note that the permanent
five (P-5) have a significant edge in mastering the

15-3246815/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

procedures and legal intricacies of the Council’s work.
The so-called penholders for resolutions are almost
invariably permanent members. To a great extent, this
happens because newly elected members, for obvious
reasons, take some time to adjust to the complexity of the
Security Council’s working methods. However, under
improved working methods, non-permanent members
should not only take part in the negotiations from the
early stages of the process onwards, but also take on
greater drafting responsibilities. The contribution of
non-permanent members can be of great relevance to
overcoming impasses. Let us not forget that one of the
most constructive initiatives regarding the situation
in Syria, which led to the adoption of resolution 2139
(2014) on humanitarian access to the country, was
conducted by three non-permanent members. Let us
also recall that resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, came about through the persistence
of elected members, under the leadership of Namibia,
15 years ago.
It is difficult to see how we will be able to
significantly improve the working methods of this
organ without tackling the need to expand it. In the
view of a majority of United Nations Member States,
the best way to enhance the Council’s dynamics with
a view to ensuring that its decisions become more
effective and legitimate is through the creation of
new permanent and non-permanent seats. That would
allow for countries committed to a more transparent,
efficient, accessible and accountable Security Council
to acquire the expertise and ability required to help
modernize the Council from within. The improvement
of the working methods of the Security Council will
depend to a great extent on a comprehensive reform that
brings the Council closer to the contemporary world.
That is why the working methods cluster is one of the
five key interrelated issues of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, as established
by General Assembly decision 62/557.
In conclusion, in the same vein as the intervention
made by my colleague from Sierra Leone, I would
like to stress that the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations and the current session of the General
Assembly represent an invaluable opportunity to
achieve a concrete outcome regarding this long overdue
task of Security Council reform.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.

16/34

20/10/2015

Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Paraguay takes this
opportunity to reaffirm our position on the working
methods of the Security Council, as expressed in
statements we have made in discussions on reform of
this organ. Paraguay believes that in addressing the
working methods of the Security Council, the key
issues are transparency, participation, accountability
and efficiency.
Transparency is a feature that should permeate
all levels of deliberation and decision-making in the
Council. One crucial aspect in that regard is the holding
of open meetings of the Council. As the Council works
today, open meetings seem to be the exception and not
the rule — a situation that prevents non-member States
from having any effect on the Council, particularly in
the adoption of its decisions.
The issue of participation is twofold. The first
aspect of participation exclusively involves the States
members of the Council, whereas the second involves
non-members. With regard to the first, we believe that
non-permanent members should participate on an equal
footing with permanent members. The treatment of
certain items as reserved and withheld exlusively for
the permanent members and not to be addressed by
non-permanent members is a discredit to the work of
the multilateral system and restricts the rights of the
latter as members of this organ. With regard to the
second, Paraguay feels that measures should be taken
to allow non-permanent members of the Council
to participate in matters that are addressed by the
permanent members, particularly when they involve
issues that affect those countries or the Organization.
To this end, these subjects should be made known with
sufficient time in advance.
With regard to accountability, it is essential to
recall that, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the members of the Council act on behalf of
all States Members of the United Nations. This implies
a particular and special commitment. Acting on behalf
of everyone requires responsible action and, therefore,
accountability. In this regard, we call for the annual
reports of the Council to the General Assembly to
contain a substantive analysis and not simply a list of
facts or a summary of meetings and decisions adopted.
Finally, let us address the issue of efficiency.
The Council’s working methods must ensure the
efficiency and effectiveness of this organ, which will
require improving its capacity to respond in a timely
15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

and appropriate manner to issues that are vital to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

both its transparency and its effective engagement with
other relevant stakeholders.

Paraguay expresses its firm desire for the selection
of the next Secretary-General to be undertaken through
a transparent, dynamic and inclusive process in which
the Security Council and the General Assembly act in a
coordinated and complementary manner.

This brings me to the second point that I should
like to highlight in this debate — the importance of the
role of the Secretary-General, whether through his good
offices in accordance with Article 99 of the Charter,
or through initiatives such as “Rights up front”. The
election of the next Secretary-General will be a golden
opportunity to increase the equality, transparency,
predictability and inclusivity of this process and to
further strengthen the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as it is a decision
taken not by the 15 members of the Council alone but
by the entire membership.

In conclusion, we know that some members of
the Council believe that only they have the authority
to choose their working methods. However, at various
points in the past we have seen this organ heed the
concerns of the General Assembly or of non-member
States, and in this regard it has incorporated suggestions,
proposals or specific contributions to improve, correct
or optimize its working methods. That is why we ask
that the outcomes of this debate be taken up by the
members of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank Spain
for convening this open debate on the Security
Council’s working methods, and the President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Mogens Lykketoft, and the
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council,
Mr. Sven Jürgenson, for their opening statements.
Allow me to address two specific points. First, my
delegation recognizes the importance of deepening
communication between the Security Council and
other bodies and actors in order to allow the former
to effectively carry out its tasks. This communication
should be much more fluid and dynamic, not only with
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Secretariat, but also with the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Special Representatives and Envoys
of the Secretary-General, and especially with the
International Criminal Court and the International
Court of Justice.
This communication should also extend to regional
and subregional organizations, troop-contributing
countries and civil society organizations that, through
the Arria Formula format, have the opportunity to
directly influence the Council’s work. The fact that
15 Arria Formula meetings have been held this year is
worth noting with appreciation.In that regard, we also
commend the work of the non-permanent members of
the Security Council and urge them to use all means
at their disposal to ensure that the Council increases

Costa Rica would urge us all to take advantage of
the momentum surrounding the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of
the General Assembly’s work, by launching as soon
as possible the process to determine who will occupy
the role of Secretary-General as of 1 January 2017.
It is urgent that the process of selection for the next
Secretary-General — whom Costa Rica hopes will be a
woman — begin as soon as possible with the dispatch
of a joint letter from the President of the General and
the President of the Security Council. The recently
adopted resolution maps the way forward ,and my
delegation will attach due importance and attention to
the implementation of the process.
My delegation is encouraged that from this point
on, and for the first time in history, we will have the
opportunity to know the names of the candidates and
their platforms and to interact with them. Nevertheless,
Costa Rica and other will continue to work to generate
the political momentum needed to ensure that the
Security Council presents not just one, but two or more
candidates to the General Assembly, and that the process
include an election, and not simply an appointment.
Rather than ask when we should begin to implement
resolution 69/321, the question we should be asking
ourselves is why we have taken so long. We ask the
same question every year when we find that the Security
Council’s rules of procedure are still provisional and
that, despite the calls of the membership, a plan of
action for implementing presidential note S/2010/507
and its subsequent updates has yet to be adopted.
The Security Council is at a critical juncture in terms
of its transparency and working methods in general. It
can choose to refresh its collaborative energy, renew

15-3246817/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

the momentum to consolidate current achievements
and meet new challenges, or it can retreat to its familiar
protocol and close ranks around its own prerogatives,
which would negatively impact its effectiveness and
legitimacy. We all know that the first of these is the
only viable option.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by thanking Spain for having
convened this meeting on the working methods of the
Council at a moment of fundamental importance for the
United Nations as we debate Security Council reform,
the new dynamic for selecting the Secretary-General
and the changing relationship between the various
organs and bodies. In that contect, Panama believes that
the time has come for this debate to be revitalized in
the light of two interrelated aspects: transparency in the
acts of the Organization and ethics as the indisputable
guiding principle of the decision-making process of all
bodies of the United Nations without exception.
Although the world has been subject to the most
diverse changes since 1946, the structures and internal
dynamics of the Organization have not necessarily
responded to these new realities as required and
demanded by the international agenda. The process of
Security Council reform today is a matter of growing
interest to 97.4 per cent of this community and
represents no less than the need for States to ensure
that their membership is representative of current
geopolitical and regional realities.
The efforts of the 51 Member States, including
Panama, that founded the Organization in 1945 are
noteworthy and have fulfilled many of their objectives,
but the United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, must respond to another historic moment,
and the current membership must be open not only
to sustaining debate but to encouraging it so as to
strengthen a decision-making organ that speaks for the
Member States, which now number 193.
After 70 years, the essential functions assigned
by the Charter of the United Nations to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security continue and will continue to be relevantm, but
it is beyond doubt that this organ needs to be revitalized
so that it will be not only more representative but also
more effective, transparent, open and accountable to
the international community. That need underlines

18/34

20/10/2015

the importance of the various initiatives aimed at
overcoming the right of veto in the Security Council,
which in various cases limits the immediate action and
efficiency of the United Nations in specific situations
or where there is a risk of crimes or violations.
We have expressed our support of the initiative
promoted by Liechtenstein and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group with regard to a
code of conduct that would promote the idea of a more
democratic Security Council. We also support the
initiative of France and Mexico and are following it
particularly closely because it reflects the first time that
a permanent member of the Security Council has taken
leadership in the discussion on revising and updating
its own privilege.
Panama has previously stated that diverse
participation within the Security Council, particularly
on the part of developing countries, would provide
greater transparency in decision-making and the
implementation of decisions. Likewise, we believe
that the veto in the Security Council played its historic
role in previous decades following the conflict of the
Second World War. Today, however, even the smallest
of countries demand that they be treated equally as we
are all subject to international law.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that it is
important that we consider the recommendations of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, which, since its establishment,
in 1993, has been working on those issues in order to
improve and rationalize the modalities and methods
used by the Security Council. We acknowledge the
opportunity afforded to us by this open debate to
consider the question of the Council’s working methods.
We are encouraged that we are moving in the right
direction to come up with the comprehensive reforms
that the Organization so urgently requires.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for convening today’s open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. The Czech Republic
supports strongly the reform of the Security Council,
including its working methods. We have expressed our
opinion both in the form of an input to the framework
document of the Chair of the intergovernmental
negotiations and during the interactive dialogue in

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

May. The Czech Republic also wishes to reiterate its
support for Ambassador Rattray’s efforts to facilitate
the intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council, which, 70 years after the birth of the
United Nations, is clearly overdue.
We agree with the Spanish concept note (S/2015/793,
annex) that there is certainly room for improvement
in the way the Security Council interacts with other
bodies of the United Nations, notably with the General
Assembly. We also feel that open debates with an
outcome pre-agreed beforehand do not give rise to an
interactive nature for such debates, nor does it give the
Member States outside the Security Council a feeling
that the reviews matter to this body. We therefore
support further debate on how those deficiencies can
be remedied. That goes also for draft resolutions and
presidential statements, where the exchange with
non-member States of the Security Council could also
be intensified.
The Czech Republic considers the question of the
selection of the Secretary-General to be one of the
most important parts of the process. We appreciate
the fact that the Spanish delegation has not overlooked
that issue. The current way of selecting the SecretaryGeneral is clearly outdated. The Czech Republic fully
supports a more transparent process of selection, as set
out in General Assembly resolution 69/321, which goes
in the right direction. We especially welcome the idea
that candidates for Secretary-General should introduce
and present themselves to the General Assembly during
informal dialogues and meetings. We would be happy to
go even further towards transparency and inclusiveness
in the selection process.
The Czech Republic also appreciates the efforts
to improve and intensify the Security Council’s
relationship with other United Nations bodies, in
particular with the Peacebuilding Commission but
especially with the Economic and Social Council.
The recently adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) lends
new impetus to the relationship between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council and
underlines the important link between security and
development.
In that context, we would like to remind delegations
of the candidature of the Czech Republic to the
Economic and Social Council during the elections to
be held tomorrow in the General Assembly. The Czech
Republic would like to stress its commitment to Agenda

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

2030 and supports further building on the link between
sustainable development and sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome Spain’s initiative in convening
an open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. I also thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2015/793, annex) prepared for this meeting.
Peru associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, particularly with regard to the importance
of General Assembly resolution 69/321 as it pertains to
the procedure for selecting the next Secretary-General.
We hope that it will be effectively implemented soon.
In signing the Charter of the United Nations all
States Members grant to the Security Council the
mandate to ensure international peace and security and
also undertake to comply with its resolutions. That gives
us the necessary legitimacy to express our views with
regard to the working methods of this organ. In that
context, my delegation would like to reiterate the urgent
need to continue to make progress towards reforming
the working methods of the Council with the aim of
increasing its legitimacy, its necessary transparency in
multilateral relations, as well as its efficiency and the
effectiveness of its work. In that regard, my delegation
would like to share three ideas that have been mentioned
by some of the speakers who preceded me, which shows
a meeting of minds on so many of these things.
First, in order to find transparency, this organ
needs to hold more public meetings, and they need to
be substantive meetings and held at the appropriate
time. My delegation also favours the scheduling open
debates, given that they provide non-members of the
Council an opportunity to express their opinions.
Secondly, with regard to the democratization of the
Security Council, my country has always expressed a
position of principle whose ultimate aim is that that the
right to the veto should be eliminated. We are aware of
the difficulties of doing that, which is why we support
all efforts aimed at restricting the use of the veto.
We should point out that, without genuine reform of
the working methods as they pertain to the veto, the
important concept of the responsibility to protect is
at serious risk of being diluted. In that context, Peru
supports the political declaration put forward by France

15-3246819/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

and Mexico aimed at preventing the use of the veto
in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and
flagrant violations of human rights law or international
humanitarian law. We call upon the other permanent
members of the Council to support that initiative. Also
in the framework of the ACT group, we have been
working towards the adoption of a code of conduct
according to which Member States would commit to not
vote against a draft resolution of the Security Council
aimed at preventing cases of genocide or crimes against
humanity.
Thirdly, in order to promote greater interaction
and participation, Peru considers it fundamental
to consolidate the practice of Security Council
consultations with countries that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations. The increasing complexity
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations as well
as the growing challenges that they face requires ever
greater coordination and an exchange of information.
The opinions of troop-contributing countries need to be
taken into account when mandates are being renewed
or designed, as they will have to implement them on
the ground.
Finally, as others have pointed out, I should like
to stress the importance of moving from a conflictmanagement approach to a prevention approach. Only
an early warning system can prevent conflicts and fully
meet the primary objective of our Organization, which
is to preserve future generations from the scourge of
war.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We are pleased to see you,
Mr. President, preesiding over today’s open debate of
the Security Council.
We fully align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.
Over the years there have been improvements in the
Security Council’s working methods. That has happened
in no small measure due to the persistent efforts of the
non-permanent members. Much more, however, needs
to be done. In that regard, my delegation would like to
highlight the following key points.
The Council must continue to work towards
enhancing openness, transparency and inclusivity
in its decision-making processes. Member States

20/34

20/10/2015

not serving on the Council nevertheless have high
stakes in its decisions, and dialogue with the wider
membership is therefore crucial. Effective and
consistent implementation of the decision to improve
the Council’s working methods, including the decision
on intra-Council communication adapted from
Pakistan’s proposal during its last term on the Council,
is important.
We should continue to find ways to forge a more
robust partnership among the Council, the troopcontributing countries, the Secretariat and general
membership. Troop-contributing countries and
police-contributing countries must be closely consulted
before the formulation and adoption of peacekeeping
mandates. Their involvement in the processes of
mission formation will address many issues related to
command, control, communication, coordination and
inter-mission movements. Such consultations would
help peacekeeping missions to adapt to realities on the
ground.
A transparent process leading to a balanced
representation on the Council’s expert panels is
required. And the Office of the Ombudsperson needs to
be strengthened. There is no justification for limiting
its role to only one sanctions committee.
To enhance the relationship between the Council
and the General Assembly more public briefings,
substantive annual reports by the Council and
meaningful interaction between the Council and the
Assembly on the annual report of the Council would be
helpful. Taking up some of the proposals set out in the
letter written last year by the President of the General
Assembly in that regard could be a good beginning.
The process of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General is upon us. The opaqueness of that
process is good for neither the Council nor the United
Nations as a whole.
Finally, the early election of non-permanent
members next year will enable the Council to
allocate the Chairs of subsidiary bodies in a timely
manner — a demand that we have been making for
many years. Perhaps that will also enable the Council to
have more penholders from among the non-permanent
members.
The Security Council is a master of its own rules
of procedure, which unfortunately to date remain
provisional. Many of us today are giving our opinions

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

on what needs to be done. The important question to
ask is, How could all this be accomplished? It is a fact
that non-permanent members have convened almost
all the debates on the working methods of the Security
Council. It is a fact worth pondering over. There is an
inextricable link between the nature of the membership
of the Council and the need felt to make the Council more
open and transparent. That link is called accountability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
A genuine reform of the Security Council to
transform it into a transparent, representative and
democratic organ and which is in line with developments
experienced by the United Nations and developments in
international relations over the past 70 years continues
to be an outstanding issue. Without that reform, the
reform of the Organization will be incomplete. Changes
to the Security Council’s working methods are an
essential aspect of its reform. In our view, the changes
that have been made to date have been merely formal
and do not guarantee the genuine participation of
Member States in the work and decision-making within
the Council.
Fundamental agreements — above all on sensitive
or highly relevant issues — continue to be taken just by
the permanent members of the Council and, on occasion,
not even by all of them. The remainder of the members
have a limited margin to influence the process. The
majority of them face the dilemma of accepting or not
accepting the final product presented to them without
having had a possibility of participating in genuine
negotiations that would address their opinions and
interests.
The public debates should be the ideal opportunity
to channel the contributions of non-member States
to the Council in analysing specific aspects on its
agenda in order to contribute to the negotiation of draft
resolutions and decisions that will be adopted. However,
in practice those debates become a formal exercise and
the members of the Council do not even wait until the
conclusion of the debates before effectively taking their
decisions.

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, Member States recognize that
the Security Council is acting on their behalf in the
exercise of its functions, which implies that it should
guarantee genuine participation on the part of the 193
States Members in its work and in its decisions. Cuba
reiterates that, at a minimum, it is urgent to make
the following changes in the working methods of the
Security Council.
There is a need to increase the number of public
meetings pursuant to Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter.
Closed-door meetings and informal consultations
should be held only in very exceptional cases.
The countries concerned should always be allowed
to participate in the Council’s discussions that directly
affect them, pursuant to Article 31 of the Charter.
The Council’s resolutions and presidential
statements should reflect the views of Member States
as expressed in the public debates.
Countries not members of the Council should have
access to the subsidiary bodies, including the right to
participate in their discussions.
We should formalize the rules of procedure
of the Council — which unfortunately continue to
be provisional rules, as has been the case now for
70 years — in order to increase transparency and the
level of accountability.
We are concerned about the growing trend in
the Security Council to consider matters and assume
functions that do not fall within its area of competence,
increasingly usurping the role assigned by the Charter
to other organs of the United Nations, particularly to
the General Assembly.
The Council is required to present annual reports
to the General Assembly. Such reports should be
genuinely analytical and make it possible to adequately
evaluate its work, including the reasons that prevented
it from taking action in a given situation or specific
case in fulfilment of its mandate. We reiterate the need
for the Council to present special reports mentioned by
the Charter in Articles 15 and 24, which unfortunately
continue to go unpublished.
The issue of the veto is intrinsically linked
to the Council’s working methods, particularly
the decision-making mechanism. The veto is an

15-3246821/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that should
be eliminated as soon as possible.
A more transparent Council will be a more
legitimate Council. And an inclusive and accessible
Council that takes into account the opinions of the
Member States of the Organization would be a more
effective Council.
Let us leave aside rhetorical devices as we discuss
this important subject. There is no lack of ideas or
proposals. What we need is immediate action. Let
us once and for all remove the secrecy and lack of
transparency in the work of the Security Council,
as well as the exclusion of the great majority of the
Members of the Organization from its work and its
decisions. Let us not delay this task any longer.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I cannot
help but note the emblematic side of the fact that the
first meeting of the Security Council in which Ukraine
is takinig part since its election as one of this body’s
non-permanent members for the next two years is
devoted to the topic of improving the Council’s working
methods, the very hallmark of Ukraine’s electoral
campaign. In looking ahead this important issue will be
one of the major priorities of Ukraine’s non-permanent
membership of the Council during the period 2016-2017.
Ukraine has always been a staunch supporter of
increasing transparency in the Council’s activities and
enhancing its interaction with the wider membership of
the United Nations and the bodies of the Organization.
In that respect, we commend the Spanish presidency of
the Security Council for inviting the President of the
General Assembly to address the Council at its annual
debate on working methods, for the first time in the
past eight years.
In our electoral campaign we made a strong case
for transforming the Council into a body, open and
fully accessible to all States, as well as promoting, as a
matter of principle, broad and constructive cooperation
with each and every State Member. The United Nations
membership can rest assured that we will deliver on that
pledge in the next two years. It is through permanent
dialogue, consultation and accessibility to all interested
delegations that Ukraine will maintain its close contacts
with other States, taking into account their legitimate
interests in the day-to-day work of the Council.
22/34

20/10/2015

Next year an important cluster of the Council’s
working methods will come under the scrutiny of the
world community as the United Nations family elects a
new Secretary-General. As an incoming non-permanent
member of the Council, Ukraine is fully cognizant
of its responsibility to contribute to the proper
implementation of General Assembly resolution 69/321,
which provides that the process of the selection of the
Secretary-General shall be guided by the principles of
transparency and inclusiveness.
Bearing in mind that the Council’s chief
responsibility lies in the maintenance of international
peace and security, the issue of conflict prevention must
feature more prominently in the Council’s work. That is
of particular importance to countries not represented on
the Council that are facing clear and imminent threats
to their security. Therefore, preventive diplomacy must
become a staple of the Council’s work.
Interacting with troop- and police-contributing
countries is of particular interest to Ukraine, as an active
participant in United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Noting some positive changes in that area, we believe
that holding more regular and timely consultations
with such countries, both during the elaboration of
United Nations peace missions and mandates and
throughout the entire life cycle, is crucially important
in the ultimate success of those missions. We strongly
support the idea that contributing countries must have
a stronger voice in the overall decision-making process
in the Council.
External aggression against Ukraine made my
country and many others take a closer look at the
Council’s working methods. What became even more
crystal clear was the direct linkage between ensuring
the effective functioning of the Council and genuine
commitment on the part of each and every of its
members — the permanent ones in the first place — to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In that light, an area of a particular concern for us
is the use of the veto in the Security Council. In our
opinion, that instrument has long outlived its utility
and now has a detrimental impact on the Council’s
performance. We therefore welcome and support the
French and Mexican proposal on suspending the use
of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, as well as the
code of conduct put forward by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group. We encourage all

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Security Council members to give due consideration to
those initiatives.

Peacebuilding Commission, the International Criminal
Court and humanitarian agencies.

Further steps towards the eventual elimination of
the veto could be taken in the direction of the non-use of
the veto when considering cases of aggression against
a United Nations State Member. Blocking the Council’s
action under such circumstances would run contrary to
the purposes and principles of the Charter. However,
being realists, we realize that the veto will remain with
us for at least the foreseeable future. In that regard, we
propose that, if the veto is used, the permanent member
resorting to it have to explain the reasons for such
action, in particular with regard to its consistency with
the Charter of the United Nations.

The Security Council has a multiplicity of
responsibilities, and meeting them requires coordination
with other actors. However, Argentina is not in favour
of the Council, whose function is the maintenance
of international peace and security, absorbing the
functions of other bodies. There is a trend, which
in my opinion should be discouraged, to raise in the
Council issues that go beyond the level of necessary
coordination and encroach upon matters dealt with by
the General Assembly. That is a dangerous trend, given
that the securitization of the United Nations agenda
could lead to the Council assuming such matters to
the detriment of bodies with universal representation,
in particular the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. Although it is true that peace and
security are mutually interrelated, I want to stress the
term “mutually”, because that relationship is not only
one-way. Just as peace is needed for development,
development also promotes peace. However, peace
is not the only factor influencing development. My
delegation wanted to to make those clarifications
because, as a developing country, we must remain
loyal to the multiplicity of factors involved and because
securitizing the development agenda could lead to oversimplifying the recipes for development and give rise to
the temptation of attributing to the Council functions
that are of the General Assembly, to the detriment of
the Council’s own functions.

We also believe that there is an urgent need to
ensure the proper implementation of paragraph 3 of
Article 27 of the Charter, which obliges a party to a
dispute to abstain from voting.
In making our contribution to achieving one of the
presidency’s goals of reducing the overall length of the
debate, I will conclude with a final remark. In its future
work in the Security Council, Ukraine will strive to
enhance the openness and transparency of the Council
with the goal of improving its efficiency and restoring
its credibility, which has been severely undermined
recently.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to Spain for its initiative in convening this
open debate. As all are aware, during 2014 and 2015,
Argentina chaired the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Based
on that experience, we remain grateful to all members
of the Council and now wish every success to Angola as
it chairs the Working Group and that this will contribute
to transparency and accountability in the Council.
The President’s concept note (S/2015/793, annex)
cites presidential note S/2013/515, which was the first
note adopted during the Argentine chairmanship of
the Working Group, and which reflected a joint effort
on the part of all Council members. The note refers to
the dialogue between the Council and Member States
and bodies, whether they be part of the United Nations
system or not. In our opinion, such dialogue is essential
in fulfilling the Council’s functions. The organizations
mentioned in the presidential note include the

I would also like to take this opportunity to share
some thoughts on the Council’s working methods
generally.
My delegation attaches great importance — following
the holding of open debates — to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
taking into account the areas of agreement among the
broader membership as to how the Council works.
There are two aspects I would like to mention, as they
are issues that delegations repeatedly mention but on
which the Council has not made substantive progress.
One such issue is due process in the Council’s
sanctions committees, in particular when it comes to
the listing and delisting of persons. Argentina favours
including Ombudspersons in all sanctions committees,
beginning perhaps as a first step with the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

15-3246823/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

The other issue pertains to the referrals made by the
Council to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council regularly receives from the Prosecutor
of the ICC the reports required by its own resolutions.
However, it takes no action in response, even when the
Court informs the Council that cooperation required
under the Council’s resolutions has not been provided.
Both issues can affect the credibility of the Council if
they are not addressed promptly.
Finally, we cannot fail to mention that the year
2017 is of fundamental importance in that together we
must select the next Secretary-General. We call on all
delegations to work together to ensure that the process
is a genuine election. That is why we welcome General
Assembly resolution 69/321, adopted by consensus on
11 September. Although it is not perfect, the resolution
served to strengthen the transparency of the process and
is a step forward in the right direction. In that regard, we
again call on delegations and on the Council to present
more than one candidate for the post to the General
Assembly. It would also be desirable for at least one
candidate to be a woman. Finally, we welcome the very
important innovation that the selection and election
process begin with a joint letter from the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for your
concept note (S/2015/793, annex). I would like to start
by saying that we should keep in mind that we must
tackle a two-track reform of the Security Council,
one is structural and the other deals with the working
methods.
Algeria commends the efforts to hold more open
debates, interactive dialogues and monthly wrap-up
sessions. However, we strongly believe that the Security
Council can do more in terms of its transparency and
openness — and thus its effectiveness. Obviously,
some steps could be easily taken. I wish to mention
open debates as an example. It is rather puzzling that
decisions are often made on an issue by the Security
Council, and only then does that constitute a reason for
initiating an open debate. It is certainly important to
have Member States express their opinions, but their
opinions should precede decisions.

24/34

20/10/2015

I would like to highlight some of the measures
that my country deems important for improving the
efficiency of the work of the Security Council.
First, there is the matter of formalizing of the rules
of procedure, which have remained provisional for the
past 70 years,
Secondly, the number of public meetings should
be increased in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Closed meetings and
informal consultations should be kept to a minimum
and held only as an exception. The use of what is known
as groups of friends or penholders on specific issues
needs to acquire perennial relevance through more
interaction between members and non-members alike.
Thirdly, the Council should establish subsidiary
organs in accordance with the Charter. Wuch organs
should report on their activities to the general
membership of the United Nations, in an adequate and
timely manner.
Fourthly, cooperation between the Council and
regional and subregional organizations is crucial.
States that have undertaken mediation or good offices
initiatives should be given ample opportunity to interact
with the Council. Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter
ought to be given priority on a more frequent basis.
Moreover, with regard to article 99 of the Charter, the
Secretary-General has a powerful tool at his disposal.
Inclusiveness would most certainly benefit the
international community as a whole when it comes to
early warning, conflict prevention and resolution and
the promotion of peace.
Fifthly, the Security Council should take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter.
Issues on the agenda of the General Assembly or the
Economic and Social Council should not be shifted to
the Security Council agenda.
Sixthly, we need to have enhanced cooperation
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Council’s report to the Assembly should
be more detailed and analytical, and discussions on its
contents need to be more comprehensive.
My country, which serves as the coordinator
for the Non-Alligned Movement on the question
of the revitalization of the General Assembly, has

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

always strongly advocated for the improvement of the
structural relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council. In that regard, the selection
of the next Secretary-General and the use of the veto
are matters that require our attention, if we want to
send the right message and strengthen our collective
work in the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council is the executive board
of the General Assembly. It acts on behalf of the entire
international community and is also answerable to it
through the General Assembly.
Finally, I would like to stress that the question
on the working methods of the Security Council is an
integral part of its reform process. I therefore reaffirm
the African common position as outlined in the
Ezulwini Consensus.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate, and we welcome the
invitation to the President of the General Assembly,
Mr Lykketoft, to participate in this important meeting.
His participation in this debate is an important step in
improving cooperation and coordination between the
principal organs of the United Nations. We hope that
the Council will invite the President of the Assembly
to participate in its work more often. We also thank the
Deputy-Secretary-General for his briefing, as well as
that by the Vice-President of the Economic and Social
Council.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

implementing the useful proposals put forth by the
general membership of the United Nations in terms
of improving the Council’s working methods. One
of the key areas of reform identified has been the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General. In
view of the fact that the term of office of the current
Secretary-General is drawing to an end, one of the most
immediate changes the Council could embark upon
would be to increase its engagement with the broader
United Nations membership. That could be achieved by
the holding of Arria Formula meetings to discuss that
matter.
Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 69/321,
South Africa calls on the Security Council to coordinate
closely with the President of the General Assembly in
formally starting the process as early as possible. That
should be accompanied by a list of criteria, developed
in consultation with Member States and drawing on the
Charter of the United Nations and additional sources,
such as previous Joint Inspection Unit reports on the
criteria for senior management positions in the United
Nations. South Africa believes that the membership
should be kept abreast of developments and that the
names of candidates, as well as their curriculums
vitae, should be circulated. Member States should
also be given an opportunity to formally engage with
candidates through a series of interactive dialogues in
the General Assembly.
Finally, South Africa fully supports the call for the
Council to send more than one name to the General
Assembly, in order for the entire membership to make
the appointment and for the next Secretary-General to
be appointed for only one term of seven years.

We are especially pleased by the format outlined in
the concept note (S/2015/793, annex) drafted by your
delegation, Sir, which aims to reduce the overall length
of the debate and produce an outcome — with that
outcome being drafted after the debate in order to take
into account the positions of non-Council members.
That is only proper, as, after all, the Council acts on
behalf of all os us, not just on behalf of the privileged
15 members.

South Africa is pleased with the Council’s enhanced
strategic cooperation with the African Union Peace and
Security Council. In that regard, South Africa implores
the Security Council to give effect to resolution 2033
(2012), which calls on the Council to elaborate further
ways of strengthening relations between the two
Councils, including through achieving more effective
annual consultative meetings, the holding of timely
consultations and collaborative field missions of the
two Councils, as appropriate, to formulate cohesive
positions and strategies on a case-by-case basis in
dealing with conflict situations in Africa.

Over a number of recent years, we have debated
ad infinitum the question of Security Council working
methods. However, little has happened in terms of

While we have noted significant areas of
improvement in the strategic coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace

15-3246825/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

and Security Council, we are concerned about the
inconsistency with which the Security Council
coordinates its position with that of the African Union.
A recent example in that regard is the situation in South
Sudan, where some members of the Security Council
were ready to impose sanctions despite the African
Union Peace and Security Council being seized with
the matter and the unfolding processes at the African
Union level. We wish to thank those permanent and
elected members of the Security Council that heeded
the call of the African Union.
South Africa welcomes the debate on the use of
the veto and on restricting the use of the veto, which
has featured prominently in discussions over the past
few years. While South Africa in principle agrees
to a discussion on the use of the veto, we wish to
reiterate that the fundamental question that needs to be
addressed remains the composition and reform of the
Security Council.
We reiterate our stance that improving the
working methods of the Council is but a small step
in making the Council more effective. The only way
to truly and profoundly improve its efficiency is by
instituting a substantive reform of the Council to make
it representative of the geopolitical realities of this
century. It cannot be that in the seventieth year of its
existence, the Council still excludes vast geographical
areas in its permanent composition.
In that connection, we reiterate our commitment to
the Ezulwini Consensus, which seeks to provide Africa
with two permanent seats and five non-permanent
seats. In tandem with over two thirds of the United
Nations membership, we call for the abolition of the use
of the veto, which only serves to promote the interests
of a few. However, if that does not happen, we believe
that the new permanent members of the Council should
not be at a disadvantage and should be afforded all the
rights and privileges that come with a permanent seat,
including the right of veto.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): I would first like to
compliment the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council this month for having convened this debate on
improving the Council’s working methods.
Nepal joined the United Nations, together with
Spain and many other countries, on 14 December 1955,

26/34

20/10/2015

and has twice served in the Council as a non-permanent
member. Throughout this period, Nepal has closely
engaged in the Council’s work to maintain international
peace and security, especially through United Nations
peacekeeping. We long to see genuine reform in all
aspects of the Council’s working methods as well as in
its structure.
In this connection, I align my statement with that of
the Non-Aligned Movement and wish briefly to make
some points in my national capacity.
First, reform of the Council’s working methods
should not be a half-hearted measure but should reflect
the conviction that only through reform can trust in it
be built, its efficiency and effectiveness increased and
its acceptability cemented.
Such reforms should be complemented by
steps to ensure greater coordination with the troopand police-contributing countries and a balanced
revitalization of the Organization as a whole, so as to
make it fit for the purpose for which it was created and
the challenges it has to confront.
Bringing forward the election of non-permanent
members of the Security Council by several months
beginning next year is a positive step. We feel that the
election of non-permanent members should be further
brought forward to allow the elected members at least
one full year to prepare for their responsibilities,
with a view to helping ensure that their membership
substantially enriches the work of the Council.
The Council should not in any way allow the
feeling to be perpetuated that it hijacks other bodies’
agendas, trumpets them as its own, takes little action
and tends to shift the burden of action to others. It must
conduct these debates with a truly open mind, proving
that important ideas are taken on board and sharing full
information for decision-making, without gatekeeping.
In these open debates, the practice of adopting
outcomes at the beginning, thus undermining the utility
of such debates, must stop. Council members should set
an honourable precedent for non-members by making
concise and meaningful speeches, rather than asking
them to abbreviate their statements on important issues.
The practice of the same countries voting for
candidates twice, once in the Council and again in the
General Assembly, such as in the case of International
Court of Justice judges, should change. Similarly,
the term of the Secretary-General should be fixed

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

and closed to extension to ensure that it is strong and
effective, and to prevent the first term from being spent
ensuring a second.
Finally, I wish to add that it is time that the United
Nations take a leaf out of Nepal’s Constitution, adopted
last month, to ensure gender balance in top positions.
It provides that either the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
of the Lower House of Parliament, and either the Chair
or Vice-Chair of the Upper House of Parliament, must
be a woman. Similarly, no persons of the same gender
or community can simultaneously hold the offices of
President and Vice-President of the country.
To conclude, my delegation is convinced that
the Security Council must rise to the challenge with
courage, determination and accountability, so as to
emerge from opacity into transparency and credibility,
in the cause of global peace, security and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Sana (Rwanda): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
Rwanda aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of
the African Group, the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group.
This year marks important milestones for the
United Nations and its wider membership. From
socioeconomic development, with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to the review of peace
operations, peacebuilding, and women and peace and
security, Member States and different organizations
have acknowledged the importance of adjusting the
activities of the United Nations to the context of the
world we live in today. There is no doubt that this
is a welcome step that, hopefully, will lead to the
measurable achievement of sustainable development,
with a tangible impact on peace and security.
That is the reason why Rwanda is a strong believer
in a collective and inclusive approach when it comes to
peacebuilding and development, which are intrinsically
linked to security and stability. Peacebuilding and the
Economic and Social Council are therefore partners of

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

the Security Council and should actively participate in
its meetings and fulfil their mission accordingly.
Today’s debate offers an opportunity to discuss how
the Security Council can improve its working methods,
70 years after its establishment, in order to reflect the
current realities of the world.
Among the many elements raised today by various
speakers, allow me to mention a few that we believe can
help improve the effectiveness of the Security Council.
Despite the current positive trends in the working
methods of the Security Council, we have yet to live up
to the expectations of the 2005 World Summit, mainly
on efficiency and effectiveness, on transparency and
accountability, and on the implementation of Council
decisions. In this regard, we hope that the Council will
make tangible progress on the issue of penholdership
on the basis of the note by the President contained in
document S/2014/268, which recognized the right of
any Council member to be a penholder. This reform
would allow Council members representing the regions
affected by conflicts on the Council’s agenda to at least
share the pen with the current penholders.
On relations with and the role of the General
Assembly, let me say that if one person is expected to
work for more than 7 billion people, the people that the
United Nations represents should have also their say
in his or her selection. The selection of the SecretaryGeneral should be characterized by transparency and
inclusiveness, in the interests of the credibility of
the Organization. Along these lines, we welcome the
adoption by consensus on 11 September of resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the General Assembly.
We hope that the recommendations contained in the
resolution will be fully implemented. The joint letter
calling for a nomination by the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council,
as well as the conduct of dialogues or meetings with
candidates for the position of Secretary-General,
is worthy of note and will definitely enhance the
transparency and inclusivity of the selection process.
On issues related to the use of the veto, Rwanda
believes that there is a need to reform the use of the
veto right, as proposed by the ACT group and the
France-Mexico and Elders initiatives. Indeed, given
the recent history of the Council and its past failures,
permanent members should agree on how to refrain
from exercising the veto in cases of mass atrocities
and genocide. We call on the Permanent Five to

15-3246827/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

remember the unique responsibility entrusted to them
by the Charter and to ensure that their decisions are
always guided by the quest for a sustainable solution
to conflicts instead of their own geostrategic interests.
Enhancing interaction and dialogue with the wider
membership of the United Nations through ArriaFormula meetings or informal interactive dialogues
also remains critical in increasing the effectiveness and
transparency of the Council. These are very important
tools that can be used in order to have a frank exchange
of views with a concerned party. In the same vein,
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and dialogue
with non-Council members, among other things,
are critical to the swift implementation of Council
resolutions. In addition, it is of great added value for the
Council to maintain regular consultations with regional
and subregional organizations, including countries that
are on the agenda of the Council, for a better outcome
in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and prevention. This
kind of partnership will help the Security Council move
from a culture of the daily management of crises to that
of the effective prevention of conflicts.
The Council should also take stock of the wrapup session in the format of a public briefing, which
can provide feedback to Member States. Member
States are also strongly encouraged to participate in
these important meetings, which are dedicated to the
assessment of the activities of the Council, including
the progress made, the challenges facing it and its
effectiveness.
With regard to the annual report of the Security
Council, we hope that in the future the Security
Council will consider improving its annual reports by
introducing a section dedicated to the assessment of
its effectiveness in the reporting period with concrete
recommendations on how to act better and faster while
maintaining international peace and security.
While we acknowledge the progress achieved so
far with regard to the working methods of the Council,
much more remains to be done. While waiting for the
adoption of a definitive rule of procedures, Rwanda
believes that various notes on the working methods of
the Council will greatly contribute to a more transparent,
democratic and effective Security Council, provided
that they are implemented in good faith, which will
uphold the equal sovereignty of States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.

28/34

20/10/2015

Let me conclude by reiterating Rwanda’s position
on Security Council reform. As a member of both the
African Group and the L.69 group and given our twoyear experience in the Council, we believe, more than
ever, that the Security Council should be expanded in
both categories, with the same rights and privileges,
including the right to veto, as long as it exists. In the
meantime, it is critical for the Security Council to
continue improving its working methods, with a focus
on transparency, effectiveness, inclusiveness and
fairness.
After all, the Council calls, in every one of its
decisions, for human rights, democracy and the rule of
law. This is a real test for this body: to reflect exactly
what it preaches. Therefore, walk the talk, dear Council
members.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kuwait.
Mr. AlJarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf the Group
of Arab States. At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the current month and for convening this
important meeting.
With regard to your concept note (S/2015/793,
annex) of 15 October, which includes guidelines for
this meeting, and while we emphasize the importance
of the topics laid out in note S/2010/507 for improving
the Council’s efficiency and transparency, the topic of
today’s meeting — the working methods of the Security
Council — is one of the most important of the five key
issues put forth in General Assembly decision 62/557
on the reform of the Security Council. I shall therefore
focus on the theme of our meeting today.
The growing challenges experienced by the
international community and the substantial changes
in the international reality since the inception of the
United Nations in 1945 have bolstered our resolve to
step up our efforts to strengthen the role of the Security
Council in order to make it more capable and effective
in addressing and overcoming those challenges within
a more representative, transparent, neutral and credible
context.
The Arab Group underscores that the efficiency
of the Security Council is primarily dependent on
the reform of its working methods. It is necessary
to develop and improve the working methods of the

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

Council to make them more effective and transparent.
Consideration must therefore be given to establishing
a permanent rules of procedure, instead of the current
provisional rules of procedure, which have been in
effect for decades. Also, consideration must be given
to increasing the number of Security Council meetings
that are open to all members. Furthermore, the States
concerned in the questions under discussion by the
Council should be allowed a decision-making role in
the Council, and such meetings should afford genuine
opportunities for contributions from the general
membership in the Council debate. Closed meetings
and informal consultations should be minimized such
that they are the exception rather than the rule.
In addition to consultations with the States
concerned and their participation in the Council’s
decision-making, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Arab Group also calls
on the subsidiary organs of the Security Council and
its Committees to report adequately on their activities
to the members of the Council. It also underscores the
need for the Council to strictly observe the limits of its
mandates established in the Charter.
While the Arab Group grasps the importance
of comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
it recognizes the possibility of taking gradual steps
with regard to improving the working methods of the
Council. In this regard, we would like to stress our
support for the position of the Non-Aligned Movement,
established in document A/66/574, including the
comprehensive detailed proposals to improve the
Council’s working methods and procedures, the
adoption and implementation of which would effect a
qualitative change in the Council’s work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to see you, Mr. President, at the helm of the
Council for this month. At the outset, I would like
to align myself with the statements made by the
representatives of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the of Kuwait on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.
At the outset, I should like to reiterate my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and on organizing this
important discussion to review the progress made at
the procedural level and with regard to note S/2010/507

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

by the President of the Council on improving and
enhancing the working methods of the Council in a
transparent manner that would achieve the aspirations
of all States Members of the United Nations, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter relating to
the competencies and mandates of the Security Council
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
I would also like to extend my thanks to you,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2015/793, annex), which
you circulated to States Members to inform these
deliberations.
Reform of the Council’s modus operandi and
procedures constitutes an important part of achieving
comprehensive reform in a manner that establishes
equitable geographic representation of the world’s
continents, especially with regard to Africa, which
includes 54 States, and which is the region of concern
in 67 per cent of the questions before the Council.
While we are focusing today on the procedures
necessary for improving the efficiency of the Council, we
underscore the Position of the Non-Aligned Movement
concerning the working methods of the Security
Council as stipulated in the relevant paragraphs of the
final document (S/2011/407, annex I), held in Bali,
Indonesia, in May 2011, on the reform of the working
methods of the Security Council. With regard to the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 on the
reform of procedural matters, making the Council’s
daily agenda available to everybody and circulating the
monthly journal to all States members are priorities. We
appreciate the efforts of some member States, which,
while taking over the presidency, have organized a
briefing to which all Member States of the United
Nations are invited and all the matters on the monthly
agenda are reviewed with transparency and objectivity.
With regard to the briefings, despite the increase in
open meetings, it is a universally acknowledged truth
that the majority of the Council meetings are closed
consultations for only Council members and members
of the Secretariat whose guidance the Council is
seeking. Transparency and objectivity require that the
States concerned can participate in such consultations.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of
fostering the principle of consultation and cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with the letter
and spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

15-3246829/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

20/10/2015

We also recall that the rights of Member States are
safeguarded in the Charter and the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure with regard to the participation of
any Member State in open meetings, in accordance
with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.

members of the Security Council — Egypt, Senegal,
Japan, Ukraine and Uruguay. My delegation wishes
to highlight the following key aspects that we believe
are of particular importance for the reform and the
improvements of the effectiveness and the transparency
of the Security Council.

There are a number of matters of concern to the
Sudan currently under discussion in the Council, which
manages its proceedings according to Article 34 of the
Charter. In our experience, Member States must share
any matter that concerns them and, when dealing with
such matters, the Council should allow adequate time to
the States concerned when undertaking any procedure.
The matter should also be accorded further attention
when it or its manifestation coincides with a weekend,
as may be the case with developing events. After all,
the Security Council must focus first and foremost on
the maintenance of international peace and security.

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Member States have conferred upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
while recognizing that the Council acts on behalf of
all Member States when fulfilling its duties. Therefore,
to ensure the accomplishment of that mandate in a
transparent and efficient way, we believe that it is
imperative for the Council to further improve its
openness and its communication with the broader
United Nations membership.

We appreciate the efforts on the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We look forward to the outcomes and
recommendations of the Working Group in accordance
with the annual report to be presented by the Council
to the General Assembly so that all States will be able
to participate in the recommendations and outcomes.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, with regard to Chapter VII of the
Charter, I would like to recall part of a statement
delivered in the Security Council six decades ago:
“A very sharp instrument has been entrusted to
the Security Council by the United Nations under
Chapter VII of the Charter, and the Security
Council must be careful that this instrument is not
blunted”.
I believe that statement is still valid and is even more
relevant today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I understand that the last
speaker has until six o’clock to deliver his statement. At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on the Security Council’s
working methods as well as for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2015/793, annex) you have presented
as a guide for this discussion. I would like to also take
this opportunity to congratulate the newly elected

30/34

In that context, Tunisia welcomes the progress
made during the past few years, in particular in the
implementation of the presidential note S/2010/507.
Nevertheless, we think that more efforts should be
exerted to fully implement the measures set out in the
note and to ensure greater coordination and dialogue
between the Security Council and non-members of the
Council, particularly countries involved in the decisions
of the Council, and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as with relevant regional and
subregional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission.
We also welcome the commitment made by the
members of Security Council through presidential
note S/2013/515 to make more effective use of public
meetings, interactive dialogues, wrap-up sessions and
Arria Formula meetings. Those practices contribute
to increase the transparency, credibility and ability of
the Security Council in carrying out its mandate and
addressing emerging challenges. Private meetings and
informal consultations should be kept to a minimum
and ought to be the exception rather than the rule.
With regard to the issues you have highlighted in
your concept note (S/2015/793, annex), Mr. President,
my delegation strongly believes that it is crucial to
improve the cooperation and the dialogue between
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
mainly the General Assembly. A rich dialogue and
collaboration between the two will enhance both
entities and avoid overlap between their activities

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

and the encroachment of the Security Council on the
functions and prerogatives of the General Assembly.
On the other hand, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) lends new impetus to the relationship
between the Security Council and the United Nations
Economic and Social Council. As stated in presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3, security and development
are closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing and
key to attaining sustainable peace.
Similarly, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note, the fulfilment of the functions entrusted to the
Secretary-General by Articles 98 and 99 of Charter
of the United Nations requires joint efforts and close
collaboration with the Security Council, so as to ease
the task of the Secretariat in undertaking good offices,
promoting political settlement and peacekeeping, and
implementing peace agreements and sanctions regimes.
I would also like to address the process of the
selection and appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral. My delegation underlines the role of the
General Assembly in the process, which should be
transparent and inclusive and take into consideration
an equal and fair distribution of candidates based on
gender and geographical balance.
On the right of the use of the veto, we are of the
view that the exercise of that right should be restrained
in cases of mass atrocities. We furthermore believe that
the initiative introduced by France and the one launched
by the Accountability Coherence and Transparency
group, led by Switzerland and Liechtenstein, represent
appropriate steps in that direction.
Finally, let me ensure you, Sir, of the commitment
of Tunisia to continue its support for improving
the work of the Security Council as part of a
comprehensive and inclusive approach in the context of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform, in accordance with General Assembly decision
62/557.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea):
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Spain on its successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. We also welcome Spain’s
initiative to convene today’s open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. We also thank the

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

President of the General Assembly, the Vice-President
of the Economic and Social Council and the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission for their briefings this
morning.
We recognize that, in addition to the Security
Council’s relationship with non-members of the Council,
its interaction with those bodies represents an important
dynamic that can improve the overall performance of
the United Nations. Against that backdrop, the Republic
of Korea would like to make several comments on the
working methods of the Security Council.
First, improving the working methods of the
Security Council is indeed an important issue for the
United Nations membership as a whole. During our
term as a member of the Council, the Republic of
Korea made the utmost effort to promote transparency
in the Council’s work and to improve its interaction
with the wider United Nations membership. Outside
the Council, we continue our involvement on issues
pertaining to the maintenance of international peace
and security — through various formats made available
by the Council, such as Arria Formula meetings,
informal interactive dialogues and open briefings by
various Special Representatives and Special Advisers.
We therefore urge Council members to continue to
make such occasions available as much as possible.
Secondly, the Security Council’s cooperation
and interaction with other bodies of the United
Nations is also very much desired. This morning’s
briefers — representing the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission — all expressed their desire to interact
more closely with the Security Council. Coincidently,
the Republic of Korea currently belongs to all three
bodies and will make its best efforts to transform such an
aspiration into substantive and practical improvements,
starting with the ongoing intergovernmental process of
reviewing the peacebuilding architecture. As President
of the Economic and Social Council and as a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Republic of Korea
attaches great importance to how peacekeeping could
dovetail with peacebuilding, while taking into account
the visionary global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in
particular Goal 16, on peace, justice and institutions.
In that regard, we look forward to working with the
members of the Security Council in the months and
years to come.

15-3246831/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

My delegation is also strongly committed to
implementing the recommendations of the report
(S/2015/682) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations. In particular, the call for Security
Council’s early engagement in conflict situations
and more in-depth dialogue with the Secretariat and
troop contributors should be given due attention.
On its part, in Seoul this Thursday and then early
next year, the Republic of Korea will host a series of
international conferences on ways to implement the
recommendations.
Finally, on the issue of the selection of the next
Secretary-General, my delegation welcomes General
Assembly resolution 69/321, on the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly, adopted
11 September. The Republic of Korea is of the view that
the selection process of the Secretary-General should
be more participatory and transparent, as reflected in
paragraphs 29 and 30 of that resolution. Overall, we
believe that an important topic for discussion among
the general membership has begun. We hope it will lead
to a convergence of views that will improve the way
that the Organization selects its most prominent officer.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea has long
supported the idea that the working methods of the
Security Council must be improved with a view to
enhancing the Council’s transparency, accountability,
legitimacy and efficiency. We view that as an important
matter within the broader context of Security Council
reform. The Republic of Korea appreciates all the
efforts made thus far by various delegations. We stand
ready to work with others to formulate a solution that
can garner the support and understanding of the broader
membership.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in today’s debate. I mentioned this
morning that it was my intention to take the floor in
my national capacity at the end of this debate. I will
therefore now make some comments and observations
in such capacity — but I may perhaps not adhere to the
three-minute rule.
I have had a team of people from the Spanish
Mission and the Secretariat here during the entire day,
following with great attention each and every statement
made. The team has noted the various proposals made
by the members of the Security Council as well as, of
course, non-members. I think that the summary I now
have before me intelligently and very well distils all

32/34

20/10/2015

the currents of opinion among the membership of the
United Nations. This is just a first summary; later on I
will make a more detailed, written proposal to the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, namely, the Ambassador
of Angola. Six main themes were raised today.
The first is the importance of the Security Council’s
working methods. Almost every speaker pointed out
that, while it is the prerogative of the Council to adopt
its rules of procedure, the impact of its authority means
that the rules affect all of us.
We have also noted full agreement on the relevance
of open debates — and I have personally heard so in
the last statements made today. Such meetings are
important in making it possible for the Council to
assess the interactive nature and effectiveness of its
work and to note the contributions of the membership.
In that connection, the representative of Nepal, the
representatie speaking on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, the
observer of the Holy See, and the representatives of
the Czech Republic and India, among others, called for
follow-up to the debates and that the product of such
encompass relevant contributions by Member States in
the course of the debates. That is exactly what Spain is
endeavouring to do today.
There have been many other substantive advances
in the work of the Security Council, as reflected
in the various presidential notes. I join the overall
commendation of the efforts by the members of the
Council and by the leadership of the Chair of the
Informal Working Group.
The second theme has to do with practical
implementation. Many Member States, including the
representatives of Panama and Peru, underscored
that the practical implementation of those notes was
essential. I now want to point out some of the many
suggestions made today for strengthening the Council’s
political effectiveness.
The representative of the United Kingdom suggested
lending greater dynamism to consultations. Speaking
on behalf of several members of the Council, the
representative of Angola referred to the need for greater
restrain when proposing Security Council products.
The representatives of Venezuela and Uruguay spoke
about a more inclusive process for drafting resolutions
and presidential statements. The representative of the
Russian Federation and the speaker on behalf of the

15-32468

20/10/2015

Implementation of note S/2010/507

ACT group called for reviewing the penholder system
in order to foster greater participation by the members
of the Security Council. And the representatives of
Lithuania, Japan and Pakistan spoke of the need to
hold a discussion on the assigning and handover of the
chairmanships of the subsidiary organs.
The use of the veto was raised by almost every
delegation. The Mexican and French initiative was
the subject of particular mention, as was the code of
conduct proposed by the ACT group with regard to the
Council’s action in connection with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Many others referred
more broadly to the reform of the Security Council.
Transparency was the third major theme. In a
general way, speakers recalled that, in acting on behalf
of all the States Members of the United Nations, it
is legitimate to expect that the Council’s work is
transparent, inclusive, accountable and in line with
current reality. In that regard, the representatives of
Algeria, Cuba, Finland, speaking on behalf of the Nordic
countries, and Thailand called for the Security Council
to step up its practice of holding public meetings and
to hold consultations only when necessary. Speaking
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries,
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
highlighted the usefulness of monthly summaries,
which inform the Council’s annual report.
The representative of Switzerland, speaking on
behalf of the ACT group, as well as the representatives
of France, Germany and Mexico, emphasized their
interest in monthly briefing meetings by the Council’s
Presidents. Spain intends to continue that practice and
will convene an informal meeting open to the entire
membership, to which we will also invite the members
of the Council, in order to lay out what has transpired
during this month. That will be a joint exercise involving
the presidency and the members of the Council.
The fourth theme has to do with cooperation with
other organs. There was clear consensus on the need for
the Council to maintain close cooperation with other
bodies of the United Nations and with regional bodies.
It was felt that there was much room for improvement
and that it was urgent to to do so.
On behalf of various Council members, the
representatives of Portugal and Angola stressed
that the manner in which the Council organized
its monthly programme of work should seize the
opportunity to maintain constant interaction with the

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Secretariat, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, as well as with other organs of
the United Nations system. Many noted that the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) provides an opportunity
for collaboration among the Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
representatives of Australia, Chad, China, Brazil and
Ukraine stressed the importance of such cooperation in
conflict prevention, and many delegations emphasized
the importance of using the early warning capability of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
The representatives of Nigeria, Egypt, Sierra
Leone, speaking on behalf of the African Group,
Pakistan, and the Netherlands, speaking on behalf of
the Benelux countries, among many others, highlighted
the need for greater Council interaction with other
organs and entities, including troop-contributing
countries, regional organizations and stakeholders and
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
Some delegations, including Italy and Lithuania,
explicitly referred to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, while the delegations of Germany and France in
particular mentioned the International Criminal Court.
The fifth theme, which raised a great deal of
interest among all the delegations, was the appointment
of the next Secretary-General. Most speakers identified
the appointment of the next Secretary-General as one
of the key decisions that we will have to take and called
for greater transparency and involvement on the part
of the membership in the process. The representatives
of South Africa, Guatemala, Turkey and Costa Rica
stressed the need for the Council to submit the names of
various candidates to the Assembly. The representative
of Mexico suggested that the candidates could be met
in Arria Formula meetings, while the representatives
of Colombia, Argentina, Poland and Venezuela, among
many other delegations, stressed the importance of
there being women candidates.
With today’s debate, Spain trusts that it has
contributed to what should be the result of a transparent
and inclusive dialogue between the Council and the
General Assembly.
The sixth theme is follow-up, which is a truly
fundamental because without it the debates remain
theoretical and the ideas presented never become
grounded in texts. Reforming the working methods is
a dynamic process. Therefore, Spain plans to grant the

15-3246833/34

S/PV.7539 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of note S/2010/507

request of many delegations to follow up on today’s
debate with a summary of the recommendations that
were made in our discussions and which go well beyond
the points that were highlighted, with the intention of
guiding the Informal Working Group going forward.
We welcome Member States’ contributions in that
regard, for which we thank them in advance.

34/34

20/10/2015

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There being no further speakers on my list, I
warmly thank all participants.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

15-32468
