S/PV.8864

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8864

th meeting
Thursday, 23 September 2021, 8 a.m.
New York

President:

Taoiseach Martin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
President Kaljulaid
Mr. Le Drian
Ms. Sandhu
Ms. Omamo
Mr. Casaubón
Mr. Massoudou
Ms. Søreide
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Jerandi
Lord Ahmad
Mr. Blinken
President Phuc

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Climate and security
Letter dated 9 September 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/782)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/815) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-26297 (E)
*2126297*

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

Wildfires, flooding, drought and other extreme weather
events are affecting every continent.

The meeting was called to order at 8.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The effects of climate change are particularly
profound when they overlap with fragility and past or
current conflicts. It is clear that climate change and
environmental mismanagement are risk multipliers.
Where coping capacities are limited and there is
high dependence on shrinking natural resources and
ecosystem services such as water and fertile land,
grievances and tensions can explode, complicating
efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Climate and security
Letter dated 9 September 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/782)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Ilwad Elman, Chief Operating Officer of the Elman
Peace and Human Rights Centre, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/782, which contains the text of
a letter dated 9 September 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General
and the distinguished Presidents, Deputy Prime
Minister, Ministers and other high-level representatives.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Irish
presidency for organizing this timely open debate.
Last month, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change released a deeply alarming report.
It shows that climate disruption caused by human
activities is widespread and intensifying. The report is
indeed a “code red” for humankind.
Much bolder climate action is needed ahead of the
twenty-sixth Conference of the States Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP 26), with Group of Twenty nations in the
lead, to maintain international peace and security. Our
window of opportunity to prevent the worst climate
impacts is rapidly closing. No region is immune.
2/21

23/09/2021

In Somalia, more frequent and more intense
droughts and floods are undermining food security,
increasing competition over scarce resources and
exacerbating existing community tensions, from which
Al-Shabaab benefit.
In the Middle East and North Africa, which
are among the world’s most water-stressed and
climate-vulnerable regions, a major decline in
precipitation and the increase in extreme weather
events are harming water and food security.
Last year more than 30 million people were
displaced by climate-related disasters. Ninety per cent
of refugees come from countries that are among the
most vulnerable and least able to adapt to the effects
of climate change. Many of those refugees are in turn
hosted by countries that are also suffering the impacts
of climate change, compounding the challenge for host
communities and national budgets.
As the devastation caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic continues to cause immense
suffering, it is undermining Governments’ ability to
respond to climate disasters and build resilience.
The threats are clear and present. But it is not too
late to act to ensure that climate action contributes to
international peace and security. Let me highlight three
absolute priorities on climate action.
First, we need unambiguous commitment and
credible actions by all countries to limit global
warming to 1.5°C in order to avert the most catastrophic
impacts of climate change. I urge all Member States
to show more ambition in their nationally determined
contributions by the holding of COP 26 and to translate
their commitments into concrete and immediate
action. Collectively, we need a 45 per cent cut in global
emissions by 2030.
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8864

Secondly, to deal with the already dire impacts
of climate disruption on the lives and livelihoods of
people all over the world, we need a breakthrough on
adaptation and resilience. It is essential that at least
50 per cent of climate financing globally be committed
to building resilience and supporting adaptation. That
need is urgent, as global climate impacts remind us
daily. Annual adaptation costs in developing countries
are estimated at $70 billion and are expected to reach
up to $300 billion a year by 2030. Huge gaps remain
in adaptation financing for developing countries. We
simply cannot achieve our shared climate goals, or
achieve hope for lasting peace and security, if resilience
and adaptation continue to be the forgotten half of the
climate equation. That neglect is seriously endangering
our collective efforts on the crucial road to COP 26
in November. Developed countries must uphold their
promise, before COP 26, to deliver $100 billion in climate
financing annually to the developing world. They must
ensure that it reaches the most affected populations. The
quality of that financing is also key. Grant financing
is essential, as loans will add to already crushing debt
burdens in the most climate-vulnerable countries.

(spoke in French)

Thirdly, climate adaptation and peacebuilding
can — and should — reinforce one another. For example,
in the Lake Chad region, dialogue platforms for
cooperatively managing natural resources, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund, have promoted reforestation
and improved access to sustain livelihoods. In West
and Central Africa, cross-border projects have enabled
dialogue and promoted more transparent management
of scarce natural resources — a factor of peace. As
climate change is impacting water resources worldwide,
we must leverage water for peace, drawing lessons
from the past. For example, in the Sava River basin,
in Eastern Europe, transboundary water cooperation
was the starting point of regional reconciliation and
cooperation after the deadly war in the Balkans in the
1990s.

Ninety-five per cent of the population in South
Sudan lives on herding and agriculture, and they are
therefore affected by unseasonable droughts and
flooding. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
works with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and IOM to facilitate the peaceful
settlement of disputes between farmers and herders.

Across all those efforts, women are critical agents of
change. The Security Council has long recognized and
sought to strengthen women’s role in sustaining peace.
Women and girls face severe risks from both climate
change and conflict. Their meaningful participation
and leadership bring about more sustainable results that
benefit more people.

We are all part of the solution. Let us all work
together to mitigate and adapt to climate disruption to
build peaceful and resilient societies.

The United Nations takes climate risks into
account in its political analyses as well as in its
conflict-prevention and peacebuilding initiatives. The
Climate Security Mechanism helps missions on the
ground, United Nations country teams and regional
and subregional organizations analyse and address the
risks that climate change has on security and to shape
swift and integrated responses. That work encompasses
countries and regions where the Security Council
has acknowledged that climate and ecological change
undermine stability.
The United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, in coordination for the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Framework Convention on Climate
Change, has launched a new initiative on peace, climate
change and environmental degradation. The initiative
will help the Economic Community of West African
States and other regional, governmental, national and
local bodies to harmonize their efforts aimed and
reducing the risks of climate change on security in the
subregion.

We are also aware of our responsibility to decrease
the United Nations carbon footprint. Eighty per cent of
Secretariat carbon emissions come from our six largest
peacekeeping operations. Guided by the United Nations
Environmental Strategy for Peace Operations, we are
working on new approaches to shift energy supply
to renewable energy producers, with the intention
of supporting renewable energy capacity, including
beyond the lifetime of our missions.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Elman.

21-262973/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Elman: I thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to address it today at this open debate on
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are in a planetary emergency that will make
the task of maintaining peace and security even harder
in the coming decade and beyond. As climate change
and other environmental crises gather pace, they are
touching every aspect of life. World international peace
and security is no exception.
The Security Council has held several thematic
debates on climate and security, and many of the
Council members assembled here today have displayed
support for the Council’s engagement on climate and
security. That is welcome progress, although it is still
too painfully slow for the vulnerable communities at
the front lines of these issues, which are confronted
with the realities of climate-related security risks every
day and are fighting for survival.
For front-line activists at the cusp of climate and
security, there is little support available to effectively
assist them in furthering climate resilience on local
and regional levels. The toolkits, recommendations
and research that are being produced primarily target
Governments, United Nations peacekeeping missions
and, at times, large international non-governmental
organizations, with very few investments being made
into the technical capacity-building and knowledge
management of grass-roots civil society organizations.
The discourse around climate change and security
still fails to adequately meet the needs of affected
communities, or to represent the voices of those who
are disproportionately affected by climate-related
security risks.
I work in Somalia, where I serve as one of the
directors of the Elman Peace Centre, a peacebuilding
organization founded in Mogadishu in the early 1990s
and established in response to the armed conflict. We
work on preventing and countering violent extremism.
We facilitate the disarmament, rehabilitation and
reintegration of youth and adults associated with
different armed groups, including defectors from
designated terrorist organizations. We contribute to
security sector reform and advocate for more inclusive
peace processes that support women and youth to
participate meaningfully in the processes that ensure
their well-being. And we founded the first rape crisis
centre in Somalia, where we are working to end sexual
violence in conflict, exploitation and abuse.
4/21

23/09/2021

Those are just some of the areas of our institutional
focus, but we are not scientists or academics. We are
peacebuilding practitioners on the front lines of a 30-year
conflict that remains volatile to this day. We began
working on climate change issues because our lives and
daily realities are at the nexus of climate change and
security. We realized that our peacebuilding goals and
our mediation efforts could not succeed or be sustained
unless we addressed the broader environmental issues
related to security — whether it be the locust- and
draught-induced scarcity of resources that multiplies
the threat of intraclan conflict, the decrease of tuna
swarms that drives Somali fishing communities
towards piracy, or the flooding that continues to drive
regional displacement and vulnerable people to violent
extremist groups.
The impacts of climate change and environmental
degradation are also changing what it takes to
build peace for local peacebuilders. Because we are
experiencing climate related shocks and stresses so
often in our environments, our peacebuilding and
security strategies now need to be more resilient to
environmental change. Peacebuilding practitioners
and civil society organizations must be empowered to
respond to their changing environments. They need to
be able to access technical and financial resources, as
well as educational materials, that are fit for purpose.
Risk-assessment information should be made available
to them.
The Security Council and the wider United Nations
system must be receptive to bottom-up solutions and
community-led processes. In a space where so much to
learn and unearth remains, policymakers must create
the right conditions for durable, locally based solutions
to emerge and succeed. I know first-hand how motivated
peace activists are to partner with the Security Council
to integrate climate-related security risks into local
peacebuilding programming and strategies. However,
the Council needs to ensure there is a genuine effort to
co-create policy and peace processes with the people
affected. Mandating and deploying more environmental
security advisers can assist in forging such cooperation
opportunities for learning and coordination.
Armed conflict, hunger, poverty, inequality,
migration, violations of human rights and pandemics
all affect one another in ways that make peacebuilding
more complex. We need to stop putting them at a
distance and stop thinking that they are this or that
agency’s business, not ours. I am proud to sit on the
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

panel of an initiative called the Environment of
Peace, which is looking at how the different security
challenges that I am describing in my briefing combine
and interact. The Environment of Peace explores how
environmental deterioration exacerbates insecurity and,
on the positive side, how environmental sustainability
can support peace.
The Environment of Peace will launch a report in
May 2022, in the run-up to the fiftieth anniversary to the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
also known as the Stockholm Conference. The report
will not only reveal security challenges linked to
environmental change; it will also look at the risks and
opportunities for peace that arise from the transition to
a greener and more sustainable future. It will also show
how global cooperation and collective action can help
address the enormous challenges that we are facing
The momentum that currently exists for the climate
and security agenda is undeniable. Now is the time
for policymakers to turn this ambitious agenda into
coherent policies that guide the future of peacebuilding.
The President: I thank Ms. Elman for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Taoiseach of Ireland.
Let me begin by expressing my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his leadership on climate
change and his important briefing this morning. I
also thank Ms. Ilwad Elman for her testimony today
and her contribution to ensuring that the international
community can understand better the insecurities that
climate change is creating in vulnerable communities.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our
generation. The recent report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change laid out in stark terms what
is happening to our planet and what the future may
hold should we fail to act. It is essential that we act
now to prevent further warming by reaching net-zero
emissions as quickly as possible, and we must redouble
our efforts to ensure a successful outcome at the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held
in Glasgow later this year.
A concerted multilateral response to climate
change involving all the organs of the United Nations
is urgently needed. That response must include the
Security Council. The impact of climate change is
global, and our collective security is at risk. We have

S/PV. 8864

seen how climate change is already contributing to
conflict in many parts of the world. Indeed, the Council
has already acknowledged that by addressing the
adverse effects of climate change in the mandates of
many peacekeeping operations.
From the Sahel to Iraq, the Council has recognized
that climate change is one of the factors driving conflict
and fragility. Around Lake Chad, the combination of
conflict and the impact of climate change have led to
violence among communities. In the Horn of Africa,
repeated droughts are undermining coping capacities
among communities and disrupting livelihoods. Armed
groups have been able to exploit those precarious
conditions for recruitment purposes.
The need for action is clear; 80 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers are deployed in countries
that are the most exposed to climate change. Our
peacekeepers and civilian staff are already dealing
with climate-related security risks in their activities. If
they are to be effective and deliver on the mandates that
the Council has given to them, we must also give them
the necessary support and tools to operate in those
challenging environments.
The instability that is being driven by the adverse
effects of climate change is being felt across the
globe — in Europe, Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean, the Middle East, South Asia and many of
the world’s small island developing States. The link
between climate and instability has been recognized
by the African Union, the European Union and the
Pacific Islands Forum. Sea-level rise, displacement
and competition over resources are contributing to
tensions. Today’s briefings gave us a clear message.
If the Security Council is to meet its responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, it must
have the information and tools to analyse and address
climate-related security risks.
The Council’s Informal Expert Group on Climate
and Security has convened since 2020 to support the
Council’s work on climate and security. Ireland is
proud to serve, together with the Niger, as co-Chair
of the Group. The Group provides a platform for
members of the Security Council to hear how we can
integrate climate-related security risks into our conflict
prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution and postconflict stabilization work. The Group provides data
and evidence to inform future action by the Council.
Ireland is also an active member of the wider Group

21-262975/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

of Friends on Climate and Security, which now has a
membership of almost 60 countries from around the
world. That further illustrates the priority placed on the
issue by the United Nations membership.
The mandate of the Council is to consider threats
to international peace and security. We must move
past theoretical debates and respond to the reality
that climate change is exacerbating conflict globally.
The Council can — and must — do more. It has the
mandate, and it has the tools. The failure to use them
is an abdication of our responsibility. I know that there
are differing perspectives around this table, but I also
believe the time has come for the Council to work
together to identify how we can most appropriately
integrate climate-related security risks into the work
we do to prevent conflict and build peace.
We must better understand the interplay between
climate change, and the country and regional situations
on the Council’s agenda. In order to help us do so,
we should invite the Secretary-General to submit a
periodic report to the Security Council on how climate
change is threatening the maintenance of international
peace and security. The appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of a special representative for climate-related
security risks could also build awareness and promote
greater coherence. Such actions are just the beginning
of what is necessary for the Council to begin to fulfil
its obligations.
To take those proposals forward, Ireland will
convene discussions on a thematic draft resolution on
climate and security in the coming days. I ask today
that all members of the Council engage constructively
on that draft resolution.
People affected by climate change-driven conflict
depend on the Council for leadership. The international
community looks to us for guidance. By working
together in a spirit of common purpose, I hope that we
can reach a shared understanding of how the Security
Council can meet that challenge. Now is the moment for
the Council to act. I look forward to hearing from all
members today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the President of Viet Nam.
President Phuc (spoke in Vietnamese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): Today’s
meeting, presided over by you, Mr. President, is
6/21

23/09/2021

particularly urgent and important in the context of
climate security.
I thank the Secretary-General and the briefer for
their insights and recommendations.
Climate change represents the greatest global
challenge of our time and shapes the future of
humankind. The devastating impacts of climate change
remain evident on every continent. Sea-level rise
threatens to submerge Pacific island States. Severe
droughts persist in West Africa and the Horn of Africa.
Flooding and natural disasters are predominant in
South-East Asia. I must also mention the degradation
of biodiversity in South America and the abnormal
melting of Antarctic ice caps.
Climate change takes up valuable resources meant
for socioeconomic development and exacerbates
poverty, unemployment and social inequality. We are
also witnessing how climate change ignites disputes
over natural resources between populations. It
displaces tens of millions from their homes in search
of new livelihoods and triggers transborder security
threats related to ecology, the environment, food and
water resources.
Those consequences may well erupt into geopolitical
tension and instability, thereby jeopardizing the peace,
security, development and prosperity of States and
nations. It is truly a “code red” — a war without gunfire,
we might say — that causes economic damage and loss
of life, no less dire than actual wars and conflicts.
Against that backdrop, I wish to share with the
Council three points on which I believe we should act
with urgency.
First, the Security Council must uphold its
leading role in establishing mechanisms for assessing,
forecasting and warning on climate security risks at an
early stage and while they are still distant. That will help
us be proactive in outlining effective response strategies
and measures. Conflict prevention, peacekeeping
missions, humanitarian assistance and post-conflict
reconstruction efforts under the auspices of the Security
Council must include climate security in a proper
manner. In that connection, I wish to propose that the
United Nations establish a comprehensive database
system on the multidimensional impacts of sea-level
rise, in support of global response policy formulation.
Secondly, people’s interests, especially those of
vulnerable groups, need to take centre stage if we are
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

to harmoniously address the security, development and
humanitarianism nexus. Viet Nam strongly supports
the full implementation of resolutions 2532 (2020) and
2573 (2021) to achieve a global ceasefire as soon as
possible and protect civilians and critical infrastructure
in areas of armed conflict.
Thirdly, we need to continue to safeguard the
sovereignty, key role and resilience of nations in
climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts.
We also need to step up international cooperation to
supplement and coordinate resources to effectively
realize the Sustainable Development Goals, outlined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and other key
international treaties.
We must resolve to cut greenhouse-gas emissions,
on which developed countries should take the lead.
Ample resources should also be set aside to provide
developing countries with assistance in financing,
technologies and know-how, so as to ensure that no
country is left behind in the common fight against
climate change.
Viet Nam is one of the countries hardest hit by
climate change. Successive natural disasters have led
to considerable loss of life and property. The Mekong
Delta, the heart of Viet Nam’s agricultural production,
is witnessing a record number of droughts and incidents
of saline intrusion, which jeopardize the livelihoods
and everyday lives of more than 20 million people,
as well as food security for the entire country and the
region as a whole.
For that reason, to realize its aspirations and vision
for national development and perform its duty to the
international community, Viet Nam is determined
and strongly committed to taking climate action and
to developing a green, sustainable and low-carbon
economy, as pledged at the twenty-first Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
Viet Nam supports all efforts by the Security
Council, multilateral forums and other cooperation
arrangements at the bilateral and regional levels to
respond to climate-related challenges. We hope to
continue to receive assistance — resources and policy
advice — from international friends so as to better
fulfil our commitments. I am convinced that, through
international commitment and solidarity, all countries

S/PV. 8864

will take bolder action towards a greener and more
sustainable future.
The President: I now call on the President of
Estonia.
President Kaljulaid: I thank the delegation of
Ireland for convening today’s meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks and leadership.
I would like to make four points. We must maintain
the same collective sense of urgency to stop climate
change that we demonstrate to fight the pandemic. We
must also collectively seek solutions to stop climate
change as efficiently as we developed the vaccines by
investing considerable resources and working with our
capable private sector. We must do better at allocating
resources to save our planet. We must also develop and
maintain a scientific database approach to resolving the
problem. Let me now elaborate on those points.
A little more than a month ago, the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change published its new report
highlighting that human influence is warming the
planet faster that we had previously thought. We must
not lose sight of those who are most vulnerable to
climate change. Many of them do not have the capacity
to cope with climate-related security risks and will
need considerable assistance and support from the
international community. For that reason, Estonia has
allocated almost €9 million for the period from 2011 to
2020, and we are keen to continue our support.
The Security Council has the scope and tools to
address climate-related security risks effectively and
systematically. Although the Council has increased
its engagement on those risks over the past few years,
much more can be done to fully integrate the knowledge
of climate-related risks into all aspects of our work in
order to mainstream them. Indeed, the whole United
Nations system should be better informed about
security risks induced by climate change.
In that context, a systematic approach is urgently
needed. We need a Security Council resolution on
climate and security — only in that way can we make
a difference. It is of the utmost importance that the
Secretary-General receive a mandate to collect data
and coordinate policy to that end. Regular reporting
that takes into account regional specifics would be a
major step towards developing tangible prevention
measures. Only a few United Nations peace operations
reflect climate and security risks in their mandates. It is

21-262977/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

important to continue integrating climate-related risks
in their activities.
Of course, the direct and indirect security
implications of climate change are not the only
climate-related security risks. Our own climate policies
can also pose risks. The green transition, as every other
transition, involves a competitive element where some
are obviously doing better than others. The knowledge,
tools and resources necessary for that transition are not
equally available to all of us. In order to avoid fuelling
marginalization and the propagation of fundamentalist
views, we need to ensure that such a transition is just
and inclusive to collectively keep the global public with
us. The impacts of climate change do not recognize
national borders, and neither should our knowledge or
best mitigation and adaptation practices. We must truly
collaborate for the common good.
But collaboration can rely only on trust. In
order to build that trust, we need transparency, good
communication and data-sharing. Data is critical for
developing multilateralism. Without reliable, timely
and accessible data, we cannot be successful. To that
end, Estonia has launched the Data for the Environment
Alliance, which will support the United Nations
Environment Programme in developing a global
environmental data strategy by 2025. We hereby invite
all countries to join that alliance.
The next two months will be of critical importance
for climate action, as we are leading up to the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Glasgow. That will decide whether this decade will be
remembered as the one where we started to save the
planet, or the beginning of the end.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of the Niger.
Mr. Massoudou (Niger) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Ireland on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September, as well as to commend the
way in which it has led the work of this organ of the
United Nations.
Your country’s commitment, Sir, to holding a
debate on the issue of security risks related to climate
change in the Council is proof of your conviction that
the fragility associated with environmental degradation
8/21

23/09/2021

is an exacerbating factor in conflicts and humanitarian
crises. As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security alongside Ireland, the Niger
shares that conviction and considers the placement of
the issue on the Council’s agenda to be timely in more
ways than one.
I would also like to thank Mr. António Guterres
and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their briefings, which reflect
their firm commitment to addressing the impacts of
climate change on peace and security.
As we move towards the end of the second
consecutive year characterized by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, we must not lose sight of the other
pandemic we face — one that will be even more
devastating in the long term and for which no vaccine is
available. I am referring, of course, to climate change.
We are already seeing record heatwaves, droughts,
severe fires and floods and melting glaciers. The
conclusions of the 2021 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change depict a most alarming
situation and constitute a call for action. While those
risks are new to some, in the Niger and the Sahel
region they are our reality. Those risks bring with them
undeniable security and humanitarian consequences for
our populations and undermine the development efforts
our countries are undertaking in a context complicated
even further by the pandemic.
As we speak, in the Sahel, the crucible of that
climatic reality — where agriculture is the mainstay
of the economies, accounting on average for more
than a third of the gross domestic product, and where
more than 80 per cent of the population depends
on agricultural activities and natural resources for
their livelihoods — climate change has intensified
competition for land, fodder and water resources. That
has led to the resurgence of community-level conflicts
between herders and farmers, thereby hampering
peacebuilding and development efforts in the region.
Numerous recent studies have shown that climate
change and conflict dynamics create a feedback
loop in the region, whereby climate change impacts
fuel additional pressures, while conflict undermines
communities’ abilities to cope.
Faced with that scourge, our States have undertaken
various efforts, both at the continental level, with
the African Union, and at the regional level, through
the Permanent Inter-State Committee for Drought
Control in the Sahel, the Economic Community of
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

West African States and the Climate Commission for
the Sahel Region. The latter has adopted a climate
investment plan for the period 2018 to 2030, with a
global cost of approximately $440 billion, which is
aimed at contributing to the global effort to mitigate
greenhouse-gas emissions and increase the adaptation
and resilience capacities of the Sahelian populations.
Those efforts, however laudable, will remain in vain
and will not produce the leverage effect that is essential
to scale up climate action if we do not all move forward
together. The lack of consensus on this crucial issue
should in no way be an obstacle for the Council when
it comes to addressing it. Rather, the lack of consensus
should serve as a unique opportunity to hear all the
different views that can contribute to our debates and
enable us to move forward on this important matter.
At this stage, allow me to make a few suggestions
as to how the Council could address the issue.
We need to build a holistic, coordinated approach.
In the context of United Nations and Security Council
efforts, increased investment in efforts at prevention
and anticipating effects in fragile States could limit the
compounded humanitarian consequences of climate
change and armed conflict. In that regard, we call for
the strengthening of the Council’s capacity to better
understand the impact of climate change on security
through a report of the Secretary-General that includes
an in-depth analysis of current and future risks, as well
as action-oriented recommendations.
We also call for the systematic consideration of
climate-related risks in resolutions on country- and
region-specific situations, which could increase the
effectiveness of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts. In that connection, we encourage the Security
Council to rely as much as possible on the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as on
the Informal Expert Group co-chaired by the Niger
and Ireland.
Those frameworks, as well as the data provided to
us by research centres, will allow us to gain perspective
on national and regional processes, which are tools to
better inform the Security Council on the implications
of climate change on peace and security. In addition,
we consider the appointment of a special envoy of the
Secretary-General on climate and security to be most
pertinent, insofar as it will give greater visibility and
effectiveness to the consideration of this issue, which
no one can ignore.

S/PV. 8864

In conclusion, my delegation is in favour of
adopting a Council draft resolution on the issue in
order to properly acknowledge the security risks linked
to climate change as a central element of our peace and
security architecture.
The President: I now call on the Secretary of State
of the United States of America.
Mr. Blinken (United States of America): I would
like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
presence and his leadership on the climate issue. I also
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s discussion
and for putting the connection between climate and
security on the Security Council’s agenda. Moreover, I
thank Ireland and the Niger for the important work being
carried out by the Informal Expert Group on Climate
and Security. I also want to applaud Ms. Elman’s
very powerful testimony, which we were grateful to
hear today.
From day one, President Biden has made addressing
the climate crisis a top priority of our Administration,
including by directing me and every one of our
diplomats to ensure that it is a core element of United
States foreign policy. We are taking into account how
every bilateral and multilateral engagement we have
and how every policy decision we make will impact
our goal to put the world on a safer, more sustainable
path. That is not only because of the devastating and,
in some instances, irreversible implications of climate
change for our majestic planet. It is also because of the
cascading effects on virtually every aspect of our lives,
from agricultural to infrastructure and from public
health to food security. We have heard some of those
effects described already.
Right here in New York City, where we are gathered
today, earlier this month, a punishing storm caused by
the remnants of Hurricane Ida killed dozens of people,
including a 2-year-old boy, and inflicted tens of billions
of dollars in damage. More than three inches of rain fell
in Central Park in a single hour, breaking a record set
only a few weeks earlier. If we look at any one of our
countries, we will see record-breaking extreme weather
events like this. The climate crisis is not coming; it is
already here.
And clear patterns are emerging in its impacts.
The consequences are falling disproportionately on
vulnerable and low-income populations, and there are
worsening conditions in human suffering in places
already afflicted by conflict, high levels of violence

21-262979/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

and instability. These mounting impacts, together with
the synthesis report of the Framework Convention
on Climate Change released last week and the
comprehensive report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change released last month, underscore the
urgent need to dramatically cut our emissions and build
our resilience for the inevitable changes to come.
One way to do that is by helping others to do their
part. Back in April, President Biden announced that
the United States would double our public international
financing for developing countries most affected by
the climate crisis. Earlier this week, here at the United
Nations, he announced that we will work with the
United States Congress to double that number again (see
A/76/PV.3). We urge other Governments, particularly
those that, like the United States, are the biggest
emitters, to step up in making these investments.
The Security Council also has a vital role to play in
three ways, which I would like to briefly suggest.
First, we have to stop debating whether the climate
crisis is a subject that belongs in the Security Council
and instead ask how the Council can leverage its unique
powers to tackle the negative impacts of climate on
peace and security. That is an argument that should
have been settled a long time ago. If we look at almost
any place where we see threats to international peace
and security today, we find that climate change is
making things less peaceful and less secure, making
it even more difficult to respond. That is the story of
Syria, Mali, Yemen, South Sudan, Ethiopia and many
other places beset by strife. By agreeing that the issue
belongs here in the Security Council, we will also send
a clear message to the international community of the
serious implications that climate change has for our
collective security.
Secondly, United Nations field missions should
consistently incorporate the effects of climate change
into their planning and implementation, as was done
in the mandates for, inter alia, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel. Doing that will advance mission activities,
foster stability and build resilience.
Thirdly, the United Nations system should further
integrate climate-related analysis into its conflictmediation and conflict-prevention efforts, particularly
in fragile States and areas of active conflict. The
10/21

23/09/2021

decision of the United Nations Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs to include climate security
in the strategic plan in 2020 for the first time and the
creation of the climate security mechanism are very
positive examples of just this. To any who doubt the
merits of these steps, I just encourage them to ask some
of the United Nations force commanders, the special
envoys, the negotiators, the peacebuilders and others
who are out there grappling with the impacts of climate
in their everyday efforts. They are hungry for many
more tools like these.
I focused today on the threats posed by the
climate crisis. But let me just say, in closing it would
be a mistake to view this only through that lens. We
agree that to prevent cataclysmic consequences, all
our nations must take immediate, bold actions to build
resilience to adapt to the unavoidable impacts and move
swiftly to a net-zero world. That is our shared charge
for the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which is now only weeks away,
and, if we are to keep within reach the goal of limiting
global warming to 1°5C, every nation will need to bring
its highest possible ambitions to the table.
But these efforts and the investments they will
require from all of us also present an unprecedented
opportunity to expand access to affordable, clean
energy, build green infrastructure and create wellpaying jobs, all of which could spur long-term economic
growth, reverse growing inequities within and between
our nations, and improve the lives of people around
the world.
Even as we are clear-eyed about the threat, let
us not lose sight of this once-in-a-generation global
opportunity. Let us be driven not only by the fear of all
the damage the climate crisis can inflict and already
has inflicted, but also by the imagination of all the
ways our response can actually make people’s lives
better now and into the future.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): Climate
change is causing a chain of disruptions in the life of our
societies and on the international scene. In recent years,
droughts, floods, storms, tropical cyclones and extreme
temperatures have directly caused nearly 2 million
deaths, to say nothing of the human tragedies linked to
the conflicts sometimes precipitated by these disasters.
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Climate change is increasingly becoming a
multiplier of crises and security risks. Entire regions
are at risk of falling into instability and violence.
Food insecurity, destruction of habitats, depletion of
resources, forced migrations, exacerbation of tensions
between communities — for example, between
sedentary farmers and nomadic herders — are the
consequences of climate change.
The fight for the climate, far from being only
environmental, is therefore also a fight for peace and
security. It is a geopolitical issue, which is why the
Security Council is fulfilling its proper role when it
looks at the new threats linked to climate change with a
view to anticipating and trying to deal with them.
I would therefore like to thank Prime Minister
Micheál Martin and Secretary-General António
Guterres for having taken the initiative to hold today’s
debate. I would like to make France’s contribution to
the discussion by sharing three convictions with the
Council. I believe these convictions are widely shared.
The first is that we must strive to foresee and
deal with the consequences of climate tragedies, and
in this respect we must first help our most vulnerable
partners anticipate the risks linked to these disruptions,
for example, by improving the mapping of people
vulnerable to risks, in order to design emergency plans
that include pre-established funding; by maintaining
our efforts in the area of early warning through such
initiatives as the Climate Risk and Early Warning
Systems initiative, in order to improve prevention and
information for populations and States on the risks of
dangerous climatic events; and by strengthening our aid
to the victims of climatic disasters with the emergency
humanitarian aid they need. I am thinking in particular
of the aftermath of Cyclone Winston in 2016, where
there was real European — and French — engagement
in the Indo-Pacific, reaching the most remote places of
the Fiji archipelago to help the populations and thereby
contributing to the stability of this region.
Secondly, we must prevent violent and terrorist
groups from taking advantage of the confusion and
distress generated by the effects of climate change in
areas already fraught with tension and fragility. To
achieve this, we cannot rely solely on the commitment
of our armed forces and the Blue Helmets deployed in
peacekeeping operations. As the Secretary-General has
reminded us, they are already active in this way, showing
great engagement and dedication, but we must also give

S/PV. 8864

ourselves the means to strengthen the resilience of
States and populations. Today, of the 20 countries most
affected by conflicts in the world, 12 are also among
the most vulnerable to climate change.
Where there are serious security threats, we need
to build a virtuous cycle of development and climate
action. An example of this is the Great Green Wall
project in the Sahel, which is a flagship programme
to combat climate change and desertification, which
is helping to combat insecurity. The fact that there
was real engagement shown at the recent One Planet
Summit in Paris on this subject — in the form of
pledges of $18 billion — is a sign that we can act to
combine development and action for the climate.
Thirdly, we must work to better take into account
the security dimension of climate and environmental
issues. In February, President Macron made some very
concrete proposals to this end: that the SecretaryGeneral prepare a biannual report for the Security
Council on the consequences of climate change for
international peace and security; that recommendations
be made for targeted action in high-risk areas; and that
a special envoy for climate security be appointed to lead
the international community’s action and engagement
on this issue.
The threats of our century are not simply
accumulating; the fact is that they are interlinked and are
likely to exacerbate one another. Everyone understands
that the cost of inaction would be immense. Therefore,
in conclusion, I would like to express my hope that our
discussions in the Security Council will also help to
convince everyone of the need to commit to making the
twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change a success by making commitments to reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions that are commensurate with
the challenges facing our planet. Member States can
count on France’s full mobilization in that regard.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico.
Mr. Casaubón (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ireland for convening this open debate on a central
topic on the current international agenda. I am also
grateful for the briefings by the Secretary-General and
Ms. Ilwad Elman. I recognize the presence of Heads
of State and Government, Foreign Ministers and other
high-level officials.

21-2629711/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/09/2021

Since last year, with the beginning of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, it has become clear
that threats to international peace and security are
genuinely multidimensional. One that is increasingly
relevant is climate change, which poses a threat to the
survival of humankind. It is undeniable today that its
effects can exacerbate, and are exacerbating, existing
conflicts, as can be seen in regions such as the Sahel
and the Horn of Africa and are having severe impacts
on many countries.

that has serious security implications, and the role
of the Council is crucial if we are to strengthen the
multilateral architecture. It is therefore important
to rigorously analyse the main risks and the specific
settings in which they exist. The challenge lies in the
timely identification of situations and areas in which
the effects of climate change may have multiplier
effects that affect international peace and security
and in acting in a timely manner, while maintaining a
preventive diplomacy of common commitment.

The 2021 report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, which was just issued on 9 August
and has 234 authors and thousands of scientific
references, is compelling: the scientific evidence shows
unprecedented changes under way in the climate and
global temperature and, unfortunately, some of those
changes are already irreversible. Projections for the
future show significant changes in heatwaves, intense
precipitation, droughts and cyclones, among others,
with serious consequences for human activity. The
report concludes that the sustainability of natural
resources and the well-being of our peoples are at risk.
It also states, after a very careful assessment, that the
commitment to invest and finance up to $100 billion for
projects that could have curbed the trend in the report
is not being fulfilled. This is to say that no one can now
reasonably question the fact that climate change is a
threat to everyone’s security. What the report says is
that we are not doing much, and we are not achieving
the goals we set for ourselves.

More effective interaction between the Security
Council and the Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the United Nations Environment
Programme, and the integration of their respective
views into the analyses of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, would substantially enrich
the content of the five-yearly report and the strategic
vision to be adopted.

The Peacebuilding Commission itself has stated
that 11 of the countries that it monitors where there
are conflicts are located in areas that are particularly
exposed to the effects of climate change, which further
complicates efforts to achieve sustainable peace.
The only way we can address climate change is
through multilateralism, with a comprehensive and
coherent approach across the entire United Nations
system. We agree with the notion reflected in the
Secretary-General’s “Our Common Agenda” initiative
on the need to be better prepared for those challenges,
which implies considering the effects of climate change
in any possible scenario — what is being called “shortterm climate security”. Hence the proposal for a report
every five years on strategic vision and global risk is
very welcome.
It is good that the Security Council is not ignoring
the issue. How could we justify that? It is an issue
12/21

The establishment of the Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security within the Security Council was
a step in the right direction. We now need to translate
its recommendations into action. Therefore, when
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions are adjusted, the impact of climate
effects will be adequately taken into account and a
timely and comprehensive response can be provided.
Another proposal that we could make would be to
include a follow-up on the goals that we propose and how
the financing that has been or will be made available
at the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP26) will be fulfilled, to make
financing a central issue for the climate security of the
planet and avoid there being just political statements
made at the Conference.
I conclude by reaffirming Mexico’s commitment to
combat climate change together with all stakeholders
to find global and multidimensional solutions to the
issue. I reiterate that we must all work to make COP26
a success. We must expand our goals and respond to the
report I just mentioned.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Søreide (Norway): I would like to thank
Ireland for placing climate and security on today’s
agenda. And I greatly appreciate the briefings by the
Secretary-General and Ms. Ilwad Elman.
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
has issued a very clear warning. We can expect further
widespread and unprecedented changes to our climate.
The impacts of that can already be seen in many of the
situations on the agenda of the Security Council.
More and more of our development aid is now
channelled to climate financing and investment in
renewable energy in developing countries, and we are
tripling our support for adaptation and disaster risk
reduction. The reason for that is that half of the 20
countries that are considered the most vulnerable to
climate change are also affected by armed conflict.
Climate change, conflict, displacement and hunger
exacerbate one other. Climate change is a threat
multiplier. And that is the reason that climate and
security are at the very core of the Security Council.
The impacts of climate change vary from region
to region. In Afghanistan, long-standing conflict
has weakened community resilience and traditional
natural resource management — eroding the capacity
of Afghan society to deal with climate-related security
risks. In Iraq, water scarcity worsened by climate
change deepens grievances and conflict. It escalates
the risk of violent conflict and provides entry points for
armed groups to exploit. In South Sudan, floods and
droughts disrupt livelihoods and worsen food security,
and livestock losses compound rivalries, which can
trigger intercommunal conflicts, displacement and
the growth of armed groups. Across the Sahel, climate
change may increase the risk of clashes between herders
and farmers over access to water and pastures.
The impact of climate change often hits women
and girls the hardest. According to UNICEF, 1 billion
children live in extremely high-risk countries. That is
nearly half of all the children in the world. And women
are on the front lines addressing resource scarcity
and mobilizing for climate action and peacebuilding.
We must support their efforts and leadership to
enhance sustainability, stability and climate resilience
in communities.
The Security Council has expressed its concern that
the adverse effects of climate change may constitute a
risk to international peace and security. What is needed
now is a more systematic approach by the Council.
As a concrete step forward, the Council should adopt
a thematic resolution on climate and security in order
to guide its work. The intention is not for the Council
to take on the tasks of other United Nations organs.

S/PV. 8864

It is a matter of conflict prevention. It is a matter of
addressing climate risk and resilience as part of our
common responsibility to maintain international peace
and security.
We therefore urge the Secretary-General to
include climate-related security risks in his reports to
the Council and for climate risks to be included as a
consideration in all relevant mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions. We have
to strengthen coordination and ensure a coherent
and whole-of-United Nations response. The Climate
Security Mechanism and the Informal Expert Group
on Climate and Security will be important platforms
in that regard.
Norway strongly believes that climate risks
must also be addressed in mediation and preventive
diplomacy. The shared experience of climate change
can be an entry point for building trust and dialogue
across communities, as we have seen in Somalia and
South Sudan.
Yet, sustainable peace and development cannot
be achieved without the inclusion of all relevant
stakeholders. In order to succeed, strong local and
regional partnerships is needed, as is the meaningful
participation of civil society.
Moreover, the Security Council needs reliable,
relevant, timely and actionable information on the
climate risks for the specific situations on the Council’s
agenda. In that respect, Norway gives financial
support to the independent research undertaken by
the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute and
Adelphi, in close cooperation with local expertise.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our
time. The Security Council must show leadership and
fulfil its responsibility as set forth in its mandate.
Climate and security is one of four main priorities
for Norway in the Council, and we stand ready to do
our part.
The President: I now call on the Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kenya.
Ms. Omamo (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Ireland’s stewardship of the Security
Council this month and thank you for personally
presiding over the Council’s open debate on the
subject at hand. I also thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Ilwad Elman for their insightful briefings.

21-2629713/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

Climate change is leading to profound effects
globally with respect to extreme weather conditions,
migration, resource competition, and on the livelihoods
and economies of millions of people across the world.
These are combining to increase the fragility of States,
are propagating resource conflicts and are escalating
existing violent confrontations. This is particularly the
case in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the Middle East
and small island developing States.
As we prepare to undertake the twenty-sixth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in a few
short weeks, we should keep in mind that climate-change
adaptation will need to deliver on conflict prevention
and resolution. It will call for the commitments made to
the regions that have not caused climate change but are
experiencing its adverse effects to be implemented in a
conflict-sensitive fashion.
Given its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Council should
also take a pragmatic approach to dealing with climate
change, particularly in conflict situations. I will
underscore six measures that Kenya considers pivotal
in that regard:
First, the growing body of evidence on the
climate-security nexus must be developed with
experts, States and institutions in the Global South,
where the challenge is most keenly felt. This research
agenda must be inclusive to enable emerging policy
recommendations to be widely embraced.
Secondly, the definitive research on this nexus will
need to benefit from the science-policy interface that is
anchored in the work of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), domiciled in Nairobi. As UNEP
prepares to celebrate its fiftieth birthday, its place at the
centre of environment multilateralism must be restored
and strengthened if the battle against climate change,
particularly in the South, is to be won.
Thirdly, technologies and practices that have been
employed over long periods of time by millions of
people are often not only resilient, but also more fit for
purpose. We therefore need to build on local knowledge
and practices that are proven to work, especially in
enhancing resilience of communities against climate
change effects. It is this indigenous knowledge, often of
women, that can form the basis of peace and mediation
efforts with respect to the conflicts that are continuing
to accumulate across our world.
14/21

23/09/2021

Fourthly, the highest priority must be given to
climate action not compromising the ability of countries
to develop rapidly. Climate action must be fair and must
be seen to be fair for it to draw the support of the vast
majority of States. After all, we all understand that the
bulk of resources for climate adaptation will need to
be drawn from domestic resources. That means that
countries will need to have access to revenues from
growing economies if they are to respond adequately in
a fashion that protects peace and security.
Fifthly, we need the development of early warning
systems that map climate change hotspots in order to
enable decision-making tools that prevent and minimize
conflict at the national, regional and international levels.
Finally, peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions,
especially those situated in Africa, must have clear
climate-action mandates, including environmental
protection and restoration. This is particularly
important in the sprawling refugee camps in Africa,
where environmental degradation is the order of the day.
These peacekeeping missions must also have the ability
to collect data, particularly gender-disaggregated
data, for us to understand the nexus between gender,
climate change and conflict. Our peacekeepers must
also have the ability to mobilize for emergencies in
order to respond quickly to communities in the face
of calamities.
As I conclude, Kenya commends Ireland and the
Niger, the co-chairs of the Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security, for their efforts towards a thematic
resolution. Kenya will continue to be an anchor in the
articulation of global environmental issues. In that
regard, we will remain a strong and consistent voice
for Africa, the Global South, including small island
developing States, in the pursuit of representative
climate and security solutions.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad
of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset. I would like to express my sincere thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to the Republic of Ireland for
dedicating today’s meeting to discuss, once again,
climate change and its impact on international, peace
and security. I would like also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing and to express to him
our appreciation for his continued efforts and support
for his priorities in addressing the impact of climate
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

change. My thanks also go to Ms. Elman for her
valuable briefing.
Threats to international, peace and security are no
longer limited to the conventional threats of geostrategic
tensions, arms races and conflicts in several regions.
Our world today is confronted with many emerging
challenges that target the necessities of life on our
planet and future generations.
Undoubtedly, climate change, along with
environmental disasters and health pandemics, such
as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and
natural disasters, which are becoming more frequent
and severe, constitute the biggest challenges to our
countries, individually and collectively. They are also a
challenge to multilateralism, the United Nations system
and international cooperation.
The attention that the Security Council pays to
these issues when discussing them as items on its
agenda reflects its conviction in the need to integrate
these risks into the Council’s work. We can no longer
overlook the extent to which climate change exacerbates
elements of fragility and instability, while threatening
food and water security for vulnerable groups. This
in turn raises tensions and prolongs many conflicts,
especially in the African continent, and leads to forced
displacement and irregular migration,
Although climate change is a global phenomenon,
its impact is uneven. Certain regions of the world will
be more affected than others, not only because they will
be more exposed to the impact of climate change, but
because their peoples, especially the vulnerable groups,
will be less capable of coping with climate shocks.
Therefore, when dealing with security risks related
to climate change, there is a need to recognize the
development aspect of any strategy pertaining to the
preservation of peace and security. In this context, there
is a need also to strengthen international cooperation and
solidarity to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development goals, including Goal 13, on taking urgent
action to address climate change and impact.
Given its belief in the common destiny of all
the people of our planet, Tunisia calls for serious
consideration to be given to reprioritizing the objectives
of the United Nations development support system and
reforming the international financial system to meet
the needs of developing countries and enable them to
mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change.
This is the responsibility of all countries of the North

S/PV. 8864

and the South but to varying degrees, depending on the
extent to which each country has contributed to climate
change. We hope in this regard that all countries
concerned will show a genuine commitment to the
peoples and the planet at the twenty-sixth session of
the United Nations Conference on Climate Change,
which will be held in Glasgow from 31 October to
12 November. Tunisia will make every effort, alongside
the international community, to reduce the existential
threat of climate change to life on our planet by
advancing our commitments to addressing it, which we
will announce at the Glasgow conference.
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s commitment
to collective action at the United Nations and other
multilateral and bilateral forums to address these
emerging threats to international peace and security.
We are determined to pursue our efforts to advance
the Council’s work on this issue. Tunisia reiterates its
support for the appointment of a special envoy of the
Secretary-General to follow up on this matter. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report on the impact
of climate change on international peace and security.
We also look forward to a Council resolution in this
regard. Tunisia supports such a resolution and will
engage with it.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
for the Commonwealth and Development, the United
Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I should like to thank the Secretary-General and
Ms. Ilwad Elman for their very powerful and insightful
contributions, which have really set the tone of today’s
important debate. With the climate crisis posing an
existential threat, not just to our shared environment
but to our common security, this debate is absolutely
critical. I therefore thank you, Taoiseach, and Ireland
for convening this very important debate in a very
timely fashion.
As we look around our world, the nations suffering
most from this crisis were already counted among the
world’s most fragile. A dozen of the most vulnerable
are already enduring the weight of armed conflict.
Climate change acts as a cruel multiplier in such cases,
making bad situations much worse. With institutions
failing, communities displaced and societies insecure,
conflict-riven nations are ill equipped to cope with the
impacts of climate change.

21-2629715/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

It risks pushing fragile regions over the edge. It
threatens to displace millions of people. Cities, towns
and villages could be erased from the map. And, as
we have already heard, the consequences of climate
change hit the most vulnerable people. They hit women
and girls particularly hard, from the risk of violence
in camps for displaced people to the threat of child
marriage when parents are plunged into poverty. And
as we heard so powerfully from Ilwad Elman and as the
Prime Minister’s Special Representative on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict, it was particularly poignant
to hear from her how we continue to see sexual violence
tragically still used as a weapon of war, as a weapon
of conflict.
The world is therefore looking to the Security
Council to act — and act swiftly. We welcome the
efforts in many areas that the United Nations, under
the leadership of the Secretary-General, has made to
address this issue. But, as the Secretary-General has
once again advocated, there is much more still to
do. In that regard, the Security Council must play its
important part. We need the United Nations system to
report comprehensively on the links between climate
and security so that we have the best information to
inform our decisions.
We also need the right people with the right training
and experience within United Nations missions to
anticipate and respond to the climate crisis that exists.
Of course, those missions should be as clean and as
green as possible, through responsible stewardship.
To serve our shared interest in international peace,
the Security Council should listen to those countries
experiencing at first-hand the impact of insecurity
compounded by climate change. It is also crucial that
women and girls play a full and meaningful role in the
work to address climate change and resolve conflict, if
we are to address gender inequality and truly achieve
our set objectives.
Inclusive and united, we can show global leadership
in the face of global threats. As all members are aware,
the United Kingdom is truly honoured to be hosting the
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, but
a few weeks from now in Glasgow. At that Conference,
as our Prime Minister articulated only yesterday in his
speech to the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.9), we
are approaching a crunch point, where those efforts
16/21

23/09/2021

need to turn into urgent action from us all, irrespective
of who we are or where we are.
We must act now if we are to stop temperature
increases breaching 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels. We must do that by bringing forward the netzero commitments, ambitious, nationally determined
contributions and, most important, the policies and
actions needed to deliver them. We must act. We must
act now to secure the financing to help vulnerable States
adapt to our changing climate. The United Kingdom is
already demonstrating how that can be achieved. We
welcome other recent announcements, including those
from the United States this week.
Last year, we committed to cutting emissions
by at least 68 per cent by 2030, the fastest rate of
reduction of any major economy. Our climate financing
commitments for the next five years stand at more
than $16 billion. The new Adaptation Action Coalition,
which we launched in January, will target action on
priority sectors.
However, as we have heard today, and, indeed, as
the Council has repeatedly shown since its inception,
global threats can be countered only with united global
action. All the arms of this great institution that is the
United Nations, including the Security Council, have a
critical role to play to meet this existential threat. We
must act effectively. We must act urgently. And we must
act together. It is that critical action that is required.
Indeed, it is our collective moral duty, for it falls on
all of us — all of us here today — as custodians of the
future we are choosing and building for our children
and generations to come.
The President: I now call on the Vice-Minister,
Secretary (West), in the Ministry of External Affairs
of India.
Ms. Sandhu (India): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s discussion on climate and
security. We also appreciate the briefings by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Ms. Ilwad Elman,
underlining the different risks of climate change.
There can be no doubt that climate change is
one of the defining challenges of our time. Over the
past several decades, Member States have engaged
purposefully and in a focused manner to put in place
commitments relating to mitigation, adaptation,
financing, technology transfer and so on, so that climate
change can be addressed holistically. Indeed, the Paris
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Agreement on Climate Change clearly brings out the
interconnectedness of those issues under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The measures to tackle climate change have been built
on an integrated structure so that it is equitable to all
parties, especially developing countries. Therefore,
addressing one aspect of climate change while
ignoring others will be counter-productive. Climate
action needs to be based on fundamental and agreed
principles, the most important of which is the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities.
Furthermore, the issue of climate change is being
discussed in a focused manner by the United Nations
in the relevant mechanisms. Whether it be on climate
change, biodiversity, desertification or other issues,
mechanisms have been put in place to take further
action. Countries across the globe have taken on several
commitments under those mechanisms, including the
nationally determined contributions.
Given that background, picking one aspect of
climate change — namely climate security — and
dealing with it in this forum, which is not designed to
address a multifaceted problem of that nature, would
not be desirable. Bringing climate security into the
Security Council discourse while disregarding basic
principles and practices relating to climate change has
the potential to disrupt our overall discussion on this
extremely important topic. When we deliberate the
securitization of climate, we should be careful not to
build a parallel climate track. We need to continue on
the path of inclusive decision-making, to which Member
States have already agreed.
While we appreciate that climate change has
impacted the lives of people and exacerbated conflict,
to view conflicts in poorer parts of the world through
the prism of climate change will serve only to
present a lopsided narrative, when the reasons for the
conflict are to be found elsewhere. The report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change clearly
states that the effect of climate variability on violence
is contested. Climate change may enhance conflict
but cannot be determined as a reason for it. A study
of nationally determined contributions also indicates
that, while parties acknowledge the adverse effects
of climate change on their economies, we need to be
conscious about looking at it as a risk to their social
stability or as an issue of peace and security. An over-

S/PV. 8864

simplification of the causes of conflict will not help
resolve them, or will it justify extreme policy measures.
We need to bring back our focus to where it should
be — combating climate change. India is a leader in
climate action and is on track to meet its commitments
under the Paris Agreement. We currently have the
world’s fastest-growing solar energy programme and
have expanded access to clean cooking fuel to cover
more than 80 million households, making it one of
the largest clean-energy drives globally. In addition,
370 million LED light bulbs have been distributed,
resulting in a reduction of more than 38 million tons of
carbon dioxide emissions annually. We are committed
to installing 450 gigawatts of new and renewable energy
by 2030.
Apart from domestic actions, India has also taken
a lead in bringing together international coalitions to
generate long-term impact through partnerships. The
International Solar Alliance is a leading example of how
collective action translates into a positive global climate
impact. It is among the fastest growing international
organizations today, with 80 members and 24 more
joining. India has set aside $1.6 billion under soft loans
to supplement such efforts. The Coalition for Disaster
Resilient Infrastructure is another successful initiative
for enhancing cooperation and building resilience
against natural disasters. India has allocated $70 million
to support the work of the Coalition. India and Sweden
launched the Leadership Group for Industry Transition,
with the support of the World Economic Forum in 2019,
providing a platform for energy-intensive industry to
progress on low-carbon pathways. India is also one of
the 10 global champions for energy transition.
What we need now is to enhance action on all
important policies that address climate change,
including fulfilling the commitments on climate
financing and technology transfer. For a vast number of
developing countries — especially during the pandemic,
when financing is drying up — robust financing for
climate action cannot be overemphasized. While we
may call for innovative financing, we need to be careful
not to indulge in innovative accounting. The pathway to
$100 billion in climate financing is critical for meeting
targets under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
To conclude, we call for a more comprehensive and
collective approach, through stronger partnerships and
strengthened global efforts, so that we can address the
challenge of climate change together.

21-2629717/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We are confronted by the continued deepening of the
planetary crisis that is climate change. As a small
island developing State particularly affected by that
existential threat and facing ever-increasing loss and
damage from the adverse impacts of climate change,
we value this timely meeting. I thank the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Elman for their excellent contributions
to advancing understanding in that context. We hope
that today’s meeting contributes to comprehensive
multilateral approaches that systematically address the
consequences of climate change for international peace
and security. Allow me to share our views on how we
should approach that threat multiplier.
First, in order to tackle climate-related security
risks in relevant situations on the Security Council’s
agenda, we must build capacity and enhance expertise
across the United Nations. That includes embedding
climate security advisers in relevant operations and
considering the appointment of a special representative
of the Secretary General on climate-related security
risks to strengthen coordination within the system
on the issue. We commend the work of the Climate
Security Mechanism, which has enhanced the capacity
of the United Nations system to address climate-related
security risks in an efficient and logical manner.
Secondly, the Security Council must not sidestep
its responsibility to address the security implications
of climate change. To be sure, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change remains the
primary body tasked with the responsibility to address
climate change. At the same time, by utilizing the tools
at its disposal, the Council can take tangible actions.
Such actions include requesting increased training
and enhanced reporting on climate and security;
strengthening coordination with relevant actors at
the local, national and regional levels; and adopting a
focused draft resolution to better enable the Council
to address climate and security risks. Furthermore,
the Council’s Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security is a useful forum to help the Council improve
its awareness and understanding of the issues, and it
should be supported.
Thirdly, as the foremost way to avert climate-driven
security risks remains significant mitigation action,
major and historical emitters must honour their
commitments made under the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and act to keep temperature rise to
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
18/21

23/09/2021

Fourthly, it is also crucial that developed
countries meet their overseas development assistance
commitments and provide greater support for climate
adaptation and mitigation as part of a strategy to avert
climate-related security risks. Scaled-up support to
conflict-affected countries through concessionary
loans, debt relief and quick-impact projects should be
provided to alleviate some of the challenges encountered.
Fifthly, as they are integral to the whole-ofsystem approach, peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding should be pursued concurrently as part
of a peace and security, development and humanitarian
continuum. In order to be sustainable, plans and
strategies must include climate change considerations
at all policy stages, namely, early warning and
assessment, planning and financing, implementation
and monitoring. Failing to account for the reality of the
adverse effects of climate change in those contexts can
have long-term impacts, undermining agreements and
settlement arrangements in peace negotiations due to
the changed environmental conditions.
Sixthly, the Peacebuilding Commission plays
a valuable role, alongside partner institutions, in
assisting Member States with advancing peacebuilding
in line with national priorities. We encourage closer
coordination between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council, including on issues related to
climate, security and peacebuilding.
Finally, we will not effectively tackle this issue
without the inclusion of all stakeholders, especially
those who have been consistently underrepresented and
yet are the most impacted by the security consequences
of climate change. Women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership is critical as we seek
solutions. Similarly, young people must be included
and engaged in these discussions and decision-making
processes. Climate change has multi-layered and
compounding effects in fragile and conflict contexts.
The Security Council has recognized that, even if
framed as a possibility, in a number of resolutions, but
we need to act on it.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation wholeheartedly
shares the international concern regarding the issue
of climate change. According to our calculations, the
climate in Russia is warming 2.5 times faster than the
global average. At the same time, we are witnessing
increasingly destructive natural phenomena. The need
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions and adapt to the
negative consequences of climate change is therefore
clear to us.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s consistent
calls for the mobilization of political will and resources
to reach effective agreements on the climate track. The
recent meeting organized by the Secretary-General
together with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
for members of the Group of Twenty and the most
vulnerable countries was once again an opportunity to
make sure we are on the same page and engage in a
constructive exchange of views. That will undoubtedly
have a positive impact on preparations for the upcoming
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) in Glasgow. We also commend the targeted
engagement by Mr. Guterres with Member States on
that matter, taking into account national specificities.
For our part, we are committed to fulfilling
our international obligations in the climate sphere.
The Government of the Russian Federation is taking
consistent steps to reduce the carbon footprint of the
national economy. We are in the process of finalizing
our Low Emission Strategy for the Socioeconomic
Development of the Russian Federation until 2050. We
are also paying special attention to reducing methane
emissions. We stand ready to cooperate with all
interested parties.
Since climate change concerns us all, we believe
it must become a kind of unifying agenda for the
international community. That is the only way to ensure
that the issue can be effectively addressed for the benefit
of present and future generations of humankind. Indeed,
the development of such cooperation is the focus of the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Relevant efforts are also under way in the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the HighLevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development, the
Peacebuilding Commission and in other specialized
bodies. In line with the principle of a division of labour
at the United Nations, they have been designated to deal
with the issue of combating climate change.
We are increasingly witnessing attempts by our
colleagues to add climate change to the Security
Council’s agenda, as has been mentioned during many
of the statements we have heard today. And yet we have
a couple of questions: how effective is this in terms
of resolving the tasks we have before us? And to what

S/PV. 8864

extent does the Council have the necessary mechanisms
for this purpose without duplicating the main bodies
of the United Nations, and, more importantly, without
impeding their efforts? There is a Russian saying that
illustrates this point: too many cooks spoil the broth.
I will be frank. We believe that the persistent and
insistent attempts to advance the premise of climate
change as a threat to international peace and security
in the Security Council agenda at all costs introduces
a completely unnecessary political component to an
already complicated and sensitive discussion. Such an
approach is also liable to artificially simplify the way
we deal with the situation, which in turn is liable to
result in one-sided or futile solutions that do nothing to
strengthen stability worldwide.
Perhaps our colleagues, by involving the Security
Council, simply wish to raise the profile of the climate
discussion. However, I think that they would agree
that the inclusion or non-inclusion of any theme or
issue on the Security Council agenda should not be
a gauge of its importance or relevance. The question
of climate change is fully applicable in this regard,
owing to its specificities. It will not benefit in any way
from incorporation into the Council’s agenda, and yet
misunderstandings and duplications will be abundant
in such a scenario.
Turning to the consequences of climate change,
Russia stands ready to discuss this subject solely
vis-à-vis specific country and regional matters, relying
on verified scientific data and taking into account the
full picture of every specific incident. To be frank,
there are many more such situations than there are
agenda items on the Security Council. Moreover, let us
not forget that climate is but one of a host of factors that
make the economic and social situation for people in
specific countries all the more difficult.
I wish to emphasize the following. We believe it
is counterproductive to include the climate component
in the mandates of peacekeeping and special political
missions. The assessment of climate-related risks, the
conduct of the relevant analyses and the development of
response measures should be carried out in specialized
forums. Peacekeepers do not have the relevant expertise
nor the necessary tools to propose viable solutions for
climate change, given that experts have completed the
requisite studies in this field and have the necessary
training, but specialists in peace and security do not.
Skills-building courses for the latter will not be enough.

21-2629719/21

S/PV.8864

Maintenance of international peace and security

Moreover, expansion of the mandate of peacekeepers
is liable to result in additional administrative and
financial costs and can undermine the effectiveness of
mandate delivery by Blue Helmets.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the Security
Council is a very serious but not universal instrument
at the disposal of the United Nations, and its use is
liable to backfire with respect to our struggle to counter
climate change. Let us not forget this. Let us not, for
the benefit of the advancement of political agendas,
disperse our efforts on this important track.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Prime Minister of Ireland to the Chamber
as he presides over today’s meeting. We thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Ms. Elman for their briefings.
China highly commends the United Nations and
its Secretary-General for their role in leading and
coordinating the multilateral process on climate.
The recent report issued by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change entitled Climate Change
2021: The Physical Science Basis warns us that
climate change has become a real threat to the survival
and development of humankind. The international
community must therefore shoulder its responsibility,
take action and work together to tackle this challenge.
China supports the upcoming twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change so that
it can achieve a fruitful outcome and promote the
comprehensive, effective and sustained implementation
of the Paris Agreement.
The relationship between climate and security
is very complex. The Security Council, on the basis
of its mandate emanating from the United Nations
Charter and of its existing agenda, needs to get it right
in terms of the manner and extent of its engagement
in discussing and addressing issues related to climate
and security. In this regard, I would like to make the
following comments.
First, it is imperative that we maintain the main
channel for international cooperation on climate
change. Climate change is a shared challenge facing
humankind that requires a global response. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and
the Paris Agreement constitute the most authoritative
platform. The principles of common but differentiated
responsibility, respective capability and equity are
20/21

23/09/2021

the cornerstones of global climate governance. We
must uphold the Framework Convention and the Paris
Agreement as the main channels of the work in this
area, and we must respect the right of all countries
to speak on equal footing on climate change issues.
It would be inappropriate for the Security Council as
a forum to replace collective decision-making by the
international community.
Secondly, it is essential for developed countries
to earnestly fulfil their international obligations and
commitments. Developed countries bear a historical
responsibility for climate change. In discussing climate
change and security, regardless of the platform or
perspective, we should not lose sight of this very basic
fact. Developed countries cannot always look to others
to shoulder their responsibilities. They must take
concrete actions that lead to the substantial reduction
of emissions, realize net-zero or even negative carbon
emissions at an early date while honouring their
commitments on climate financing, fill the pre-2020
annual funding gap of $100 billion to the greatest
extent possible, provide a clear timetable and road map
from 2021 to 2025, and formulate a new collective
quantitative funding target post-2025.
In that regard, we have heard the appeals issued
by many countries. We have also heard the SecretaryGeneral himself. We hope that developed countries will
respond to those appeals positively, which is key to the
early achievement of the net-zero target. There is not
only a need for the international community to make
such an appeal, but also a need to establish an oversight
mechanism to ensure with certainty that developed
countries will live up to their commitments.
Thirdly, it is necessary that the challenge of climate
change be addressed in the course of sustainable
development. Climate change is a by-product of
humankind’s unsustainable development models. The
only way out, once and for all, lies in a holistic approach
within the framework of sustainable development. For
enhanced resilience to climate change, countries should
integrate a climate-change response into their national
development programmes, aligning it with poverty
eradication, employment promotion, security and
clean-energy rollout.
In view of the insufficient capacity for
climate-change mitigation and adaptation in countries
in conflict, the Security Council may focus on
climate-change-reduced risks under country specific
21-26297

23/09/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8864

agenda items, mobilize, in the light of the situation
on the ground, a greater input of resources from the
international community and support United Nations
specialized agencies in helping countries in conflict
better meet the challenge.

of our active contributions to promote a green global
recovery and achieve global goals on climate change.
And it demonstrates China’s unwavering determination
and practical action in building a community of life for
humankind and nature.

It is worth pointing out that not all of the countries
on the Council’s agenda have been plunged into war
and chaos because of climate change. Neither does the
Council have the necessary specialized knowledge,
mechanism or tools to address climate change.
We therefore must refrain from using a wholesale
approach to the climate issue as the key to addressing
all problems. We must refrain from including it in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations so as to not impact
the Security Council’s ability to effectively deliver on
its mandate and to refrain from a duplication of effort.

China has made its support for the global effort to
address climate change known and has continued its
support. China is a reliable partner and takes concrete
actions in that regard.

As the world’s largest developing country, China
has always been a contributor to global climate
governance, a leader in the building of a global
ecological civilization and an implementer of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.
In his address during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session on
21 September (see A/76/PV.3), Chinese President Xi
Jinping announced that China will step up support
for other developing countries in developing green
and low-carbon energy and will not build any new
coal-fired power projects abroad. That is another
important measure of the initiative announced by
President Xi to address global climate change. He
also announced last year that China will strive for its
carbon dioxide emissions to peak by 2030 and achieve
carbon neutrality by 2060. That represents another

The fifteenth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the Convention on Biodiversity will take
place next month in Kunming, Yunnan province,
China. Using the opportunity of the fifteenth session
of the Conference, China stands ready to work together
with other countries around the world to make new
contributions to global environmental governance and
to jointly build a clean and beautiful planet that we
call home.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before concluding, I would like once again to thank
all of the participants who joined us today. In particular,
my thanks go to Secretary-General Guterres for being
with us for the entirety of the meeting. We appreciate
his commitment and interest.
I would also like to thank the Member States and
regional groups that have so far submitted written
statements on the subject of today’s discussion.
Statements that are received by the end of today will
form part of the compilation of statements from this
meeting. We look forward to receiving more.
The meeting rose at 10.05 a.m.

21-2629721/21
