UNITED NATIONS

SE’CURITY ‘%OUNCIL
OF,:FICIAL

RE’CORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

lf#ll;

MEETING:

NEW

17DECEMBER1974

YORK

CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l8 11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...*.........o....
Adoption of the agenda .,..,...,,,....,.,*.......,*.,...I..............
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent Representative of
Upper Volta to the United Nations addressedto the President of the Security
Council (S/11575) . , . . . , , . , , . . . . . , . . . . , , , . , , , , . , , . . . . . , . , . , . ,,. . . . . . .

1
1

1

YPV.1811

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND ELEVENTH MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 December 1974, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Sir Laurence MCINTYRE

(Australia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya,
Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon and United States of
America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/Ml)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Upper Volta to the United
Nations addressed to thk President of the Security
Council (S/l 1575)
The meeting was called to order at 11.1.5 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
7he situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 13 December 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Upper Volta to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11575)
1. The PRESIDENT:
A letter has been addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representative of
Morocco which contains a request that his delegation be
invited to participate without the right to vote in the
discussion of the question on the agenda in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure. Following the usual
practice, I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the
representative
of Morocco,
in accordance with his
request, to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.
2. In view of the limited number of seats available
around the Council table, I now invite the representative
of Morocco to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber, on the understanding that he will
of course be invited to take a place at the Council table
when he is scheduled to speak.

At the invitation qf the President, Mr. Zainli, (Morocco)
took the place reseriedior him at the side of the ~ouncr?
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter, dated
16 December, from the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which reads as follows:
“Taking into account its special responsibilities for
the international Territory of Namibia as set forth in
General Assembly resolutions, the United Nations
Council for Namibia wishes to participate in theforthcoming meeting of the Security Council on the question of Namibia. The Council will be represented by
the following delegation: Ambassador Rashleigh E.
Jackson of Guyana, President of the Council:
Mr. Zimba of Zambia; Mr. Vlasceanu of Romania:
and Mr. Budhiraja of India.”
4. It may be recalled that on previous occasions when it
was considering the situation in Namibia the Council
extended invitations to representatives of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, in particular at its 1628th
meeting on 28 January 1972, at its 1656th meeting on 31
July 1972 and at its 1756th meeting on 10 December 1973.
Accordingly, I propose, if I hear no objection, that the
Council extend an invitation, pursuant to rule 39 of its
rules of procedure, to the President and the other
members of the delegation of the United Nations Council
for Namibia.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. <Jackson (President

ofthe United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members of the
Council also that I have received a letterdated 17December from the representatives of Kenya, Mauritania and
the United Republic of Cameroon [S/11580]. This letter
contains a request that the Security,Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provIsIona rules ofproccdure to Mr. Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Forcjgn
Relations ofthe South West Africa People’s Organisation
(SWAP()). As I hear no objection, I take it that 11~
Council is agreeable. I therefore invite Mr. Mueshihsnp~
to take the place reserved for him at the side uf‘ the
Council chamber. At the appropriate time 1 shall request
him to make his statement.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihangr tooA
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

and membership of the United Nations. These developments raised hopes that colonialism would be speedily
eradicated from that continent. These hopes are, however, yet to be realized. For a zone of colonialism based on
myths Of racial superiority and buttressed by the active
support ofsome members of the international community
became entrenched, particularly in southern Africa-a
zone which provided, and continues to provide, an illusory cordon sanitaire for white supremacy.

6. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 13 December addressed to
the President of the Council by the representative of
Upper Volta on behalf of the African Group of States
[S/1157.5]. The Council has also received in this connexion a letter dated 13 December from the SecretaryGeneral
[S/115741,
drawing attention
to General
Assembly resolution 3295 (XXIX) of 13 December 1974
concerning the question of Namibia, In Section II of that
resolution, the General Assembly:

12. For a time it appeared that the winds of change had
lost their momentum.
Those of us who yearned and
laboured for freedom and who vigorously advocated a
speedy end to colonialism engaged in a long vigil. One
lesson history teaches us is that people under a colonial
yoke will always rise up-the majority of them-against
tyranny, And so it was-and so it is-in southern Africa.

“Urges the Security Council to convene urgently in
order to take without delay effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter
of the United Nations and with resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly regarding Namibia, to put an end to South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia;“.

13, As the Pretoria-Salisbury-Lisbon
axis became consolidated, so did the liberation movements intensify their
struggles for freedom, fired by the justice of their own
cause and encouraged by the positive support they
received here at the United Nations, as well as outside it,
from the vast majority of the members of the international community.

7. In addition, I want to draw the particular attention of
the members of the Council to document S/11579, which
contains a draft resolution sponsored by Kenya, Mauritania and theUnited Republic ofCameroon. In the course
of the consultations which we have had on this matter, the
common wish was expressed that the Council proceed
first to the vote on the draft resolution before hearing any
statements.

14. The success of these combined efforts has led us to a
situation where today we can realize those hopes, which
some have frustrated, for the prospects for freedom
throughout Africa. Guinea-Bissau now sits as a Member
of the Organization. And in Mozambique,
Angola, Sao
Tome and Principe and Zimbabwe the pace of decolonization has visibly accelerated. Now, by a curious twist of
history, those “winds of change” are blowing hard on the
dominion of that unhappy country where-some
may
say, somewhat unexpectedly-Mr,
Harold Macmillan
spoke so prophetically.

8, Accordingly, unless any member particularly wishes
to make a statement at this time, and if I hear no objcction, it is my intention to put the draft resolution contained in document S/I 1579 to the vote at this stage.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution

was adopted unanimously. I

9, The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the President 01
the United Nations Council for Namibia, Ambassador
Jackson. I now call on him.

15. Six weeks ago the Council undertook an historic
debate on the future relationship between South Africa
and the United Nations. The Council, as we are well
aware, took no decision but remains seized of the matter.
In the course of that debate South Africa’s reprehensible
conduct in regard to the international
Territory of
Namibia was fully exposed. The brutally repressive measures, the systematic elimination
of the most elementary
political freedom, the complete denial of fundamental
rights, the ruthless exploitation of the natural resourcesin short, the sustained campaign of terror, intimidation
and repression based on grotesque concepts of racism
which characterize the behaviour of the Pretoria gang
operating in Namibia were fully catalogued in the condemnation of South Africa which took place in this
chamber in October. South Africa pursues this course Of
action in open, flagrant and perverse defiance of the
Charter of the United Nations, of its resolutions and
decisions, and of international law. This contemptuous
conduct appals the conscience of the overwhelming
majority of mankind.

10. Mr. JACKSON
(President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): Mr. President, it is a great privilege
for me, as President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to speak in this debate in the Security Council
on the question of Namibia
and 1 wish to thank the
mcmbcrs of the Council for permitting me so to do. That I
do so at a time when you, a distinguished son of Australia,
sit as President for the month of December is indeed a
great honour. For it is not without significance that you,
whose wisdom, patience, tact and dedication are so well
known, should at the very end of this term of Australia’s
membership of the Security Council superintend its deliberations on so important a question.
11. Fourteen years ago, a former British Prime Minister, while on a visit to Cape Town, spoke apocalyptically
of the “winds of change sweeping through Africa”.
Indeed, for some time thereafter winds of change did
sweep through Africa bringing to the vast majority of
countries then under colonial domination
independence
‘See rcsnlution

16, The question of Namibia is one to which the United
Nations has given prolonged and especial attention, and
the long record of South Africa’s persistent defiance Of all
our efforts is clear for all to see,

366 (1974).

7

17. Since the establishment of the Council forNamibia,
the Security Council has considered the question of
Namibia on numerous occasions. As long ago as 1968,’
when resolution 246 (1968) was unanimously adopted,
the Council called upon South Africa to take certain
specific measures in relation to Namibia and decided
“ . . . that in the event of failure on the part of the,
Government of South Africa to comply with theprovisions of [that] resolution, the Security Council will
meet immediately to determine effective steps or measures in conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations”.

once again called upon South Africa to withdraw from
the Territory, and declared that
6‘

any further refusal of the South African Government to withdraw from Namibia could create conditions detrimental to the maintenance of peace and
security in the region”.
.

.

.

21. The question of Namibia next engaged the attention
of the Security Council at its historic meetings at Addis
Ababa in 1972. At those meetings, two resolutions, 309
(1972) and 310 (1972), were adopted, The first, inter alia,
reaffirmed the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia and invited the Secretary-General
“ . . . to initiate. . . contacts with all parties concerned,
with a view to establishing the necessary conditions so
as to enable the people of Namibia . . . to exercise their
right to self-determination and independence”.

18. In 1969, by resolution 264 (1969), the Security
Council called upon South Africa “to withdraw immediately its administration from [that] Territory” and once
again promised to meet immediately, in the event of
non-compliance by South Africa with the provisions of
the resolution. Later that year, by resolution 269 (1969),
the Council condemned South Africa for its refusal to
comply with the Council’s earlier resolution 264 (1969)
and reiterated its call upon the Government of South
Africa to withdraw its administration from Namibia
immediately and in any case before 4 October 1969. The
Council once again indicated its intention to meet immediately, if South Africa did not comply with the provisions of the resolution.

22. In the second resolution, the Security Council once
again strongly condemned the refusal of South Africa to
comply with the resolutions of the General Assembly and
Security Council pertaining to Namibia, declared again
that the defiant attitude of South Africa towards the
Council’s decisions wasundermining the authority of the
United Nations, reiterated its view that the continued
occupation of Namibia by the Government of South
Africa created conditions detrimental to the maintenance
of peace and security in the region, once more called upon
South Africa to withdraw from Namibia and, significantly, after a lapse of a few years, again declared that
“ . . . in the event of failure on the part of the Government of South Africa to comply with the . . . resolution, the Security Council shall meet immediately to
decide upon effective steps or measures, in accordance
with the relevant Chapters of the Charter, to secure the
full and speedy implementation of the . . . resolution”.

19. In January 1970, at its 1529th meeting, the Security
Council took further decisions on Namibia [resolution
276 (1970)]. The Government of South Africa was
strongly condemned for its refusal to comply with General Assembly and Security Council resolutions pertaining to Namibia: the continued presence of the South
African authorities was again declared illegal; and the
defiant attitude of the Government of South Africa
towards the Council’s decisions was recognized asundermining the authority of the United Nations. Later that
year, in July [resolution 283 (1970)], the Council noted
with great concern the continued flagrant refusal of the
Government of South Africa to comply with Security
Council decisions demanding the immediate withdrawal
of South Africa from the Territory, and the Council
agreed to remain actively seized of the matter. At its
1550th meeting, the Security Council, in its resolution 284
(1970), submitted the following question to the International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion:
“What are the legal consequences for States of the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding
Security Council resolution
276
(1970)?“.

23. The results of the Secretary-General’s efforts are
well known. As many anticipated, the dialogue with
South Africa was a dialogue with the deaf. It was therefore not surprising that the Security Council on 11
December last year, on the basis of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, decided by resolution 342 (1973) to
discontinue the contacts which had earlier been initiated.
This, then, is the first occasion within a year on which the
Security Council has substantively considered the question of Namibia.
24. Three principal factors informed expectations ofthe
outcome of the Council’s deliberations: the record of
Security Council decisions over the years, the Council’s
debates two months ago in so far as they related to
Namibia and the recent developments in southern Africa.

20. We are all aware ofthe terms of the advisory opinion
given by the International Court of Justice on 21 June
19712 and of South Africa’s categorical and complete
rejection of the Court’s findings. However, when th.e
Security Council took up the matter in October 1971, it
adopted resolution 301 (1971), which condemned all
moves by the Government of South Africa designed to
destroy the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia. It

25. I have endeavoured earlier to give a synopsis of
Security Council decisions on Namibia from 1968 to
1973. I believe that the conclusion is inescapable that
South Africa has contemptuously flouted theauthority of
the Council.
26. As a consequence, many analysing this record
would assert that the Security Council should, now more

2 Legal
Consequences
for States
of the Continued
Prmem d Sold
Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Securily
C$IC”
.
Resolution
276 (1974
Advisory
Opinion.
I.C.J. Reports
1971. P.

3

than ever, have taken those “effective steps or measures”
about which it has spoken so often in the past. For they
believe that South Africa must be compelled to implement the decisions of the Council, to acknowledge and
respect the mandate of the Council for Namibia and to
comply with the manifest wish of the General Assembly,
The Foreign Minister of Guyana in addressing the General Assembly earlier this session3 reflected widely held
sentiments in this regard when he stated that
‘6. . . the time is ripe for us, through the instrumentality of
the Security Council, to take the further steps that may be
necessary for ensuring that the illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa is speedily and irrevocably
terminated”.

acknowledged its own specific responsibility to assist in
finding a solution to the question of Namibia.
30. However, while we acknowledge agreement on
those principles we must be ready to go beyond a mere
reaffirmation of them. In past debates on Namibia in the
Council, the positions of certain permanent members
have not always coincided with those of the majority.
There has been no prior debate on this occasion, but I
believe that it would not be inappropriate to consult the
records with a view to situating the current postures on
Namibia of those members who, during October, vetoed a
proposal commanding majoritarian support, If my reading of the situation is correct-and the postures adopted
today seem to give positive indication of that-then it is
my hope that in the context of new and unfolding realities
the Council, when it meets again to consider the question
of Namibia, as it has decided to do, will, if necessary,
arrive unanimously at a determination
of the action
which should be taken to bring to an end the truculent
banditry which South Africa is perpetrating ‘in Namibia.

27. South Africa’s defiant attitude towards the Security
Council,
the Council for Namibia
and the General
Assembly, indeed towards world public opinion, is a
matter of public record. We must, however, recognize
that when subjected to intense international
pressure
South Africa always counters with gimmickry.
Let US
remember that when the Council sought an advisory
opinion from the International
Court of Justice, South
Af*rica proposed a referendum; when the International
Court of Justice confirmed the illegality of South Africa’s
presence in Namibia, South Africa proposed discussions
with the Secretary-General; when faced with the prospect
of expulsion a mere two months ago, South Africa proposed sham constitutional discussions between so-called
ethnic groups-one
group, be it noted, strategically composed entirely of whites, irrespective of their national
origins. Recently, spokesmen of the racists in South
Africa have propagated, in their characteristically deceptive manner, the notion that the stage of selfdetermination
for the Namibian people can be reached
much sooner than 10 years, as they had earlier envisaged.

31. The Charter provides for the application of measures, including those in Chapter VII, and it may have been
timely for a signal to have been given that the Council will
not be hesitant in employing them, if required.
32. There is much comment abroad about the disaffection and cynicism of peoples with regard to the United
Nations. I believe that the quality of vigilance which the
Security Council exerciseson the question of Namibia can
give the Council its chance to dispel those apprehensions.
The people of Namibia-the
people of the world-watch
and wait.
33. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling upon the next
speaker, I wish to inform the Council that letters have
n6w been addressed to the President by the representatives of Upper Volta and Nigeria. Those letters contain
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the question on the agenda, in accordance with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the assent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. In view ofthe limited
number of places available at the Council table, I request
the representatives to take the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding
that they will be invited to take places at the Council table
when it is their turn to speak.

28. The record of South Africa’s treatment ofthe people
of Namibia for over 50 years, its contempt for the Council
and for the views of the vast majority of the world’s
people is nothing short of what could aptly be called
white-mail. The time has long passed for such contumacious practices to be brought to an end.
29. I believe that there are certain principles and positions on which all members of the Security Council are
agreed. First and foremost is the inalienable and imprescriptible
right of the people of Namibia
to selfdetermination
and independence and their right to
proceed to that independence on the basis that Namibia is
B territorial unit in and for itself. The second is that South
Africa has no legal authority whatsoever to administer
Namibia.
Quite simply, South Africa’s occupation of the
Territory
is illegal-or,
as some would say, unlawfuland as such must be terminated, Indeed the withdrawal of
the South African usurpers is long overdue. The third
principle is that the United Nations has a direct responsibility for the administration
of the Territory, a responsibility
which has been entrusted to the Council for
Namibia.
The Fourth principle is that the Security Council, as evidenced by its previous dispositions,
has
-.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yao (Upper Volta)
andMr. Ogbu(Nigeria) took theplacesreservedfor themat
the side of the Council chamber.

34. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Upper
Volta is the next speaker and I now invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
YAO (Upper Volta) (interpretation from
By an accident of automatic alphabetical order,
to borrow a term now current in the United Nations, I
have the honour of speaking here on behalf of the Group

35. Mr.
French):

4

of African States. The Group has instructed me first ofall,
Mr. President, to express our deep gratitude to you and,
through your kind agency, to all members ofthe Council
for authorizing me to speak here on behalfofthe African
Group. Secondly, I should like to say how happy we are to
see you presiding over the Security Council. Your personal talents, your long experience of international affairs
and the enlightened position taken by your country on
questions relating to southern Africa will be ofthe utmost
usefulness to US all in the debate now opening on the
question of Namibia, or, more particularly, the problem
of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa.

of the entry into force ofthe Charteruntil 1966-that is, a
period of 20 years-the minority racist rtgime of South
Africa administered the Territory of South West Africa in
continuing violation of Articles 73, 74 and 76 of the
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
40. Throughout that period the United Nations spared
no effort to bring South Africa to reason. Resolutions,
Special committees, missions, negotiations, the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice-nothing
helped. Everything ran into a wall of arrogance and contempt. With cruel obstinancy, and taking advantage of
the fundamental weakness of the Organization-the
absence of any real enforcement machinery-or,
quite
simply, because it was aware of the reluctance of the most
influential States to have recourse to the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter, South Africa brought the
Territory under the dreadful shadow of apartheid,
Various attempts were made to annex all or at least part of
the Territory. So far as concerned the inhabitants of the
Territory, whose material and moral well-being and
social progress represented a “sacred mission” for the
Government of South Africa, repression and exploitation
was their daily lot.

36. This problem is certainly not new to the members of
the Council. Indeed, in certain respects it is even older
than the Council itself. But we have no intentionofdrawing the Council into ttie tortuous byways of the unhappy
history of this question, though there may be some need
to make certain brief historical references,
37. The question the Council is about to debate is,
indeed, clear-cut. On 13 December last, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 3295 (XXIX), on the question of Namibia. Section II of that resolution reads as
follows:

41. It was in view of that state of affairs that the General
Assembly in 1966 took the historic decision to terminate
South Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa, which it
brought under the direct authority of the Organization.
That decision was confirmed by the International Court
of Justice in its advisory opinion of 21 June 1971, according to which South Africa wasobliged to withdraw from
Namibia.

“Urges the Security Council to convene urgently in
order to take without delay effective measures, in
accordance with the relevant Chapters of the Charter
of the United Nations and with resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly regarding Namibia, to put an end to South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia”.
In brief, the Council must now seek ways and means of
putting an end to the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa.

42. That decision of the General Assembly, also contemptuously rejected by South Africa, was followed by
other efforts by the Organization to bring about a peaceful transfer of power to the people of South West Africa
through the United Nations Council for South West
Africa-which in 1968 became the United Nations Council for Namibia-and
thereby to put an end to the South
African administration of the Territory.

38. As all members of the Council will recall, that illegal
occupation has now been going on for more than eight
years. It was on 27 October 1966 that the General Assembly, by its resolution 2145 (XXI), terminated the South
African Mandate over the Territory of Namibia, which
henceforward came under the direct responsibility of the
Organization. That decision was not taken lightly. The
South African Mandate over Namibia, which at that time
was known as South West Africa, lasted 46 years, from
1920 until 1966. From the beginning ofthat period, South
Africa administered the Territory in flagrant contradiction of the principles and objectives of the Mandate,
which made the achievement of the well-being and development of the population of the Territory a “sacred
civilizing mission”, to use the language of the time.

43. In its report to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session, the Council for Namibia says that:
“Since the General Assembly, by its resolution 2145
(XXI) of 27 October 1966, terminated South Africa’s
right to administer Namibia, and decided that the
United Nations should assume thereafter direct
responsibility for the country, no less than 37 resolutions on the question of Namibia have been adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council.“4
44. All the appeals addressed to South Africa in those
resolutions have remained dead letters. By reason of the
intransigence and bad faith of the South African authorities, the mission entrusted to the Secretary-General under
resolution 309 (1972) of the Security Council has been
thwarted. In 1973 [resolutjuiun 342 (1973)1, the Council
decided to make no further efforts on the basis of that
reso]ution. Thus it has become more and more obvious

39. Notwithstanding the criticism and condemnation of
the international community, discriminatory rUkS were
applied and annexationist inclinations were given free
rein. Although one of the founders of the Organization,
South Africa refused to recognize the authority of the
United Nations over the Territory and refused to Place
that Territory under United Nations trusteeship; still
more, it simply ignored all the purposes and principles of
the Trusteeship System as established by the Charter, of
which it was one ofthe original signatories. From the date

4 Ibid,.,

5

Twenty-ninth

Session,

Supplement

NO. 24, VO/. 1. PWa.

196.

that, despite the efforts of the Organization to bring about
a Peaceful solution, the policies of South Africa towards
Namibia have not developed in any direction that would
be conducive to settlement with the Organization or that
would be in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Trusteeship System,

Namibia, our only hope was that the Council, in its
wisdom, could take measures to defuse the explosive
situation prevailing in Namibia. Our group has been frequently accused of intransigence, even of being unrealistic. But we do not come here to ask the impossible of the
Council: what we ask is that the Council bring its influence to bear-and particularly the influence of those of its
permanent members that have certain relations with the
South African regime-to
impel South Africa to withdraw from Namibia.

45. Each day that dawns in Namibia is another day of
suffering for the Namibian people, The over-all political
situation is deteriorating
from day to day. The racist
minority regime of Pretoria is applying its shameful policy of apartheid with the utmost rigour on the basis of a
body of legislation
which is the very negation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Sabotage
Act, the Terrorism Act, the Immorality
Act and so on, as
well as the pass system, represent the main pretexts for
mass and arbitrary arrests and for scandalous travesties
of the political process,

49, A solemn commitment on the part of South Africa
on this point would be particularly encouraging. In order
to create a propitious atmosphere for negotiations and to
ease people’s minds, certain transitional measures need to
be taken right away by the illegal South African regime,
such as the freeing of political prisoners, the abolition of
the laws and practices of apartheidand the return ofexiles
to their homes.

46. The minority racist rCgime has even carried barbarism to the point of inflicting such degrading treatment as
public whipping. Torture and humiliation
of every kind is
the current practice in the prisons. Under the over-all
system of repression, even church and press figures are
not spared, Hounded, persecuted and exploited in their
own country, which is given over to foreigners, many
Namibians
have been forced into exile. Furthermore,
notwithstanding
the many resolutions adopted on the
subject, South Africa is attempting to fragment the Territory into various “homelands”,
in the hope of breaking
the unitary and nationalist spirit that strives to create a
free and united Namibia.
The greater part of the
Territory-and
also the richer part-has
been reserved
for the whites, whereas blacks and other Coloured people,
who represent the vast majority of the population, arc
confined in arid homelands and condemned to languish
wretchedly in a subsistence economy.

50, The situation in southern Africa is changing rapidly.
The new Portugal has renounced its blind policies of
earlier years and courageously committed itself to decolonization, to the great satisfaction of the entire international community, and particularly of the African States.
The news from Zimbabwe holds out hopes of new and
important changes in the near future. In this atmosphere
of renewed hope, South Africa’s challenge to the Organization cannot be left unanswered indefinitely: the United
Nations must throw its full weight into the scales to tilt the
balance in favour of freedom and justice. In so doing, it
will have helped to avoid further unnecessary bloodshed.
The Council faces the famous dilemma of the olive branch
and the gun. Our heads of State, at Mogadiscio, charged
us to call on the Council to find ways of bringing South
Africa back to the path of reason. Otherwise, no one will
be able to predict where the outbreak of violence in that
region will lead us.

47. I could continue at great length describing in these
terms the inhuman conditions in which the people of
Namibia are constrained to eke out their existence; but
that would be an otiose exercise, since all members of the
Council are certainly aware of the facts. There is no
shortage of documents on the subject. I might mention, in
particular, the excellent reports of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the reports of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, Eyewitness reports also are
not wanting; a number of petitioners have described in
minute detail the daily life of the Namibians. Better yet,
the valiant freedom fighters of SWAP0 have repeatedly
addressed the Members of the Organization
in various
organs of the United Nations. The stubborn resistance of
the Namibian
people, organizcd and mobilized
by
SWAPO, is one of the outstanding features of the situation. The African Group wishes once again, through me,
to hail the heroic struggle of the Namibian people, led by
SWAPO, the authentic representative of the aspirations
of the people.

51. We do not doubt that the Security Council, on
which the principal responsibility for the maintenance of
peace devolves, will take the necessary measures to spare
present and future generations in southern Africa, and,
above all, those of Namibia, from the scourge of war,
52. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria, whom I now invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. OGBU (Nigeria): Mr. President, you are presiding over a meeting which, in the opinion ofmy delegation,
is a momentous one. We observe that the draft resolution
that the Council was to consider has been unanimously
adopted, with the speeches following, an indication that
the Council is indeed seized of this problem and is anxious, under your presidency, to make a positive contribution towards the cause of settling the situation in
Namibia. Your experience in international affairs is well
known, and the commitment
of your country and
Government to the cause of freedom will now be very
much appreciated and welcomed.

48. The African Group did not come here today to start
arguments or to engage in controversy. In requesting this
meeting of the Security Council on the question of

54. The Security Council is meeting again to consider
the situation in Namibia. As the United Nations looks
6

forward to the attainment of self-government and independence by all the Territories placed under mandate
after the First World War, the problem of Namibia
remains unresolved.

fully informed of any new developments concerning the
question of Namibia.
61. In its various resolutions, the United Nations has
clearly laid down the basis for a solution of the problem of
Namibia. These are:

55. South Africa, which obtained the Mandate after a
solemn undertaking to promote the well-being of its
inhabitants, has flagrantly violated its obligations, and
has continued its illegal occupation even after the Man-,
date was terminated by the international community. It
continues its manoeuvres to dismember the Territory and
to dispose of it according to its apartheidideology and the
interests of the white minority it represents.

-First, the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia is illegal and South Africa is under an obligation to
withdraw its administration from Namjbja immediately and
thus put an end to its illegal occupation of the Territory.
There can be no question of the South African rigime
determining the means for the exercise by the Namibian
people of their right to self-determination
and
independence.

56. The United Nations, which has taken over the
responsibility for the people of Namibia, has a sacred
duty to enable them to achieve self-determination and
independence without any compromises and without any
further delays. This matter must occupy the utmost attention of the General Assembly and the Security Council, as
well as of all Member States loyal t,o the principles of the
Charter.

-Secondly, the right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination and independence is inalienable and imprescriptible. They must be enabled freely and with strict regard
to the principles of human equality to exercisetheir right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and under the auspices of the
United Nations.

57. As a first step, in the opinion of my delegation, the
Security Council should take effective measures, as
requested by the General Assembly, to put an end to
South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia so that the
United Nations can assist the people of Namibia to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence.

-Thirdly, the principle of the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia cannot be subject to any conditions.
The establishment of bantustans and the forcible removal of
Namibian people from their homes must stop. In the past
year since the adoption of resolution 342 (1973), the South
African rigime has shown no willingness to abide by these
principles or any positive sign that it intends to do so.

58. More than a year ago, the Security Council discussed the situation in Namibia in the light of the reports
of the Secretary-General on the results of his efforts,
under a mandate from the Security Council, to find means
to establish
L‘. . . the necessary conditions so as to enable the people
of Namibia, freely and with strict regard to the principle of human equality, to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations” [resolution 309
(1972)].

62. The South African representative, in his statement
of 24 October before the Security Council, during the
discussion of the relationship between the United Nations
and South Africa [180&h meering],tried again to mislead
the Council. Let me say that we take note of the declaration that the South African rCgime recognizes that the
Territory has a distinct international status, that it has no
designs on the Territory and that it is for the inhabitants
of the Territory themselves to decide their own fyture. I
must hasten to add, however, in this connexion, that we
deny that the South African rCgime has any right to decide
that Namibia is not one nation but consistsofmanypeoples
according to the convenience and the whims of that rtgime.
We must condemn any attempt by that rtgime to divide the
Territory and its people.

59. The contacts by the Secretary-General with the
South African rCgime in 1972to 1973 showed clearly that
the South African rCgime was not prepared to respond
positively to the conciliatory approach by the United
Nations, They showed that the South African rtgime was
not prepared to accept the basic principles laid down by the
Security Council for a solution of the situation. Instead, that
rkgime attempted to use the contacts to deceive the world
and consolidate apartheidin Namibia. It proceeded with the
establishment of bantustans and the forcible removal of
people so as to destroy the unity of Namibia. Contrary to the
assurances it gave to the Secretary-General and his representatives, it proceeded to institute brutal repression against all
those who demanded the withdrawal of the South African
administration and the right to self-determination and independence for Namibia as a whole.

63. Mr. Botha went on to say that those who have left the
Territory may return to participate in elections and discussions provided they do so in peace, and that they may
propagate any constitutional changes they like within the
requirements of “law and order”. We know very well what
kind of elections the South African rtgime has in mind and
what kind of “law and order“ it seeks to maintain.
64. In flagrant defiance of the United Nations, that regime
is again planning elections in the bantustan of
Ovamboland-where the last elections were boycotted by
98.4 per cent of the people. It continues to enforce repressive
legislation which denies all freedom to the Namibian:
including the notorious Suppression of Communism AC
and the Terrorism Act, as well as the emergency regulation!
No one can even hold a meeting without the permission c
the authorities. Hundreds of people have only recently fle

60. As a result, the Security Council decided unanimously,
in resolution 342 (1973) of 11 December 1973, to discontinue the mandate of the Secretary-General under resolution
309 (1972) and requested him to keep the Security Council
7

from the Territory because of the floggings, the torture and
the detentions.

General Assembly yesterday in this connexion6 and I should
like to repeat it here today.

65. Under such conditions, the South African regimeseeks
to hold elections for seats in a so-called legislative assembly
which hardly has any powers, set up in a bantustan created
to divide the Territory, South African officials have even
made it clear that they intend to dismember the Territory
after these so-called elections.

72. In our view, the Council has no choice but to demand
that South Africa withdraw from Namibia, and to institute
appropriate measures under the Charter to oblige it to do so.
These measures are clearly indicated in the past resolutions
of the Security Council and the recent resolution of the
General Assembly on this subject [resolution 3295 (XXIX)].
We hope that all Member States will lend their full cooperation in implementing such measures.

66. Mr. Botha complained that South Africa wasexpected
by certain United Nations Members to do all the compromising without the United Nations conceding anything. That
statement shows the present mentality of the South African
rtgime. It seems unable to appreciate that the rights of the
Namibian people are inalienable and that there can be no
deals on these rights.

73. We should like to make a special appeal to the three
permanent members of the Security Council and to other
countries which have continued and maintained relations
with the South African regime to co-operate in this respect.
They have indeed a special responsibility. It is because of
their past collaboration that the South African rkgime has
been able to resist and defy the United Nations, to oppress
the people of Namibia and to exploit the resources of the
Territory. We ask them to cease such collaboration and to
exert all their influence in the interests not only of the
Namibian people but of the United Nations itself.

67. The South African regime has violated the sacred trust
placed in it by the world. It now wants the United Nations to
betray the sacred trust it has assumed.
68. We should like to emphasize that the United Nations
can discuss the modalities of enabling the Namibians to
achieve their rights-within the context of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice-but it can
never and should never concede on the principles. It can
never allow the South African regime to supervise the exercise of the right of self-determination by the people of
Namibia, who have been so long oppressed by South Africa,
in violation of its sacred obligation.

74. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council will recall
that at the beginning of our meeting we decided, in accordance with the request made by the representatives of Kenya,
Mauritania and the United Republic of Cameroon, to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to Mr. Mueshihange. In accordance with that
decision, I now invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

69. The developments inside Namibia during the past
year, as reported by the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the Special Committee on decolonization,5
belie the efforts of the South African regime to mislead the
world. It was only a few months ago, in June 1974, that it
announced that it had sent its army to the Caprivi Strip in
defiance of the world. It has resorted to an intensification of
repression in Namibia so that hundreds of people have fled
from the Territory. It has taken no steps to stop the brutal
flogging of the leaders of the people under orders from the
puppet chiefs, in spite of the horror and indignation
expressed by the world community.

75. Mr. MUESHIHANGE:
Before I take up the item
under consideration here, I should like very much, on behalf
of our national movement and also on behalf of all the
valiant people of Namibia, to convey to you, Sir, and
through you to the members of the Council our sincere
thanks for having been given this opportunity to address
once again this august body of the United Nations.
76. The Security Council is seized once again of the problem of Namibia. Indeed, it is a tragic problem which has
been before the United Nations for the last 28 years without
any solution. With every passing day and year, this problem
goes from bad to worse. Now, today, the situation in
Namibia is most critical and constitutes, in our view, a threat
not only to the well-being of all those in southern Africa but
also to. international peace and security.

70. A number of leaders of SWAP0 and its Youth League
have been detained and kept in solitary confinement for
many months. Several have been sentenced to long terms of
imprisonment for demanding the implementation ofunited
Nations resolutions. One of them, Mr. Komati, a 22-yearold youth, was detained for 132days in solitary confinement
with no charges and then accused of scratching political
slogans on the wall of his prison cell with a spoon.

77. For the last 28 years the tragic and brutal story of our
beloved fatherland and the daily sufferings of our people has
been brought repeatedly before various organs of the United
Nations, including the Security Council. Yet, today,
Namibia remains still the most exploited colony and our
people the most oppressed and dehumanized in the whole
world. This situation has been allowed to continue and
deteriorate further because those who could lift their hearts
and arms in defence of freedom and justice would not do so
because they value economic profits more than human life.
Thus, though many times concerns and apprehensions have

71. Instead of signs of conciliation, there has been an
increase in the number of political prisoners, and in the
persecution of all those who seek genuine freedom for
Namibia. We are gravely concerned over reports that some
prisoners are seriously ill. I made an appeal in the plenary
5 Special
Committee
tion of’ the Declalation
Countries
and Peoples.

on the Situation
on the Granting

with regard
to the Implementaof Independence
to Colonial

Ir Official
Record.y of the General
/Yenary Meetings, 2320th
meeting.

8

Assembly,

Twenty-ninlh

Session.

been expressed here and elsewhere by some prominent
members of this very Council, nothing has been done con-.
cretely to remove Fascist colonialism and white supremacy,
from the soil of Namibia.

bill of indictment against South Africa in respect of Namibia
and Point the way for that rCgime to withdraw immediately
from our country and hand over all power to the Namibian
People through the United Nations. This will demonstrate
Sincerity, good will and indeed a correct attitude by the
Vorster r&&tie towards the Namibian problem and will
Pave the way for a genuine southern African dCtente, which
would mean peace and harmony for all those who have
made Namibia their home. What is unacceptable to US is the
continued illegal occupation of our country and the white
man’s arrogant belief that he can perpetuate white supremacy in southern Africa. And here, South Africa is the
bulwark of colonialism and racist reaction. It is in part for
that reason that that r&me stands today excluded by democratic majority vote from the current sessionof the General
Assembly.

78. However, we have never asked for mercy or pity from
the Organization or from anybody, for we know that the
price of liberty is suffering, and often loss of human lives.
We have long committed our people to use all means at our
disposal to free ourselves, with support and assistance from
the United Nations-but,
if need be, by ourselves.
79. This time, as in the past, we appear before this
august body to reaffirm our faith in the principles and
philosophy of the Charter of the United Nations. We
appear also to reaffirm ourselves-our inalienable rights
to freedom, to life and to an independent political existence as one sovereign people, as masters in and over one
united Namibia.
80. After many years of impassive confrontation and
hostility between the forces of national liberation and the
forces of colonialism and racism in southern Africa, supported and abetted by certain powerful members of
NATO and others, there seems to be a prospect of forward changes in the field of decolonization in that region
of the African continent. Recent events in the Portugueseadministered Territories resulting from the successful
struggle of the liberation movements there have demonstrated conclusively that the march of the oppressed and
colonized peoples towards freedom and independence is
an inevitable and logical process of history. No amount of
repression or tyranny can forever reverse this process,
81. It is therefore timely that the illegal rCgime of Pretoria in Namibia fully recognize this historic imperative: that
Namibia shall be free, as Guinea-Bissau is and as Mozambique, Angola and others soon will be. We all desire a just
and peaceful solution of the political problems in Namibia,
but we do not want peace at any price. No. We shall
continue to struggle to ensure that Namibia achieves freedom and independence as one country and as one people.
On this we shall never compromise. It is for Vorster and his
agents in Namibia to recognize this and desist at once from
doing anything by design or default that will violate or ’
destroy the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a
nation.
82. At this point in time, I do not wish to recount the
substance and details of the Namibian problem-the criminal repression and murder of our people under Vorster’s
illegal, brutal and tyrannical system. This we have already
done in the past and recently here and elsewhere. This time,
during this debate of the Security Council on Namibia, I
seriously wonder aloud, in the light of the realistic response
of the new Government of Portugal vis-A-vis Mozambique,
Angola, Sao Tome and Principe and more recent developments in southern Africa, whether there is any basis for hope
that the illegal rtgime of Vorster in Namibia is prepared to
commit itself, at last, to accepting the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council
as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971, all of which together form a basic

83. In this connexion, it is now up to Vorster to do right.
The matter that the Security Council is still seized ofnamely, the relationship between South Africa and the
Organization-in
our view involves three broad areas in
which the Pretoria rCgime is obdurately defying international law and the authority of the United Nations. The first
one is the obnoxious policy of apartheid itself which is
brutally being imposed as a matter of law and policy by a
racist minority upon the indigenous African majority. No
change is in sight here. Secondly, there is South Africa’s
interference in Rhodesian affairs through its military presence there and otherwise through the breaking of economic
and diplomatic sanctions imposed by the Council against
the illegal rtgime in Rhodesia in 1968. Thirdly, and lastly,
there is the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa, a country for which the United Nations has
direct responsibility. In each one of thesecases,and in others
as well, it is the defiance of the Pretoria regime and the
recalcitrance of certain members of the Council which exasperate the already strained relationship between Pretoria
and the Organization.
84. Thus, while we jubilantly welcome the initiatives of
the new Lisbon authorities in regard to Portugueseadministered Territories and look upon the recent positive developments in Zimbabwe favourably, and while we
remain convinced that victory inevitably will be ours in
Namibia as well, we regret the fact that the illegal rCgime
of Pretoria still persists in disfiguring the territorial integrity
and national unity of Namibia, notwithstanding appeals,
recommendations, condemnations and warnings by the
overwhelming democratic majority of the world. All these
efforts appear to have fallen on deafears. It is said, “There is
none so deaf as he who will not hear”.
85. Mr. President and members of the Council, I am
launching a serious appeal to you and particularly to those
members of the Council who are listened to by Vorster and
his cohorts to use your good offices to convince that criminal group to comply with and commit themselves to the
resolutions and the decisions of the United Nations, including the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of June 1971, In the name of peaceand justice, it may be
necessaryfor the friends and allies of Pretoria to scream into
the ears of the Vorster group, though this may be inconvenient for that group’s eardrums. We still think it is better
that way than the other way, which is to bring them to their

9

senseswith the staccato of a machine gun. We too come here
with an olive branch in one hand and a freedom-fighter’s
gun in the other. It is up to the Pretoria rCgime and its
protectors to decide which one of these two objects will
remain in our hands.

90. We firmly maintain that the illegal regime of
Pretoria has no business in Namibia and must be compelled
by the collective power of the international community to
withdraw immediately from Namibia. In this connexion, we
remain convinced that the powerful couptries of the West
should prevail over their friend and ally--South Africa-to
come to terms with the demands of the Namibians and the
overwhelming majority of the world.

86. The cardinal objective of our struggle is not-is not, I
repeat-to come to terms with colonialism and white supremacy and bantustans in Namibia; rather, it is to eradicate all
this from our soil and to establish a new democratic society
under majority rule where all, black or white,all Namibians,
natural or naturalized, can contribute individually and collectively to the best of their abilities towards the general
well-being and prosperity of a united Namibia.

91. In conclusion, Mr. President, we thank you and your
colleagues once agam for this opportunity to address the
Council. It is significant that you, Sir, a distinguished representative of a new, progressive and dynamic Government
and country, Australia, are presiding over this debate. You
are an old hand in diploma’cy and international affairs. We
trust that your experience and personal commitment to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations will ensure
that justice is finally done with regard to Namibia and the
Namibians.

87. We feel that if the racist leader of South Africa intends
to convince black Africa and the world, he must first and
foremost start by accepting his obligations under international law in respect of Namibia and in that context comply
fully with al1 the relevant resolutions of the United Nations
and the recommendations of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971. This means a commitment by that
rCgime to withdraw from Namibia so that we, the people of
Namibia, can attain freedom and independence as soon as
possible. This is where Vorster must start, for Namibia is
one place where he clearly has no business. We say so. The
United Nations said so. And so did the international
tribunal.

92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Morocco, and I now invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
93. Mr. ZAi’MI (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
Ambassador Slaovi, representative of Morocco, had intended to participate in this debate in person, but he had to
return to Rabat for urgent consultations and he has asked
me to read out the statement he had prepared.

88. The New York Timesof today’s date carries an article in
which Vorster is reported to have suggested ‘*a plan to settle
the prolonged Rhodesian crisis”. If this means that Vorster
has finally decided to disengage from Rhodesia so that the
problem there can be solved by the people of the area, and so
that a majority rule can be established, this would be a most
welcome change, If, however, this is but another example of
Vorster’s double talk or a sinister scheme to confuse the
situation in southern Africa, then, of course, this action
must be exposed, condemned and rejected. Vorster must be
told seriously and categorically that if he wishes for peace
and co-operation with the rest of Africa he must openly
table a plan to withdraw from Namibia and another plan for
South Africa itself which will, in time, effect a majority rule
there as well, Then South Africa might expect not only good
will and generosity from the rest of Africa, and indeed from
the world, but also perhaps acceptability at last.

94. My delegation, which is addressing the Council today
on behalf of the Group of Arab States and of the Kingdom
of Morocco, would like first of all to express to you, Sir, and
to the members of the Council our deep gratitude for having
allowed us to participate in this debate on the crucial problem of Namibia.
95. Twenty-nine years have elapsed since the United
Nations began to concern itself with this problem. In that
time it has never recorded any true progress, that is to say
that the Organization has not succeeded in obtaining from
the Government ofSouth Africa which illegally occupies the
Territory of Namibia the slightest commitment regarding
the evacuation of the Territory. The question of Namibia is,
therefore, nothing new and it is not my intention to dwell at
length on its various aspects. Nonetheless, it may not be
amiss on my part to recall briefly certain facts which may
serve as points of departure.

89. Instead of fulfilling these obligations and recommendations regarding Namibia, the racist leader of South Africa
is practising repression and brutality in Namibia on our
people. Then he continues to utter warnings and threats
against our people and black Africa, as he did recently in a
broadcast on 5 November 1974, from which I quote: “We
will not tolerate any threats of violence, Order must be and
will be maintained in South West Africa”. Now, who is
using threats and violence? Is not the Vorster regimethe one
which is illegally occupying Namibia? Is it not Vorster and
his agents in Namibia who are daily brutalizing, imprisoning
and even murdering our people? Is it not Fascist South
Africa which is violating the territorial integrity of the neighbouring African republics? Who is this group trying to fool?
Not us, and we hope not this august body.

96. I should like to remind the Council, for example, that
at the very first session of the General Assembly the Government of South Africa went so far as to dare to call for the
integration of Namibia into its own territory. This fact in
itself is implicit but clear recognition of United Nations
competence in the matter. But this surprising request was
rejected by the General Assembly, and rightly so, and South
Africa was invited to transfer its Mandate over Namibia to
the Organization. All peaceful means were invoked, but in
vain, in our attempt to reach a solution with the Government of South Africa that would allow the people of
Namibia to exercise its right to self-determination and
independence.
10

97. As long ago as its twenty-first session, the General
Assembly put an end to South Africa’s Mandate and
placed the Territory under the direct respo&bility
Ofthe
United Nations. The United Nations Council for
Namibia, Which was subsequently established, was
entrusted with the administration of this Territory
pending its accession to independence. The advisory opinion
of the hlterIlatiOna~
Court of Justice handed down on 21
June 1971 confirmed the mandate ofthe Security
Council
and supported without reservations the justice
of the
decision taken by the General Assembly to put an end to
South Africa’s Mandate and to assume direct responsibi]ity for Namibia until it had attained independence,

rePresentatiVe of South Africa when he addressedthe secu%’ Council. That representative confirmed in particular
information to the effect that his Government supported
the
ProPosal of the white National Party regarding possible
negotiatiohs on a multiracial basis betweenthe "peoples"
of
Namibia on the subject of the constitutional future of the
Territory.
103. As SWAP0 has emphasized in a letter dated 26
September last, addressed to the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, this was “a well-calculated
and deliberate political manceuvre aimed at misleading
world public opinion”,

98. This brief historical review of this question that we are
dealing with here today was essential if only to demonstrate
that, despite all the efforts made over the decades by the
Organization, and in particular, by the Security Council,
South Africa has always rejected all co-operation with the
United Nations to reach a solution that would enable the
people of Namibia freely to exercise its right to selfdetermination and independence.

104. Moreover, in his statement to the Security Council
[18ooth meeting], the representative of the racist rdgime of
Pretoria added:
“The administration of the Territory has been directed
towards achieving the greatest good for the greatest
number of the Territory’s peoples. And they are exceedingly disparate as to their cultures and development.
“ *. I

99. However, following upon the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, for the first time South
Africa agreed that the Secretary-General should visit
Namibia. That aroused a faint hope in all ofus that we might
finally see South Africa engaged in a dialogue with the
United Nations on the question. We thought, though not
without reservations, that the opening of the door to dialogue might lead to a change in the attitude of the Pretorian
rdgime; but that glimmer of hope, that illusion, was shortlived. The conversations which the Secretary-General and
his representative had with South Africa were broken off
very abruptly, and on 11 December 1973 the Security Council was compelled to adopt resolution 342 (1973) whereby it
decided not to pursue further efforts on the basis of resolution 309 (1972).

“It is not for South Africa nor for the United Nations
but for the peoples of the Territory themselves to decide
upon their political future. And all options are open to
them in this regard,”
We are confronted here with a fallacious and hypocritical
statement. The reference made to the diversity of cultures
and social levels is to us confirmation of the stubborn determination of the racist rCgime of Pretoria in pursuit of its
policy of fragmentation, called “bantustanization”.
105. During this period the situation in Namibia has steadily deteriorated, as is emphasized by the Secretary-General
in the introduction to his report to the General Assembly.’
The tragic fate in which the Namibian people finds itself is
described in a report prepared by the Special Committee,
which notes that “during the past year, . +there has been an
escalation of police terror and intimidation of Namibians
both by the illegal rCgimeof South Africa and by the authorities of the so-called ‘homelands’“.8

100. South Africa alone bears the resporsibility for this
situation because once again it has demonstrated evident
bad faith. It was clear, in fact, that the racist regime of
Pretoria had used contacts with the United Nations for
internal political purposes in order to try to emerge from its
isolation and to advertise its own idea of self-determination,
a concept that has as its goal the domination of the Namibian people and the perpetuation of the unlawful occuPation of the international Territory of Namibia.

106. In their respective reports, the Special Committee
and the United Nations Council for Namibia denounce all
measures of repression, whose victims are the people of
Namibia, the Territory where the illegal rtgime of Pretoria
is pursuing its illegal policy of apartheid and “bantustanization”.

101. Although contacts with South Africa have not lived
up to our expectations, the fact nonetheless remains that the
mission of our Secretary-General and his representative to
Namibia made it possible to clear up certain doubts. On the
one hand, it demonstrated, as has already been emphasized,
that the policy of South Africa remained unchanged and
that this racist rbgime intended to maintain the Namibian
people under its domination; on the other hand, that same
mission had the merit of demonstrating to those who were
still in doubt that the Namibian people, one and indivisible,
had expressed
its firm determination to exercise its right to
self-determination and independence in a united Namibia.

107. In the face of such pitiless repression and in view of
the illegal occupation by South Africa of an international
Territory-which constitutes a typical act of aggressionthe Security Council is duty bound to find the means tc, Put
an end to that situation, particularly since the United
Nations has assumed responsibility for the defence of the
Namibian people and the future of this international Territory.
Some would like to have us believe that the Organization is powerless in the face of such a situation. For our part,

102. rile arrogant attitude of the Pretorian rkgime was
expressed once again quite recently in the statement of the
11

7 Ibid.,

Twellty-ninth

Session.

8 Ibid.,

Supplement

No. 23, chap.

Supplemen

IX, pm.

NO. IA. P. 6.

Il.

Organization of African Unity for the current year and on
behalf of my delegation, our most sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of December.

we believe that, confronted by the illegal occupation of an
international Territory and an act of aggression, the Organization, and in particular the Security Council, should undertake effective action by appropriate means. The unlawful
occupation of this intern,ational Territory by South Africa
constitutes a threat to peace and a typical act of aggression,
and thus the Council is duty bound, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, to take appropriate
measures to put an end to this serious situation.

115. I am most grateful to you and to the members of
the Council for this opportunity to address the Council on
the question of Namibia. This question was given particular attention at the summit conference of the Organization of African Unity held in June this year because the
African States are acutely conscious of the fact that the
situation with regard to that Territory has reached a
critical stage. The situation is critical because no one can
pretend any longer that South Africa needs more time in
which to comply with the United Nations resolutions on
Namibia. The African heads of State took the realistic
view-and this is reflected in the, important resolution on
Namibia adopted by the summit ,conference-that
the
Security Council must be prepared to implement its decisions on Namibia, if necessary through the enforcement
measures provided under Chapter VII of the Charter.

108. The Arab peoples who themselves are the victims of
Zionist occupation can only, out of justice, manifest their
full solidarity with the valiant Namibian people, which is
carrying on a legitimate struggle against the racist South
African occupiers. Here, we would like to assure this heroic
people and its authentic leaders of our active and continuing
support.
109. It should also be emphasized that the collaboration of
certain Powers, in various areas, with South Africa, and
foreign investments in Namibia, are harmful to the cause of
the Namibian people and constitute a source of encouragement to the racist rCgime to flout the resolutions of our
Organization. As waspointed out some time ago in Foreign
Affairs Magazine, “the role of international investments has
consolidated the programme of the National Party with a
view to maintaining white domination”.

116. It is nine years since the General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa-a
decision which has been repeatedly endorsed and reaffirmed by the Security Council. It is four years since the
International Court of Justice gave its advisory opinion
that South Africa’s continued presence in Namibia constituted an illegal occupation of the Territory, and during
these years the main organs of the United Nations have
repeatedly condemned this illegal occupation and called
on South Africa to withdraw from the Territory.

110. Accordingly, we should like to appeal to those Powers to put an e’nd to all co-operation with the Pretoria rCgime
and to exercise pressure on the companies under their
authority in order to compel them to cease investing in
Namibia and exhausting the natural resources of that
Territory.

117. For two years the Secretary-General, at the request
of the Security Council, made a special effort to find
common ground with the Pretoria regime for the implementation of the United Nations decisions on Namibia,
but, as we know, even the superficial changes that were
promised have not been forthcoming. Indeed, far from
moving towards the establishment of a just and free
society, the rCgime has tightened its oppressive hold on
the Namibian people, The South African Government
has continued to carry out its plan to keep the Namibian
people politically handicapped and permanently cheated
of their natural resources through the imposition of
bantustans-an
arrangement long condemned by the
United Nations as being fundamentally inequitablepolitical repression has become more brutal and the
uniquely inhuman racism of apartheid is continued in
violation of the human rights of the people of the
Territory.

111. We are convinced that the Council, which has
assumed responsibility for the future of Namibia and the
defence of the people of that Territory, will be able, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, to
find effective means for putting an end to South Africa’s
challenge to the Organization and to regain the international Territory of Namibia, We would like to believe that
the members of the Council-all its members-will know
how to shoulder their responsibilities in order to put an end
to the serious situation prevailing in Namibia, which constitutes a serious threat to international peace.
112. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that
I have just iedeived a letter from the representative of Somalia requesting that Somalia be invited to participate in our
discussion, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council wishes to grant that request and shall accordingly
invite the representative of Somalia to participate in our
discussion without the right to vote.

118. It is obvious that the hope of achieving progress
through reasoned discussion and peaceful negotiation
was an illusion. Also illusory was the hope that the NATO
Powers on the Security Council would demonstrate in
practical ways the support for United Nations decisions
on Namibia which they have expressed in theory. Their
nationals continue with impunity to exploit and plunder
the resources of the land and people of Namibia; the arms
embargo, which was recognized by the Security Council
as having significance for the question of Namibia, is
flagrantly and continuously violated, and the recent triple
veto of the proposal to expel South Africa for its repeated

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Hussein (Somalia)
took a place at the Council table.

113. The PRESIDENT:
Somalia.

I now call on the representative of

114. Mr. HUSSEIN (Somalia): Mr. President, permit me
lirst of all to express to you, on behalf of the Chairman of the
12

violations of human rights and of the .principles and
purposes of the Charter was a blow to the cause of freedom in Namibia.

needed to implement its decisions, including if necessary
the use of the enforcement measures provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. While it must be hoped that
the South African Government will act in accordance
with its responsibilities, the experience not only of the
past 9 but of the past 29years leaves little ground for hope
that the South African Government will follow the path
of reason, justice and reconciliation.

119. l?ortunately there are other movements and influences in southern Africa besides those motivated by commercial and narrowly conceived strategic interests, The success
of the liberation struggle in the Portuguese-administered
Territories is evidence of the determination and ability of
peoples fighting for their right to self-determination and
independence. The forward-looking policy of the new
Government in Portugal is a good indication of the direction of the winds of change now blowing through southern
Africa. The United Nations, with its special responsibility
for the liberation of Namibia, must not fail to use all its
moral authority and all the practical measures at its command so that the advantage gained by reason of recent
events in southern Africa can be pressed home and the
inevitable and historic process of decolonization be speedily
completed.
120. The course of action open to the world community
is clear. In order to give effect to its decisions on Namibia,
the Security Council must demand from South Africa,
ante and for all, a clearand unequivocal commitment to a
speedy withdrawal from Namibia. It must demand, too,
that immediate steps be taken to end political repression,
policies of racial discrimination and efforts to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia.
121. During the historic debate in October 1966 which
led to the termination of South Africa’s Mandate, the
Somali representative warned, even then, that the United
Nations would have to bc prepared to take all steps

122. If it continues in its intransigence and its contempt
for the Organization, then the Security Council will be
faced with the inescapable duty of resorting to those
means which it is entitled to use under the Charter. It must
enforce its decisions in the interests of international peace
and security and for the preservation of its authority and
credibility, for it cannot be denied that South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia, in defiance of the United
Nations and of the International Court of Justice, is an
act of international aggression. Primary responsibility for
ending this situation rests with the Security Council. If the
Council were to remain impassive in the face of South
Africa’s open defiance, then it would be tantamount to
the abandonment of the world Organization’s collective
responsibility for the Territory and people of Namibia
and a tacit endorsement of the continued usurpation of
their land and rights by South Africa.
123. My delegation trusts that the Security Council will
‘face up to its grave responsibilities with regard to
‘Namibia, with regard to the preservation of the authority
of the United Nations and with regard to thepreservation
of international peace and security.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

13
