154

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

report on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
l l 9th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/199. Co-operation between the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
and the United Nations Environment Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 62 of 19 December 1977
and 35/77 B of 5 December 1980,
Having considered resolution 8/14 adopted by the Commission on Human Settlements on 8 May 198588 and decision 13/ l 2 adopted by the Goveming Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on 23 May
1985, 83
Decides to discontinue the annual meetings of the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) and the bureau of the Commission
on Human Settlements with the Executive Director ofthe
United Nations Environment Programme and the bureau
of its Governing Council.
l 19th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985

40/200. International co-operation in the field of the
environment
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the intemational dimension of environmental problems, the role of environmental factors in the
broader economic and social context, and the importance
of taking environmental considerations fully into account
in the implementation of the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 22
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its thirteenth session, 82
Having considered a/so the report of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Env1ronment Programme
on intemational conventions and prv:ncols in the field of
the environment, 89
Noting with deep concern that the harmful consequences
of the drought and desertification seriously affecting many
countries, in particular African countries, are exacerbated
by the continued erosion of the resource base for the
development of those countries,
Reaffirming the importance of the interrelationships
between resources, environment, people and development,
and the need to take those interrelationships into account
in development policies and strategies,
Stressing the importance of an international exchange of
experience and knowledge conceming the protection ofthe
environment,
Noting the activity of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the subject "The arms race and the environment", in accordance with its programme of work as
adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme,
88 See Official Rtcords of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 8" (A/40/8 and Corr.1 ). anncx I, sect. A.
89 UNEP/GC.13/1 O.

Mindful of the sovereign rights of States o ver their natural resources, including their forests,
Noting a/so the activities of the United Nations and
other intemational organizations, as well as the intemational initiatives being taken that are directed towards the
important objective of rational management, protection
and rehabilitation of the world's forests,
Reca/ling its resolution 38/ l 6 l of 19 December 1983 on
the process of preparation of the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond,
1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
work of its thirteenth session and endorses the decisions
contained therein, 82 as adopted;
2. Welcomes the decision ofthe Governing Council to
change to a biennial cycle of sessions on an experimental
basis and in this regard takes note of the establishment of
the open-ended Committee of Pennanent RepresenLltives
to facilitate this process; 90
3. Invites the Governing Council, when reviewing the
experiment with the organization of a biennial work programme, to consider changes that may in consequence be
necessary in the functioning of the Council. mcluding the
term of membership;
4. Welcomes section lII of decision 13/ l of 23 May
1985, 83 and decision 13/10 of24 May 1985 83 by which the
Governing Council initiated steps towards the preparation
of the system-wide medium-term environment programme for the period 1990-1995 and invited the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to review and further develop the methodology in the light ofthe experience
gained in the system-wide medium-term cnvironment
programme for the period 1984-1989;
5. Takes note of the work done by the Special Commission on the Environmental Perspective to the Year
2000 and Beyond, which has adopted the name World
Commission on Environment and Development, and by
the Intergovemmental Inter-sessional Preparatory Committee on the Environmental Perspective to the Year 2000
and Beyond in the prepara t. .,n of their reports. and recalls
the relationship between the Commi~1oion aHJ the Committee, as set out in General Assembly resolution 38/161;
6. Takes note ofthe progress on international conventions and protocols in the field of the environment during
1985, including the aJoption of the Vienna Convention
for the Protection of the Ozone Layer and of an international protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-range
Transboundary Air Pollution, on sulphur emissions and
fluxes, and the organization ofthe first meeting ofthe Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals;
7. Considers that measmes to deal with the erosion of
the natural resource base in countries affected by drought
and desertification should have as one oftheir major aims
the sustainable exploitation and increased productivity of
that natural resource base;
8. Welcomes the importance attached by the Governing Council to regional approaches and programmes
relating to international co-operation in the field of the
environment, and in this context stresses the relevance of
specific regional planning identified hy the regions themselves;
9. Notes with appreciation the convening of the first
African Ministerial Conference on the Environment at
Cairo from 16 to 18 December 1985;
90 See Officia/ Records of the General Assernhl>•· Fortieth
ment No. J5 (A/40/2~). annex, decision 1312.

s...,.,wn. Supp/,•.

V.

ISS

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

10. Ca/Is upon the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme to co-ordinate further
the activities ofthe Programme with those of other organizations ofthe United Nations system, to co-operate appropriately with the organizers of the intemational initiatives
on the future of the forests, and to report thereon to the
Goveming Council;
11. Reaffirms the need to strengthen the co-ordinating
role of the United Nations Environment Programme and
the need for additional resources to assist developing
countries in dealing with serious environmental problems,
and urges the Executive Director of the Programme, in
consultation with Govemments and the intemational
organizations concemed, to accelerate and intensify his
efforts in that field;
12. Expresses its appreciation to the Govemments that
continue to contribute to the Fund of the United Nations
Environment Programme, particularly those that have
increased their contributions, and urges those Govemments that have not yet paid their pledged contributions to
the Fund for 1985 or made pledges for 1986 to do so in the
near future.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/201. Living conditions of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Palestinian territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976,91 and the relevant recommendations for
national action 92 adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also its resolution 39/ l 69 of 17 December
1984,
Taking note of Commission on Human Settlements resolution 8/3 of 10 May 1985, 88
Grave/y alarmed by the continuation of the Israeli settlement policies, which have been declared null and void and
a major obstacle to peace,
Recognizing the need to identify priority development
projects needed for improving the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories,
1. Takes note with concern of the report of the Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories; 93
2. Takes note a/so of the statement made on 25
October 1985 by the observer of the Palestine Liberation
Organization; 94
3. Rejects the Israeli plans and actions intended to
change the demographic composition of the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the increase and expansion of the lsraeli settlements, and other plans and actions
creating conditions leading to the displacement and exodus of Palestinians from the occupied Palestinian territories;
4. Expresses its a/arm at the deterioration, as a result
of the Israeli occupation, in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967;
5. Affirms that the Israelí occupation is contradictory
to the basic requirements for the social and economic
9I Report of Habita/: United Natwns Conference on Human Selllements.
Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.7 and comgendum), chap. l.
92 /bid., chap. 11.
93 A/40/373-E/1985/99

development of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize, by April 1987, a seminar on priority
development projects needed for improving the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories, including a comprehensive general housing
programme, as recommended in resolution 8/3 of the
Commission on Human Settlements;
(b) To make the necessary preparations for the seminar, providing for the participation ofthe Palestine Liberation Organization;
(e) To invite experts to present papers to the seminar;
(d) To invite also relevant intergovemmental and nongovemmental organizations;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the
preparations for the seminar;
(/} To report to the General Assembly at its fortysecond session, through the Economic and Social Council,
on the seminar.
l 19th p/enary meeting
17 December 1985

40/202.

Human settlements
A

REPORT OF THE COMMISSION
ON HUMAN SETILEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 32/ l 62 of 19 December
1977 on institutional arrangements for intemational cooperation in the field ofhuman settlements and 34/116 of
14 December 1979 on the strengthening of human settlements activities,
Conscious of the very substantial gap between the
resources available through voluntary contributions to the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat)
and the needs of developing countries requesting assistance from the Centre,
Having considered the report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its eighth session, 95
1. Takes note of the report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its eighth session;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the progress which
the Commission and its secretariat, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), have continued
to make in providing guidance and assistance to Govemments in their efforts to provide adequate shelter and services to their people, particularly the poor and disadvantaged;
3. Calls upon all Govemments to accord the requisite
priority in their development and development assistance
94 Offic1al Records of the Genera! 1sseml>ly, Fortieth Se.rnon, Second Com
mi/lee, 17th meeting, paras. 93-99
9 5 ll>1d .. Fortieth Sesswn. Su¡,p,eml'nt No. 8 (A/40/8 and Corr.1 ).
