A /69/PV.4

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

4th plenary meeting

Monday, 22 September 2014, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 9.10 a.m.
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples
Agenda item 65
Rights of indigenous peoples
High-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly to be known as the
World Conference on Indigenous Peoples
Draft resolution (A/69/L.1)
The President: The World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples, the first ever convened, is truly
a historic event. It is a great privilege and honour to
welcome everyone present in the General Assembly
today.
At the outset, let me pay tribute to the indigenous
peoples of this land — the Haudenosaunee, also known
as the Six Nations or Iroquois. I also wish to send a
warm embrace to indigenous peoples around the world.
I am truly honoured to preside over this Conference,
which must focus on the challenges facing indigenous
peoples and on renewed commitments by Member
States to address them.
The World Conference on Indigenous Peoples
is a culmination of the dynamic interface between
the United Nations and the indigenous peoples of the
world over the past 50 years. The process leading to
this Conference has been unprecedented in the history
of the Organization, as it has involved the active
participation of indigenous peoples in its preparation

as well as cooperation between Member States and
indigenous peoples in the preparation of the draft
outcome document. We are indeed heartened by the
inclusive nature of the preparatory process, which
bodes well for the implementation of post-Conference
commitments.
For more than 30 years, indigenous peoples’ issues
have been a preoccupation at the United Nations.
Negotiations between Member States and indigenous
leaders, under the auspices of the United Nations
Working Group on Indigenous Populations, were
indeed long and protracted, but they eventually led to
the General Assembly’s adoption of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in
2007.
Most important, the Declaration represents a global
consensus on indigenous peoples’ rights and affirms
their right to self-determination. Furthermore, it accords
pre-eminence to collective rights in international
human rights law and serves to galvanize international
attention on the protection of both the individual and
collective rights of indigenous peoples.
It is important to note the valuable contributions
of the institutional arrangements that have served to
translate the objectives of the Declaration into reality
and fostered specific policies on how the United Nations
should engage with and support the aspirations of
indigenous peoples. Particularly, I would like to mention
the contributions of the United Nations Permanent
Forum on Indigenous Issues, the Inter-Agency Support
Group on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues, the Special

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-54394 (E)

*1454394*

A/69/PV.4

Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples and the
Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
At a national level, there have been many
declarations of commitments, policies and legislative
actions to improve the conditions of indigenous peoples.
Yet there continues to be a deep chasm between those
commitments and reality. The World Conference should
serve as a turning point for translating the Declaration
into concrete action.
The draft outcome document, which we will adopt
today, is another pact between indigenous peoples and
Member States that builds on the Declaration. It is
carefully crafted and comprises many action-oriented
commitments directed towards addressing the gaps
in the implementation of the Declaration. Included
among the commitments are a system-wide action
plan to ensure coherence in the various efforts towards
realization of the provisions of the Declaration, as well
as a call for enhancing the participation of indigenous
peoples and their representative institutions at the
United Nations.
This World Conference is an opportunity for
Member States to engage indigenous peoples in a more
strategic and beneficial manner. That will require
Member States to make greater efforts to translate the
draft outcome document into reality and to demonstrate
resolve in addressing inequities that adversely affect
indigenous communities. Member States must also
follow through on capacity-building commitments that
will allow indigenous peoples to manage their own
affairs.
In conclusion, let me urge Member States,
intergovernmental organizations, civil society and the
private sector to make a renewed commitment towards
strategic partnership with indigenous peoples to help in
their quest for a sustainable future,
I now give the floor to Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I wish to thank those
attending for coming to the United Nations for this
historic, first-ever World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples. I am going to greet the General Assembly in
a few indigenous languages. I am sorry that I cannot
speak in every language represented in the Assembly,
but please consider this my way of welcoming each
person.

2/21

22/09/2014

Takahi (Taíno — Latin America), Aweh (South
Africa), Kia ora (New Zealand), Buorre beaivvi
(Saami — Norway and Sweden), Hao (Lakota — North
America), Kopisanangani (Dusun-Sabah, Malaysia).
This is the most important week of the year at the
United Nations, and this Conference is one of our most
important events because it connects so much of our
most critical work. Indigenous peoples are concerned
about issues that top the global agenda. They are deeply
connected to Mother Earth, whose future is at the heart
of the Climate Summit opening tomorrow. Indigenous
peoples are central to our discourse on human rights
and global development. The Assembly’s deliberations
and decisions will reverberate across the international
community with concrete effects in the lives of
indigenous people. The success of this Conference is
integral to progress for all humankind.
(spoke in Spanish)
In order to prepare myself for this Conference, I
met with many indigenous leaders to listen to the things
they were concerned about and to learn from their
experiences.
In June, I went to Bolivia, a country that has
made enormous progress in the areas of the rights of
indigenous peoples. President Morales was a decisive
driving force for this conference.
The people of El Torno were very warm and
generous. I was very much impressed by their wealth
of culture. They taught me about the relationship of
respect between indigenous peoples and nature. This
could be summed up in the expression that I adopted in
Bolivia: “Good living,” which means to live well, but in
a simpler way.
(spoke in English)
In July, I held talks with indigenous leaders in
Costa Rica. The former Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica, Eduardo Ulibarri, also actively promoted
this conference. We had a meaningful, open discussion.
I listened closely to what the indigenous leaders had to
say. They were worried about land, resources and their
rights. I repeated my pledge to address the exclusion
and marginalization facing many indigenous peoples
around the world.
Earlier this month, I was in New Zealand, where I
travelled to Taupo to spend a day with Maori leaders.
They were using their great respect for nature to build

14-54394

22/09/2014

prosperity. I was impressed by their multimillion-dollar
horticulture, waste-management and energy-production
companies. I will never forget how every bit of waste
is fed to worms that create very rich organic fertilizer.
That is sustainability in action. It showed how much the
world can learn from indigenous peoples.
I will continue visiting indigenous communities and
hearing from their leaders, and they will always have a
home at the United Nations. I am proud that the General
Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples (resolution 61/295) during my first
year in office. That set minimum standards for the
survival, dignity and well-being of indigenous peoples.
More and more countries are reflecting those principles
in their laws and constitutions. United Nations agencies
have also developed specific policies to guide our work
for indigenous peoples, and we are joining forces with
indigenous peoples to reach our common goals.
I am pleased to welcome representatives of our
leading experts, the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues, and the Special Rapporteur and the Expert
Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. I am
sure they would agree that it is important to get pledges
from Governments — but it is even more important to
see actions. That is why I am encouraged that the draft
conference outcome document (A/69/L.1) contains
action-oriented commitments to bridge the gap between
promises and results. I thank all the indigenous peoples
and Governments that cooperated in good faith to
produce that draft. And I expect Member States to meet
their commitments, including by carrying out national
action plans to realize our shared vision.
I welcome the outcome document’s direct requests
to me. I will also consult the rest of the United Nations
system on the way forward. We will work closely with
all of the indigenous peoples and the Member States.
The outcome document also requests that I develop
concrete proposals to enable indigenous peoples and
their institutions to more directly participate in our
United Nations activities. That is critical for indigenous
communities — and for our world. The outcome
document also asks me to appoint a high-level official
on indigenous peoples. I will give that my most serious
consideration. The United Nations will do everything
possible to support indigenous peoples — and we count
on their engagement in our global drive for a more
sustainable future.
I began with greetings in a few indigenous
languages. I know there are thousands of others. Some

A/69/PV.4

of them are in danger of extinction. I am proud that
the Declaration has been translated beyond the United
Nations’ six official languages into 50 other languages.
I hope we can add many more to the long list. At
the same time, I count on the indigenous peoples to
speak with one voice. A long-time indigenous activist
and former member of the Permanent Forum, Tonya
Gonnella Frichner, once said: “Indigenous peoples all
speak many different languages but in our meetings, we
are speaking one language. Our relationship to Mother
Earth is identical.”
I urge the indigenous peoples to join their voices in
a harmonious chorus to secure their rights and protect
our planet. The United Nations stands with them in this
struggle.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his multilingual statement.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Evo Morales Ayma, Constitutional
President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
President Morales Ayma (spoke in Spanish):
I offer special wishes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, to the President of the General Assembly, to
all the representatives of States Members of the United
Nations and to the representatives of the indigenous
peoples of the world who are here and those who are
listening to this first World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples.
First, on behalf of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
I would like to thank and congratulate the SecretaryGeneral for having ensured for us the convening of
this first official summit of the United Nations on
indigenous peoples. I would like to say to all here, and
to those listening, that the fundamental principles of the
indigenous movement are life, Mother Earth and peace.
Those fundamental principles of indigenous peoples
throughout the world are constantly being threatened
by a system, the capitalist system, a model of how one
can put an end to life and Mother Earth itself. That is
why I want to say to all of my brothers and sisters that
I have come here to share with them some experiences
that I have had during my short period of ruling Bolivia
as a President who comes from the social movement,
the indigenous people’s movement.
In the history of Bolivia, indigenous people have
been the most hated, humiliated, vilified, marginalized
and discriminated against. Thanks to the struggle
and awareness of my brothers, not just the indigenous

14-543943/21

A/69/PV.4

movement but also the social movements have had an
opportunity to share experiences in order to defend life
and change the models that so threaten life and nature
itself.
I would like to tell the Assembly first of all that,
historically in Bolivia, the indigenous movement was
able only to vote, but not to govern. In this short time,
we have shown that the indigenous movement does not
exist simply to vote in elections, but also to govern.
Thanks to the struggle of social movements, politics is
no longer a business or a reward. Politics now means
service, commitment and, beyond that, sacrifice on
behalf of our peoples.
Secondly, those who govern the world need to govern
by obeying their people and by working in collaboration
with their people and with social movements. Our people
and nations cannot be governed by bankers, powerful
businessmen or multinational corporations. Bolivia
is the first and only country to have incorporated the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples into its legislation. The Declaration was given
legal status in the Plurinational State of Bolivia in
2007. Likewise, the rights of indigenous peoples were
incorporated into our Constitution, which was approved
by referendum in 2009.
Thirdly, the natural resources so generously
bestowed upon us by our Mother Earth should benefit
all. Bolivia’s oil revenues in 2005, before I became
President, totalled $300 million. This year, following
the nationalization of petrochemicals, oil revenues
will exceed $6 billion. Quite frankly and with all due
sincerity, I would like to let Members know that neither
I nor our Vice-President nor the Cabinet realized how
quickly the economic situation of our country would
change. By nationalizing hydrocarbons, we freed
ourselves economically from the gendarmes of the
world economy, by which I mean the World Bank and,
especially, the International Monetary Fund. Before,
our economic policy was decided by those international
institutions, which follow a model whose primary aim
is the exploitation of our natural resources.
Fourthly, another important theme is climate
change, which has become one of the most serious
problems for the planet and for humanity. The best
way to combat climate change is through the policies,
experience and traditions of the indigenous movement,
which are based on solidarity, complementarity and,
most important of all, a lifestyle in harmony with
Mother Earth. For indigenous peoples, the paradigm
4/21

22/09/2014

of living well means living well with oneself, with our
communities and in harmony with nature.
Fifthly, indigenous peoples need to be the actors of
change, in accord with their own models of development,
with respect for the social, cultural, economic and
judicial plurality of all peoples. We need to strengthen
the links that unite us and to draw on our shared energy
to build a culture of brotherhood, peace and life.
Sixthly, we need to tend and protect the world’s
agricultural lands and forests in order to promote the
full productive potential of our territories, above all
those that belong to indigenous peoples. Indigenous
peoples must likewise strengthen our capacity to
feed all the nations of the world with our organic and
ecological products.
Finally, it is imperative for the indigenous
peoples of the world to achieve the full exercise of
their individual and collective rights to their land and
territories. We need to overcome our limitations with
regard to development through access to education,
health care, water, waste disposal and all basic services.
Thanks to the economic improvement in my country
and to the satellite systems we have installed, some of
our brothers and sisters from isolated places — men
and women who had never even seen the capital city
of their province — are now better served and better
connected, although not all of their demands have been
fully met. It is difficult to meet everyone’s demands in
a short time frame, but change has begun to come to the
various communities of Bolivia. Before, there was no
telephone, no potable drinking water and no electricity.
There was no television and no radio. Now, more than
80 per cent of our provinces and communities have
potable water. Telecommunications reach more than
90 per cent. The major weakness remains the lack of
irrigation systems. Meeting that need remains one of
our responsibilities.
It is critical for all the world’s Governments to
further the process of overcoming and eradicating
the conditions of extreme poverty and discrimination
that still affect indigenous peoples, as well as to find
solutions to the structural problems of poverty that
many of those peoples still face. We have reduced the
poverty rate from 38 per cent to 18 per cent, a historic
record for Bolivia in terms of eradicating poverty.
Indigenous peoples have continuously resisted the
processes of colonization in our countries and have
always preserved the culture of life. We have learned

14-54394

22/09/2014

A/69/PV.4

to live in harmony and equilibrium with Mother Earth,
and we are humanity’s moral reserve. This global
conference should be the starting point for defining our
collective action in defence of life and for launching
a process of transformation and change based on the
wisdom and science of our indigenous peoples, working
directly in concert with the technology and scientific
advances of our time.

from country to country, but in all cases the objective
should be to reach consensus in good faith. In Finland
authorities are obliged by law to negotiate with the Sami
Parliament, the representative body of the indigenous
Sami people. Recently, the Finnish Government worked
together with the Sami Parliament to expand the scope
of the obligation to consult. The proposed reform spells
out the concept of free, prior and informed consent.

Brothers and sisters, it is important, in the interest
of our collective freedom, for me to share our small
experience after taking on the responsibility of working
for my country. We have to free ourselves politically
in order to free ourselves economically. The Assembly
knows perfectly well that throughout history there have
been various empires that have sought to dominate us
politically in order to steal from us for their own gain.
Happily, political liberation through a democratic and
cultural revolution has been crucial for our economic
liberation and has enabled us to meet our people’s
demands. I am grateful to the United Nations and the
General Assembly for the opportunity to participate
in this international event for the world indigenous
movement.

Today, as we recall the words of former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan, “Let us ensure that all young
people have every opportunity to participate fully
in the lives of their societies”, we are witnessing the
important role being played in this Conference by
young indigenous delegates. Indigenous youth must
have the right, means and support to participate in their
societies. To that end, access to education, information
and the means of communication is essential. In
Finland Sami youth have taken significant steps to
improve their cultural and political participation
through the establishment of the Sami Youth Council.
Measures to revive indigenous languages, including
“language-nest” activities for children, have proved to
be an efficient way to strengthen the identity of young
indigenous people.

The President: I thank the President of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia for his statement.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Sauli Niinistö, President of the Republic
of Finland, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States.
President Niinistö: I am honoured to address the
first United Nations World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples. The participation of representatives of
indigenous peoples in this Conference and in its
preparations makes this event special for all of us. It
reinforces our joint commitment to the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(resolution 61/295).
In addition, this Conference marks an important
step in fulfilling a key recommendation made in Alta,
Norway, a year ago. Indigenous peoples should have
the right to participate in matters concerning them at
the United Nations. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals in that regard. In that context, we
must express our concern over the reported attempts to
prevent the representatives of indigenous peoples from
Russia from joining us today.
Indigenous peoples’ participation in decision-making
is vital also at the national level. Procedures may vary

Finland’s role in the Arctic is defined by our
geography, and our Arctic expertise by our emphasis
on sustainable development and environmental
considerations, and by international cooperation. It
is essential to secure the welfare of people living in
the Arctic. We are convinced that that contributes to
economic stability and enhances competitiveness.
Climate change has consequences for us all. We must
address them together.
Industries such as fishing, herding, hunting and
tourism are vital to Arctic business development and
to the livelihoods of the peoples in the Arctic. Finland
is very pleased with the establishment of the Arctic
Economic Council, two weeks ago in Iqaluit, Canada.
Arctic business leaders and indigenous peoples
are working together to facilitate Arctic businessto-business activities and responsible economic
development. Traditional knowledge, stewardship and
a focus on small businesses will play a central role in
that work, which Finland will continue to support going
forward.
The Nordic countries have a long tradition
of cooperating with the Sami and Greenlandic
representative bodies. Cross-border cooperation
is vital for finding common solutions to common

14-543945/21

A/69/PV.4

challenges. Internationally, we work together on issues
such as biodiversity. Cooperation between different
stakeholders is not without challenges. Only true
dialogue with all the relevant stakeholders will yield
solid results that are beneficial for all. For that reason,
the voices of indigenous peoples must be heard also at
the United Nations.
The President: I thank the President of the Republic
of Finland for his statement.
I now give the floor to The Honourable Henri
Djombo, Minister of the Forest Economy and
Sustainable Development of the Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Djombo (Republic of the Congo) (spoke in
French): I have the honour of delivering this statement
on behalf of the Group of African States.
I would like, at the outset, to express the African
Group’s congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Sam
Kahamba Kutesa on his election to the presidency of
the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
The African Group is delighted to see that the
meetings of this important World Conference dedicated
to the promotion and protection of the rights of
indigenous peoples are being led by Uganda, which,
along with other African countries, has adopted a
comprehensive and progressive approach to matters
that concern indigenous peoples. We are also indebted
to the President of the General Assembly at its previous
session, His Excellency Mr. John Ashe. His persistence
and leadership have ensured that this important meeting
is taking place under the most favourable possible
conditions.
We wish to emphasize that the process that led to
this important meeting was a constructive and inclusive
one and that it upheld the relevant provisions of
resolution 66/296, of 17 September 2012, which called
in particular for active participation in this Conference.
The African Group would like at this point to convey
its deep appreciation for the important contribution of
indigenous peoples to the preparatory process for this
World Conference. Since indigenous peoples are both
the subject of the Conference and key players in it, their
active participation has contributed to draft resolution
A/69/L.1, to be adopted today and which reflects their
valuable contributions and recommendations. How
could we not recognize, in the large numbers of us in
the General Assembly Hall, the very affirmation of our
shared faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity

6/21

22/09/2014

and value of the human person and in the equality of
the rights of men and women? Beyond those numbers,
our common will to uphold the commitments contained
in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples is also illustrated here.
It is clear that the discussions we have had throughout
the preparatory process for this conference, and even
before, revealed the richness of sympathies surrounding
indigenous issues. In Africa, the indigenous issue that
brings us together today could be aptly discussed in the
light of the continent’s history, because the history of
indigenous peoples varies from one region of the world
to another and from one country to another. Today, the
collective awareness has finally recognized the need to
provide special protection to those communities, which
have long been ostracized by discrimination.
For nearly a decade, African countries have
embraced the cause of indigenous peoples and provided
a new assurance of their commitment to that cause.
We recall that the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples (resolution 61/295), of
13 September 2007, was adopted with broad support
from African countries. That was undoubtedly a
victory for justice and human dignity, after more than
two decades of negotiations between representatives
of Governments and indigenous peoples. The African
Group views its effective participation in this conference
along the same lines.
Since then, the situation of indigenous peoples has
gradually improved, and several African countries now
acknowledge the existence of indigenous peoples in
their territories as First Peoples groups, but ones who
have historically been marginalized. Our Governments
are working to ensure their social integration and to
promote and protect their rights as full-fledged citizens,
able to fully participate in the life of our nations with
due respect for their culture and language. Protection
and social integration are now a reality.
Following a consultative process that identified the
factors, causes and effects of discrimination suffered
by indigenous peoples of the Congo, the Congolese
Government developed a domestic law standard that
reflects the Government’s desire to implement the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples. That is the law for the promotion and protection
of indigenous peoples of 25 February 2011. Now, three
years after its adoption, the effects of that law, seen as

14-54394

22/09/2014

revolutionary and exemplary on the African continent,
are noticeable.
In order to flesh out the law, in August 2013 the
Congolese Government adopted a new national action
plan to improve the quality of life of indigenous peoples.
To ensure that they enjoy the dividends associated
with the use of natural resources, the text provides
for consultative and participatory approaches to take
into account the free, prior and informed consent of
the local indigenous populations with regard to the
use of those resources. The standing provisions of that
text guarantee the strict adherence to the sustainable
exercise of rights and cultural activities by indiginous
peoples.
As we know, the way of life and practices of indigenous
peoples contribute to the care and maintenance of
forest ecosystems and carbon sequestration. Therefore,
my country calls on the international community and
Governments to mobilize the necessary means to
invest in the development of basic infrastructure near
indigenous communities. That approach should include
the promotion of income-generating activities and
payment for environmental services.
Moreover, in order to give indigenous peoples
a way to share their knowledge and their skills, the
Republic of the Congo initiated and institutionalized
the International Forum on Indigenous Peoples of
Central Africa as a platform for integration and
cooperation in the Congo Basin on indigenous issues.
That institution, which is located in northern Congo in
the Likouala department, has become an integral part of
the operational bodies of the Economic Community of
Central African States. As elsewhere in Africa, through
the promotion of the rights of indigenous peoples, the
objective of my country remains the establishment
of the rule of law, free from discrimination based on
origin, ethnicity, way of life or culture.
The path of equality among the peoples is of course
laborious and must be maintained by the strong will
of our Governments. African countries are engaging
in that effort and will continue to work with the
United Nations system and all initiatives aimed at the
development of those marginalized peoples. Africa will
continue to participate in the efforts of the international
community to combat any affront to human conscience
and will spare no effort to contribute to the promotion
and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples. That
is the commitment of our Governments.

A/69/PV.4

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of the
Republic of Estonia.
President Ilves: It is an honour to address
this high-level meeting dedicated to the rights of
indigenous peoples. As a member of an indigenous
people — Estonians have lived on our present territory
for several thousand years — I am especially happy to
see among participants here so many of those whom
the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples is about.
Therefore, we can discuss issues faced by indigenous
people together.
We have stood on both sides — as an oppressed
indigenous people and now as a Member of the United
Nations. We know what indigenous peoples face.
I would like also to flag at the very outset that it is
unfortunate that the participation of indigenous peoples
in United Nations forums is constantly questioned. It is
incomprehensible, if not to say bizarre and shameful,
that some States attempt to hinder the participation of
indigenous peoples and offer no explanation for their
actions. We hope that this will soon be a thing of the
past and that indigenous peoples will have a strong
voice in the international community.
I recall that the indigenous peoples, those most
directly affected by the provisions of the outcome
document (draft resolution A/69/L.1) we are to adopt
today, could not participate in the negotiations on it
in the very last stages. However, I believe that their
input in the earlier stages provided a good basis for the
joint ownership of the document. I am pleased that in
the outcome document that we are about to adopt, we
can reaffirm our commitment to the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
It includes clear deliverables to further improve
indigenous peoples’ rights, including stronger action by
the United Nations. I hope that the outcome document
will serve as a basis for the way ahead, and we are
looking forward to its swift implementation.
The rights of indigenous peoples must be respected.
The great majority of States do so, voicing their support
for the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Estonia has also voiced such respect. Unfortunately,
however, in many countries, material gains are often
prioritized over fundamental rights. It is crucial to
understand that the cultural heritage of indigenous
peoples is a form of wealth that clearly outweighs

14-543947/21

A/69/PV.4

the economic profit gained by the extensive and
unsustainable exploitation of natural resources.
The reckless pursuit of profit at the expense of the
cultures of peoples is precisely what we have witnessed
in many Finno-Ugric areas. For Estonians, the future
of Finno-Ugric peoples, with whom we are linked
in kinship and language, is particularly close to our
hearts. We know and have felt the fear of extinction.
We have observed with concern that Finno-Ugric
populations have decreased, while the sociopolitical
activism needed to improve their position has not
always corresponded to the major challenges in that
area. The worst-case scenario, in our view, would be
that national organizations vanish, their leaders be
marginalized and the countries where they live become
indifferent, claiming that, as such, indigenous peoples
have no “perspective”, to use a phrase that we know
from the Soviet era.
Urbanization, industrialization, world wars,
deportations and extensive migration have all left
deep wounds within many indigenous populations,
including, for example, the Votic population, our
Finno-Ugric cousins. A few years before the turn of
the millennium, the construction of the large port of
Laugasuu began. It is being built on traditional Votic
lands, where our cousins have lived for as long as we
Estonians have lived on ours. That construction poses a
great danger to the last three remaining Votic villages:
Luutsa, Liivtšülä and Jõgõperä.
The construction of the port of Laugasuu is in
conflict with the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, but the current situation
faced by the Votes is hardly unique. We all know that
there is a long list of indigenous peoples living in the
most challenging conditions. For example, side by side
with the Votes lives another small Finno-Ugric nation,
the Izhorians, who are especially threatened by the plan
to erect a chemical plant right next to their villages of
Rutsi and Viistina. If the chemical plant is erected and
the environment devastated, the nation and the culture
of the Votes will be endangered and may even be
destroyed. Mankind will grow ever poorer.
To support our kindred nations, the Estonian
Government launched the Kindred Peoples Programme
in 1999. It is a Government aid programme to support
the indigenous Uralic languages and cultures. It
provides support in five different fields — education
and training courses, research, culture and information
exchange, health care and the protection of the
8/21

22/09/2014

environment. For many years, Estonian experts have
contributed to the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues. Our Government has also provided financial
support to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Indigenous Populations, and we shall continue to do so
in the future.
I would like to acknowledge New Zealand for
always including the Maori peoples in their delegation
and meetings. I would like to thank Finland, Norway and
Sweden for ensuring the presence of a representative
Saami delegation at all United Nations meetings on
indigenous peoples and for voicing their sincere concern
about the future of indigenous peoples. I would like to
associate myself with the statement made earlier by the
President of Finland with regard to the inability of the
Kola Saami to attend this meeting.
I would like to thank Ukraine for supporting the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (resolution 61/295) and for recognizing the
Crimean Tatars as an indigenous people. I would like
to thank the many other countries that are taking
steps to improve the situation of indigenous peoples.
We are obliged to do everything that we can to
support indigenous peoples, to respect their past and
to grant them a future. All indigenous peoples must
be acknowledged, no matter where they live, be it in
the Leningrad oblast, Crimea, Amazonas State, New
Zealand, Arizona or the Scandinavian peninsula. Let us
learn to listen to the voices that have been silenced for
too long and that too often continue to be so. We cannot
allow the persistence of a colonialist mentality to cover
up crimes committed against indigenous peoples, nor
can we continue to deny indigenous peoples the right to
have a say over their own futures.
In conclusion, the former Estonian President, the
beloved writer and film-maker Lennart Meri, was one
of those individuals who dared to listen to and to film
such peoples. I would like to invite members to the
opening of an exhibition of photographs from his film
and his journeys to the Finno-Ugric indigenous nations
in the Conference Building today at 6 p.m. It is a fitting
tribute to a great film-maker and a man who devoted
his life to showing how indigenous peoples live and
how they have suffered.
The President: I thank the President of the Republic
of Estonia for his statement.
The Assembly will now hear an address by the
President of the United Mexican States.

14-54394

22/09/2014

President Peña Nieto (spoke in Spanish): As
President of Mexico and as the representative of a
multicultural nation, originally founded on the basis
of its indigenous peoples, it is a great honour for me
to participate in this World Conference. I come to this
plenary meeting to affirm the ongoing commitment of
Mexico to the protection and recognition of the rights
and freedoms of indigenous peoples in all regions and
countries of the world. I express my highest appreciation
to the General Assembly for its decision in 2010 to hold
this historic event, which is the first high-level meeting
dedicated exclusively to the well-being of indigenous
peoples.
For Mexico, Latin America and the Caribbean, the
indigenous issue is at the root of our identities and our
historical, social and political circumstances. I mention
that because of the linguistic diversity and the high
number of indigenous peoples in Latin America and the
Caribbean, who account for nearly 45 million people.
However, I say it, above all, because of the commitment
and leadership that indigenous women and men have
shown over the years to the recognition, protection and
promotion of their rights.
For Mexico, it has been a great honour to contribute
to the preparation of this World Conference and the
negotiation of its outcome document (A/69/L.1). The
major objective is to achieve the effective exercise of
the rights of indigenous peoples in all nations. That is a
very significant achievement and the result of an open,
inclusive and constructive dialogue between Member
States and indigenous representatives. We have also
taken care to ensure that their recommendations are in
line with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples. Mexico trusts that the final
document will be a road map enabling us to reposition
indigenous issues on the international agenda and
to give renewed impetus to the actions of the United
Nations in that area.
The Mexican delegation appreciates the incorporation
of several of the approaches it presented in favour of the
indigenous of the world, including the following: the
post-2015 development agenda should ensure the rights
of indigenous peoples; the participation of first peoples
in the work of the United Nations should have a status
distinct from that of non-governmental organizations;
national laws should be harmonized in the spirit of
the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples;
and the Human Rights Council, in consultation with
indigenous peoples, should monitor, evaluate and

A/69/PV.4

improve the implementation of the Declaration in each
Member State. Mexico would like to see those ideas
translated into concrete benefits for the estimated 5,000
indigenous peoples in the world.
We have to continue working together. Inequality,
injustice and discrimination against indigenous peoples
are still, unfortunately, a grim reality. To eradicate those
practices and enable indigenous peoples to assert their
rights, we need to strengthen international cooperation
and, above all, intensify actions within each country.
In Mexico, our Constitution recognizes and guarantees
the right of indigenous peoples and communities
to self-determination and thus to the autonomy to
decide their internal forms of coexistence and social,
economic, political and cultural organization. It also
recognizes their right to preserve and promote their
culture, traditions and customs in an environment of
equality and non-discrimination.
For the more than 15 million indigenous people of
Mexico to fully exercise those rights, the State relies
on a cross-cutting policy, aimed at improving their
quality of life and the creation of greater opportunities
for development. That policy includes specific actions
to eradicate hunger and overcome extreme poverty in
indigenous municipalities as well as the construction of
basic infrastructure in their communities. Furthermore,
the main programme to fight poverty, which serves more
than 6 million persons of indigenous origin, has been
redesigned and strengthened. We are also determined
to support their integration in public education, healthcare services and adequate housing. We also encourage
their access to justice and their efforts to increase
production and marketing of their products and crafts,
with a focus on sustainability.
In short, the Government of Mexico supports
indigenous peoples so that they can achieve real,
inclusive development and improve their income and
quality of life, without losing their cultural identity or
compromising the natural heritage of the country. In that
regard, in accordance with international commitments,
we have established a respectful and direct dialogue
with various indigenous communities in order to
guide public policy and infrastructure projects in their
areas of influence. We are thus ensuring effective
participation in the design of actions that promote their
comprehensive development, with full respect for their
self-determination.
The development initiatives of the United Nations
deserve the combined skills and experiences of all

14-543949/21

A/69/PV.4

countries, because only together can we realize the
goal of building a better future for all humankind. It
is with abiding conviction that Mexicans continue to
act with global responsibility within this international
Organization, since it is the forum that best represents
the diversity of nations and the shared aspiration to
peace, development and prosperity for all the peoples
of the world.
In Mexico, we are determined to build a true
society of rights, in which all people, regardless of their
ethnic origin, can exercise in their daily lives the rights
and freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution and
international treaties.
The President: I thank the President of the United
Mexican States for his statement.
Pursuant to sub-paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 66/296,
we will now hear statements by three representatives of
indigenous peoples.
I now give the floor to Chief Oren Lyons, Chief of
the Onondaga Nation Council of Chiefs.
Chief Oren Lyons: As we say in Onondagan, “Thank
you for being well”. And your answer, Mr. President,
is “Yes, what you say is true.” The responsibility for
speaking on behalf of indigenous people has been given
me again. I shall do the best that I can on their behalf.
I am so glad to see all the people here. It has
been a long journey. I greet the Assembly with peace
and friendship, and a question. How do you instruct
7 billion people as to their relationship with the Earth?
Until they learn that relationship, we are imperilled
as a species. That relationship is fundamental to our
existence, and we have to understand that Nature is the
authority and the final word. We are subject to every
natural force in this world — water, for example, which
is the first law of life.
We now have 7 billion people, soon to be 8 billion,
soon to be 9 billion, and soon to be 10 billion. Our
children are going to suffer the consequences of
decisions that are made here today. The responsibility
to future generations has been given to us; it was told to
us many hundreds of years ago. We were set — we were
advised — by the Great Peacemaker, when He said,
“In your Council for the welfare of the people,
think not of yourself nor your family nor even your
generation. Make your decisions on behalf of seven
generations hence”.

10/21

22/09/2014

Those layers and layers of humankind awaiting
their turn on Earth will be determined; their fate will
be determined by we who sit here today. I think that
the current generation is the generation that is going to
make the decision as to whether or not we survive as a
species.
Today I bring participants greetings from
indigenous people around the world. Let me repeat: we
are the keepers of traditions, ceremonies, histories and
the future of nations, and we are the ones who escaped
your proselytization. We survived with the wisdom of
the old ones. We are pleased to add our voices to others
in the Assembly in this great effort for common sense
and peace among nations.
I bring a most urgent message that was brought to
our annual gathering of the Traditional Circle of Elders
and Youth. This message was brought by a runner from
the North, a traditional person from Greenland. He said:
“The ice is melting”. He informed us that years ago they
had noticed trickles of water coming down the sheer
face of Glacier Mountain, and that trickle has grown to
a roaring river of ice water pouring out of the mountain
into the Atlantic Ocean. Thousands of feet of ice have
been lost, and it continues to melt at an accelerating
pace. I remind the Assembly that the acceleration is
what we are dealing with. The compounding effect is
that we are now fully engaged.
In the Assembly, as leaders of the world, as a
collective voice, we join this mission of peace. We
add our presence in support of this great effort for
reconciliation between peoples and nations. We agree
that there must be parity and equity between rich and
poor nations, between white people and people of
colour, and rich people and poor people, with special
attention to women, children and indigenous peoples.
We, in our collective voices, add that there must be a
reconciliation between peoples and the natural world,
between nation States and the forests that sustain us,
between corporations and the resources that they mine,
the fish that they catch and the water that they use.
Indigenous nations and peoples believe in the
spiritual powers of the universe. We believe in the
ultimate power and authority and limitless energy
beyond our comprehension. We believe in the order
of the universe. We believe in the laws of creation and
that all life is bound by these natural laws. We call this
essence the spirit of life. This is what gives the world
the energy to create and procreate and becomes the

14-54394

22/09/2014

ponderous and powerful law of regeneration — the law
of the seed.
We, in our collective voices, speak to this to
remind everyone that spirit and spiritual laws transcend
generations. We know, because this has sustained
us. Religion and spirituality are vital to survival and
moral law. It is a faith that has sustained our human
spirit through our darkest hours. It has sustained our
human spirit in times of crisis during the times we
suffered through the grinding measures of inexorable
persecutions that have spanned generations and
continue today. Yet here we are today, adding our voices
to this plea for sanity in leadership and responsibility to
the future generations whose faces are looking up from
the Earth, each awaiting their time of life here.
The collective voices of indigenous people add that
we are saddened by the absence of many of our brothers,
not allowed to be in the Assembly today. However, we
believe that reconciliation should begin at the United
Nations because peace is an inclusive term. We include
everyone, and peace and reconciliation is the purpose
of this summit. Peace is dynamic and requires great
effort of spirit and mind to attain unity. Leaders of
peace must step forward and take responsibility for a
paradigm change in the direction of current lifestyles
and materialistic societies. The human species has
become the most voracious and abusive consumer of
Earth’s resources. We have tipped the balance against
our children and their future and we imperil all life.
Despite all of our declarations and all of our
proclamations, no matter how profound they may be,
the ice is melting in the North. We see the accelerations
of the winds. We see the fires that are raging around the
world, insects moving northward, the Lyme tick. We
are dealing with all this. And we see that the sun’s rays
that provide us with light, energy and the very essence
of life are now causing sickness among our people,
blinding animals and killing the plankton of the sea.
This is only the beginning and we are helpless already.
We will now see the real power, the spiritual power of
the Earth.
There can be no peace as long as we wage war upon
our mother, the Earth. Responsible and courageous
actions must be taken to realign ourselves with the great
laws of nature. We must meet this crisis now, while we
still have time. We offer these words as common peoples
in support of peace, equity, justice and reconciliation.
As we speak, the ice continues to melt in the North.

A/69/PV.4

There is an addendum to this. I gave this speech
14 years ago in this very Hall. So, what have we
learned? This effort for me to speak on behalf of the
indigenous people, I thought, well, what will I write
now? I said, I do not need to write. I just need to repeat
what we said to the Assembly 14 years ago — precious
years that we have lost. So I urge the Assembly, I urge
Member States, to listen to our voice. We are the pulse
of Mother Earth. We have experience and we have a
lot of knowledge, so keep our languages. The United
Nations might have to call on us again.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Aili
Keshkitalo, President of the Sami Parliament of Norway.
Ms. Keshkitalo: It is indeed a great honour for me,
as the President of the Sami Parliament of Norway, to
address the General Assembly on this historic occasion
today, the opening of the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples. It has been a long journey for all of
us: from December 2010, when the General Assembly
decided that the World Conference should be held, until
today’s actual opening of the World Conference. The
arduous journey within the United Nations to promote
and advance indigenous peoples’ rights has been
an inspirational one, and yet one that is grounded in
pragmatism.
I sincerely thank all concerned who were involved
in the process, particularly indigenous peoples in the
seven indigenous regions, including the Indigenous
Global Coordinating Group and Member States, for their
tireless efforts, their wisdom and their collaborative
spirit. We have had challenges in the process, including
with regard to indigenous peoples’ participation, due
to reasons related to the rules of procedure and other
matters.
Today, my thoughts also go to those indigenous
representatives who played an instrumental role in
the process but have since passed away. They were
our siblings, our teachers, our parents and our friends.
Their contributions lie deep in our hearts, and we pay
respect to their memories. I am sure that their spirits
are with us during these momentous days.
Indigenous peoples have been marginalized,
discriminated against and ignored; but we have not lost
heart, struggling for many decades until September
2007, when the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples was finally adopted
by this apex world body. It was a historic milestone
and a triumph for justice and human dignity. The

14-5439411/21

A/69/PV.4

challenge now remains to implement the provisions
of the Declaration by closing the gap between theory
and practice, between inspiration and reality, between
commitment and implementation and between politics
and good faith and sincerity.
Every single indigenous regional and thematic
caucus has contributed to that process, drawing upon
their respective struggles to halt the ongoing usurpation
of our lands, territories and resources; eliminate
discriminatory practices sometimes aimed at destroying
our cultures; craft solutions to halt climate change in
order to prevent the imposition of development models
that destroy the life-giving capacities and integrity of
Mother Earth; and maintain our identities, cultures and
dignity and our social and political integrity.
One gathering in a small city in the traditional
Sami territory within Norway became the epicentre
of the indigenous peoples preparatory process — the
Global Indigenous Preparatory Meeting, held in Alta in
June 2013. It was a gathering attended by approximately
600 indigenous representatives from around the world,
as well as some Governments — a gathering that my
Parliament was honoured to host. The Alta conference
was momentous. It was the culmination, the end result,
of a process that started at local and national levels, then
went regional and finally global. Indigenous peoples
from around the world mobilized resources and support
and unanimously agreed on their common priorities.
The city of Alta is significant. It is where many
of the leaders of the Sami Kautokeino Rebellion of
1852 were sentenced to death and executed. It is also
the birthplace of Norway’s modern indigenous policy.
The dispute about the hydroelectric development of the
Alta-Kautokeino watercourse in the 1980s highlighted
the need to clarify the State’s relationship to Sami
people, including our legal position. That was the start
of a process that led to the State’s recognition of the
Sami as an indigenous people and the establishment of
the Sami Parliament.
Indigenous peoples have been fighting for a
very long time to be recognized as “peoples” under
international law. As we know, article 3 of the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (resolution 61/295) mirrors common article 1 of
the two international human rights covenants of 1966.
The right to self-determination is a fundamental right
of all peoples, which includes the right of peoples to
decide for themselves how they wish to engage with

12/21

22/09/2014

other peoples and with the international community.
The Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
recognizes that indigenous peoples are free and equal
to all other peoples and that they have the right to be
free from any kind of discrimination. We are not there
yet, but we are slowly moving in the right direction.
I welcome the fact that the outcome document of the
World Conference recognizes the urgent need to ensure
that indigenous peoples’ representatives and their
representative institutions are able to participate at the
United Nations on issues affecting them. Indigenous
peoples are ready to engage in discussions about how
that can be achieved, and we look forward to studying
the Secretary-General’s report on this matter during the
seventieth session of the General Assembly.
I believe that the process leading up to the World
Conference has demonstrated that indigenous peoples
make important contributions to the work of the United
Nations. We are reliable partners that engage in the
work of the United Nations, and we do so in good faith
and expect the same in return from States and the
United Nations. Make no mistake; indigenous peoples
are here to help strengthen societies, by advancing our
collective rights and the rights of our elders, women,
youth, children and disabled. When humankind
harnesses the potential of indigenous peoples, we will
all be more harmonious, more successful and more just.
If there is anything all of us in this great Hall
should learn from the past three years, it is that the
relationship among indigenous peoples, Member States
and the United Nations can be mutually respectful
and beneficial when carried out in good faith and in
the spirit of cooperation. Indigenous peoples have
suffered — and still do — from historic injustice as
the result of discrimination, colonization, invalid legal
doctrines and dispossession of our lands, territories
and resources, all of which has prevented us from fully
exercising our rights, including our right to development
in accordance with our own needs and aspirations. That
is why we work so hard to advocate for our rights.
A Sami proverb says that “The night is not so long
that the day never comes”, which essentially means
that all bad things will eventually come to an end.
The adoption of the outcome document of the World
Conference is a small but important step towards the
dawn of the day of indigenous peoples. What we have
not achieved in this process, we will pursue in the

14-54394

22/09/2014

future, at the national and international levels, with
great determination in the spirit of cooperation.
We are committed to continuing to build a just and
sustainable future for our coming generations. We shall
advocate for what matters in the lives of our peoples,
including by increasing our efforts to start a new
chapter of international cooperation that recognizes
and advances our rights, while fully respecting the
rights of others. This is the time when we — States,
indigenous peoples and other sectors of society — have
no other, wiser choice but to continue to work together.
This is the time when we must persist in realizing our
common aspirations for human rights, justice, dignity,
integrity, cultural identity and a better future for the
entire world community.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Luis
Evelis, Member of the Senate of Colombia.
Mr. Evelis (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to convey a very fraternal greeting to the President of
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, Heads
of State and Government, the various delegations and
the indigenous peoples and their representatives at this
Conference.
I also welcome the efforts of the United Nations
to ensure a participatory process for all the peoples
and bodies that were invited to build a document that
would establish a plan of action designed to ensure the
implementation of the United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (resolution 61/295).
I also wish to highlight the work done by the Global
Coordinating Group, particularly the important role
played in that process by Ms. Mirna Cunningham and
Mr. Les Malezer.
I thank the members of the Andean Coordinator of
Indigenous Organizations for giving me the honour of
participating in this Conference. I would also point out
that the outcome document of this summit (resolution
69/2) is the result of an ongoing struggle of organizations
and indigenous peoples and of their considerable ability
to debate and come together. I therefore urge that we
pursue this dialogue not only at the national level, but
also at the international level and in the United Nations
framework.
I recognize the progress made by and the willingness
of certain States and Governments to incorporate into
their national legislation all international instruments,
including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights

A/69/PV.4

of Indigenous Peoples. I also urge that all agreements
reached and the outcome document be incorporated
into and implemented through public programmes
and policies and explicit budgets to ensure that the
indigenous peoples of Latin America and the world can
enjoy their rights.
I would also like to state that while it may be true
that there has been important progress made in the
United Nations, it is necessary to make the aspirations
of indigenous peoples much more concrete and to adopt
their paradigms for coexistence, peace, development
and well-being. It must also be said that there are
great lacunae that are cause for much concern. As
certain United Nations agencies and other international
organizations have noted, indigenous peoples continue
to be the poorest of the poor, despite so much legislation
and some very advanced constitutions in certain parts
of the world.
Indigenous peoples suffer the greatest effects of
climate change. They are also victims of and suffer
from all the consequences of a development model that
leads to illiteracy, poverty and hunger. In many parts of
the world, above all in our region, indigenous peoples
have the most limited access to quality health care and
education. In some countries, indigenous peoples are
threatened with physical and cultural extermination.
We have also seen some States implement reforms to
lower international standards with respect to indigenous
rights, particularly regarding prior notice, selfdetermination and free, prior and informed consent.
We note that some sectors within indigenous
groups are more vulnerable, including women, young
people and children. We are also seeing an increased
exodus of indigenous peoples to major cities, owing to
a lack of opportunity in many countries. Against that
background and recognizing the feelings of the Indian
populations in some countries of the world, I want to
suggest the following recommendations on behalf of
the indigenous peoples of Latin America.
States should, after the outcome document
contained in draft resolution A/69/L.1 has been
adopted and on the basis of the Declaration and the
international instruments on the subject, proceed to
incorporate all the relevant instruments and adopt them
in their national legislatures. That should lead to public
policy initiatives that are inclusive as well as capable
of distinguishing and attempting to resolve the gaps

14-5439413/21

A/69/PV.4

that have been referred to by speakers and in the very
valuable outcome document that we will approve today.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
In addition, States in the United Nations system and
the international community must listen to indigenous
peoples and pay attention to their paradigms for
development, because those peoples are well rooted
in their relationship with Mother Earth and know that
nature itself has rights. If we do not understand that,
I would be pessimistic as to the future well-being not
just of indigenous peoples, but also of all of humanity.
We also recommend that we design different policies
to deal with all of the difficulties of exclusion that
the women, young people and children of indigenous
communities suffer in all parts of the world. We need
to make progress in terms of self-determination;
free, prior and informed consent is necessary for any
proposed action. It is important that we not just look
for economic growth indicators in those States, but that
growth also be reflected in living well, as the major
indicator of overcoming poverty and of the well-being
of indigenous peoples.
I would also like to recommend that the United
Nations system continue to play an important role in
building consensus when it comes to defining strategies,
bringing together the international community, the
private sector and multilateral sectors to address all
situations of exclusion suffered by indigenous peoples.
Indigenous peoples within their organizations must
themselves be encouraged to continue to fight and
work to put forward proposals, because the future of
humanity is not just the future of the powerful and of
Governments; it is also a future that is in our hands.
Together we have to save the planet. We all have the
opportunity to achieve that; there is room for everyone.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 66/296, I
now give the floor to Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mr. Al Hussein: It is a great honour for me to join
the General Assembly today at the World Conference
on Indigenous Peoples. I see this as both a celebration
and a call for action. We are here to celebrate the
contributions that indigenous peoples make to our
societies, as well as the progress that we have achieved
towards the full recognition and respect for their rights,
including through the implementation of the United

14/21

22/09/2014

Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (resolution 61/295). But we are also here so
that States can commit to stronger action to close the
gaps in implementation, gaps that continue to diminish
the impact of the Declaration and other human rights
standards and so that we can take action to strengthen
our fight against the discrimination, exclusion and land
grabs that indigenous peoples still experience in all
regions of the world. That action must demonstrate that
our resolve to advance the rights of indigenous peoples
is not simply rhetorical, but real.
A proverb of the Native American Hopi tribe
states, “One finger cannot lift a pebble”. It reminds
us that alone, we can achieve very little — perhaps
hardly anything of significance. So I am heartened
by the strong and high-level engagement of numerous
States and other parties in the preparations for this
Conference and, in particular, by the very impressive
commitment on the part of so many indigenous peoples.
Their in-depth contributions, especially to the outcome
document (A/67/994, annex) of the Global Indigenous
Preparatory Conference in Alta, have been crucial. I
very much hope that in the future the United Nations
will open its doors even wider to accommodate the full
participation of indigenous peoples.
Many representatives in the Hall today have
travelled from remote corners of the world. Some of the
beneficiaries of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Indigenous Peoples have travelled for up to seven days,
taking several boats and flights to attend this event,
in order to highlight the challenges their communities
face, for many challenges remain. Seven years after
the adoption of the Declaration, specific disaggregated
data on indigenous peoples are lacking. But the harsh
imprint of poverty and marginalization suffered by
indigenous peoples is clearly visible in all the available
statistics.
In developed countries, the percentage of
indigenous people in prison is highly disproportionate
to their numbers. In one country, indigenous children
were 25 times more likely to be in detention than
other children. In Latin America and the Caribbean,
indigenous children are three times more likely than
others to have no access to education, safe drinking
water or housing. In Africa and Asia, indigenous
young adults are more likely to be deprived of their
right to education, especially if they are female. In the
Arctic, the Pacific and South-East Asia, indigenous
women are at greater risk of dying during pregnancy

14-54394

22/09/2014

or childbirth than women from other communities, and
their newborns and young children are also more likely
to die. Such stark statistics translate into thousands of
human tragedies — thousands of violations of human
rights.
This World Conference and its outcome document
constitute the stepping stones that will bring our work
on indigenous peoples’ rights to a new level. And as we
do so, we must also recall the past. Recently, I learned
about a story that I found very moving. For centuries,
an enormous rock that resembled a large, pale bison
stood by the South Saskatchewan River in Canada. It
was a sacred gathering place for indigenous peoples on
the vast plains. But in 1966, in order to accommodate
the construction of a dam and an artificial lake, that
monumental rock was blown apart with dynamite. The
waters rose and the jagged, broken pieces were covered
in darkness. But last month, after a patient search, those
pieces were found, deep under the waters. Once again,
as their ancestors had done for generations, indigenous
peoples could touch the remains of the rock and feel
through it their connection to their past.
The rock could not be reconstituted; its pieces will
remain under water. But the discovery will bring the
rock’s story to life. Generations to come will know
where it is and what it has meant and continues to mean
to their community. Through this story, I understand
that what has been done is done. Often it has been
bitterly unjust. But the indigenous peoples of the world
have shown us their strength, persistence and depth of
wisdom. They possess clarity and knowledge. Standing
here together we can look forward and build societies
based on partnership, mutual respect and human rights.
At this World Conference, I urge Member States
to once again pledge to ensure that the human rights
and dignity of all indigenous peoples are acknowledged
and fully protected, in line with the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. I am confident that the
draft outcome document of this Conference will be
adopted and will provide strong human rights tools to
promote the full application of the Declaration.
The constant and vigorous engagement of human
rights mechanisms is vitally important. We must
also make sure that indigenous peoples’ rights are
fully embedded in all other international initiatives
that affect them. The new post-2015 sustainable
development goals must be explicitly rooted in those
rights, so that indigenous rights, lands and cultures can
no longer be sacrificed in the name of skewed concepts

A/69/PV.4

of development. Indigenous peoples’ concerns and
recommendations will also be vital for tomorrow’s
Climate Summit and for the 2015 World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Natural disasters and
the effects of climate change are often borne by
indigenous peoples — and those peoples may also hold
the traditional knowledge that can help mitigate these
disasters.
But, ultimately, the meaning and value of all the
international processes can be measured only in terms
of their real impact. The commitments that we make
here and at other conferences must be followed up
decisively at the national and local levels with resources
and political will that match the ambitions expressed in
speeches. It is easy to be brave from a distance, as the
proverb says. We need real impact.
I look forward to seeing national action plans and
strategies in line with the objectives of the Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, plans and strategies
that include all of the Declaration’s principles: selfdetermination; free, prior and informed consent; the
rights of indigenous women; respect for treaty rights;
the rights of indigenous persons with disabilities; and
many more.
I call on States to develop such plans in full
cooperation with indigenous peoples. There must be
an immediate halt to the intimidation, persecution,
violence and sometimes death that advocates for
indigenous peoples continue to face in some countries
when they take up the legitimate defence of their
communities’ rights and lands. All those who seek to
cooperate with the United Nations in the field of human
rights must be free to do so. I am also very concerned
about reports that some indigenous representatives have
been prevented from taking part in this conference.
My Office, including its field presences, stands ready,
together with our United Nations partners, to support the
efforts of the international community and indigenous
peoples, building on the work that we are already
undertaking in close cooperation with Governments
and indigenous peoples in all regions.
This World Conference has the potential to be a
milestone in our quest to ensure full respect for the
rights of indigenous peoples. I encourage all present to
set out clear goals and renewed commitment, so that
that quest can move forward.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 66/296, I

14-5439415/21

A/69/PV.4

22/09/2014

now give the floor to Ms. Dalee Sambo Dorough, Chair
of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues.

to uphold the Charter’s purposes and principles and
thereby strengthen the international human rights
system as a whole.

Ms. Dorough (United Nations Permanent Forum
on Indigenous Issues): First, I want to acknowledge
the Onondaga Nation, original inhabitants of this land,
and thank them for the welcome on their territory
once again. I would also like to echo the comments of
concern made by the Presidents of Finland and Estonia
and, just now, by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, concerning any and all actions to disallow
indigenous peoples’ participation in this gathering
today. Hopefully, such actions will not continue in the
future.

At this moment, it is highly important for all of us
not just to underscore the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, but also to be mindful of
the pertinent international legal obligations of Member
States in relation to all peoples, including indigenous
peoples. Specifically, I would like to emphasize the
peremptory norms of international law and in particular
the principle of and right to self-determination, as
affirmed in the Charter, the International Covenants,
the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations (resolution 2625 (XXV)) and, of course, the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (resolution 61/295, annex).

On behalf of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues, I, too, want to welcome each of the participants
to the United Nations and this significant two-day
high-level plenary meeting — a meeting that should be
considered important for all indigenous peoples across
the globe. Since the General Assembly’s adoption of
resolution 66/296 and the initial discussions by the
Government of Bolivia, the Forum has concerned
itself with the full, effective and equal participation
of indigenous peoples in the preparatory processes for
this event. Many will agree that the preparations for
this gathering had a very slow start, causing indigenous
peoples, including those who serve voluntarily as expert
members of the Forum, to become deeply concerned at
the uncertainty that was generated by lack of concrete
United Nations action.
However, since 2011, the Forum’s expert members
have generously provided space in the Forum’s agenda
in order to build a spirit of partnership, inclusiveness
and respect between Member States, indigenous peoples
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. I
believe that without the generosity of the Forum this
process would not have taken the form or momentum that
has collectively propelled us to this opening ceremony
and our substantive programme for the afternoon and
tomorrow. I genuinely hope this spirit of partnership
continues at the regional and national levels, and, more
importantly, at the indigenous community level.
Indigenous peoples have spent the past few decades
building genuine cooperation with States in good faith,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples is a strong testament to what can be achieved
when States and indigenous peoples strive together
16/21

Furthermore, I must stress that even though the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as a
whole, is not an expression of customary international
law,
“some of its key provisions can reasonably be
regarded as corresponding to established principles
of general international law, therefore implying the
existence of equivalent and parallel international
obligations to [sic] which States are bound to
comply with ...
“The relevant areas of indigenous peoples’
rights with respect to which the discourse on
customary international law arises are selfdetermination, [the right to self-determination of
indigenous peoples] autonomy or self-government,
cultural rights and identity, land rights as well as
reparation, redress and remedies.”
In addition to the objectives of the hastily negotiated
outcome document, contained in draft resolution
A/69/L.1, with the limited and carefully controlled
participation of indigenous peoples from around the
globe, the peremptory norms of international law and
customary international law principles remain essential
and constant parameters for all future dialogue,
negotiation and implementation of the individual
and collective human rights of indigenous peoples.
Furthermore, the articulation of the right to free, prior
and informed consent, and the continuing importance
of indigenous peoples’ rights to their lands, territories
and resources, remain urgent and necessary features for

14-54394

22/09/2014

the survival, sustainability and vitality of indigenous
peoples, nations and communities.
For all future dialogue, at the local, national and
especially international level, we must recognize that
consensus loses its validity if it is used to undermine
the principles of justice, democracy, respect for human
rights, equality and non-discrimination, as well as
good faith. Good governance becomes a casualty if
a few States, or even one State, can undermine such
essential rights and principles at the international level.
We must recognize that indigenous peoples are among
the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in the world.
It is therefore a huge injustice if they are severely
undermined by a highly questionable practice that
allows the lowest common denominator to prevail.
In 1993, former Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali underlined that “human rights constitute
the common language of humanity”. The human
rights of indigenous peoples must not be politicized
or otherwise undermined by local, regional and
national State interests and agendas. They must rather
be respected and recognized by local, regional and
national Governments. These principles and human
rights are universal. They do not stop at the borders
between so-called developed and developing States.
All States must consult and cooperate with indigenous
peoples, consistent with their right to free, prior and
informed consent, as well as related State international
obligations, including those pertaining to human
rights, the environment and sustainable and equitable
development. This high-level plenary meeting should
be remembered for its contribution through a principled
outcome document — a document that must be
interpreted against the backdrop of international law,
customary international law principles and in particular
the human rights affirmed in the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
In conclusion, I call on Member States, guided by
a spirit of solidarity and partnership with indigenous
peoples and consistent with their international legal
obligations, as well as their political capacity, to provide
support for effective implementation of the outcome
document and its mutually agreed terms for cooperation
within the framework of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Finally, let us
ensure that we are guided not only by legal imperatives
and international legal obligations but also by moral
imperatives.

A/69/PV.4

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the opening session of the highlevel meeting. I should now like to consult members
with a view to giving the floor to the indigenous leader
and Nobel laureate Ms. Rigoberta Menchú. If there
is no objection, may I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly, and without setting a precedent, to
invite Ms. Menchú to make a statement at this meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with the decision just taken, I now give the
floor to Ms. Menchú.
Ms. Menchú (spoke in Spanish): Today is a sacred
day in the Mayan calendar, celebrating the seven energies
of Ahau Ahpu. Ahpu is the strength of the human
being, of every man and woman living on our planet.
Ahpu reminds us that we are also children of oxygen
and Mother Earth, and with that observation I begin my
contribution to the General Assembly at its first highlevel meeting on indigenous peoples. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for enabling the Assembly
to host this meeting, and I hope it will culminate in the
adoption of a draft resolution (A/69/L.1) that promotes
the rights and dignity of indigenous peoples.
First, it was in 1923 that our brother Deskaheh
travelled to the League of Nations to ask to be able to
participate fully and actively within the organization.
He did not succeed, but he set a precedent.
Many years ago, when I was 23, I had the good
fortune to participate in the inaugural meeting of the
Working Group on Indigenous Populations, at which
indigenous peoples began a strong petition within
the United Nations. We are grateful to that Working
Group, to which we pay tribute today, for having moved
forward the debate on the rights of indigenous peoples.
Since 1982, when the Working Group began its work,
the United Nations has seen hundreds of thousands of
delegations of men and women. As a result, we saw the
establishment of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues, which led to the adoption of the Indigenous
and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169), by
the International Labour Organization. That gave
rise to the participation of indigenous peoples at the
World Conference on Human Rights, held in Vienna
in 1993, where a programme of action that provided
for the establishment of the first International Decade
of Indigenous Peoples. I recall all the aforementioned
events because we, as indigenous peoples, remember

14-5439417/21

A/69/PV.4

everything that we have been through, and the history
of the world is reflected in our intensive efforts and the
many United Nations resolutions.
Today, we are once again witnessing extraordinary
progress, not only in the rights of indigenous peoples
but also in the common language to define those rights.
That is why we fully support the adoption of the draft
resolution at this World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples (A/69/L.1), which will once again strengthen
not only our struggles but also, above all, the action
plans for, on the one hand, indigenous peoples and, on
the other, for nations or nation States. We would like to
say that the progress made with regard to indigenous
peoples has made it possible for many millions of
indigenous peoples to reaffirm their identity, their
rights and their existence.
Today, however, I speak on behalf of the young
people, the children and those thousands of millions
of our brothers who still suffer from hunger, poverty
and malnutrition and the effects of the daily violence
that they experience in their communities, villages and
lands in order to protect their seas, rivers, waters and
land. I am here because I believe that indigenous peoples
and their young people and children have the right to a
future. That is why we need once again to agree on the
outcome document that we hope the General Assembly
will adopt in a few minutes.
For us, peace means freedom, mutual respect,
common interest and consultation. For us, peace is
listening to the various views, because we are part of
one diversity. As has already been noted, it is a great
responsibility to speak on behalf of the indigenous
peoples today. That is why I also appeal to all
indigenous peoples and their leaders to ensure that they
act with full responsibility and that, above all, we set as
a priority the fundamental interests of our communities
and our peoples.
We therefore have gathered today to celebrate
such progress. We can see the future. We have success
stories. That is why there is the Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which has also been
discussed for several decades. I would like to pay
tribute to the hundreds of thousands of indigenous men
and women who have lost their lives since the debate on
their rights began in the United Nations in August 1982.
Since that time, indigenous communities have suffered
the most serious human rights violations, including
genocide, ethnic crimes, fratricide and gender-based
crimes. Those concepts are still not included in the
18/21

22/09/2014

draft resolution. However, we must set a precedent so
that in the Assembly we can strengthen the observance
and monitoring of international mechanisms, above all,
those that, together with members and the peoples of
the world, we have established and adopted.
Uncertainty still prevails among our peoples
in the area of health, because health is essential for
all humankind. However, for indigenous peoples
in particular, health means their overall well-being
and does not relate only to pain and suffering in
one part of the body. We must include the existing
technologies of indigenous peoples in comprehensive
development plans. It is essential to incorporate the
science and knowledge of indigenous peoples in the
area of education. Today, we need to adopt a new
approach to education in a multicultural context, not
merely an education that reproduces the paradigms
of colonialism or subjugation. We need to combat
racism and discrimination head on, because racism and
discrimination are emotional habits and mental ills that
undermine the integrity of the human being. We must
also strengthen our legitimate, full, active and focused
participation in programmes of work that are relevant
to us, both within the bodies of the United Nations and
in public policies at the national level.
We congratulate our brothers and sisters who
first courageously came to speak to the international
community. They denounced crimes against humanity.
They made it clear that humankind breathes the oxygen
of our Mother Earth. Without them, our overall wellbeing would have been completely undermined.
During the 34 years that I have had the good fortune
to be connected with the United Nations, I have seen
not only developments but also frustration, since the
greatest problems can be found among the millions of
indigenous people living in mountainous areas and in
communities that are still not connected by roads. They
still have access only to a small amount of information,
not the technology that humankind talks about today.
We peoples, like all peoples who have suffered
from slavery and subjection, are like all men and
women who have suffered violence against their own
flesh. Nevertheless, they have the strength to shine a
light and share it with others. If indigenous peoples are
able to achieve their freedom and, above all, their selfdetermination, then all international norms will lead to
dignified policies at the national level. It is not possible
to understand indigenous rights if you do not see them
as being part of the daily life of our populations. That
14-54394

22/09/2014

A/69/PV.4

is why this is a new opportunity for us to open common
space for reciprocity, mutual respect, the fullness of life
and the future of all of humankind.

Declaration and to report to the General Assembly at
its seventieth session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on progress made.

I see a lot of young faces here. These young people
greatly inspire us. They come from the various nations
of the world, and they include many young leaders. I
pay tribute to Mexico, which has gone to great lengths
to promote the draft resolution that we are going to
adopt, but I would also pay tribute to our brother Evo
Morales, who leads the Plurinational State of Bolivia
and very many other fights that, in years past, when
we were younger, seemed to be impossible to fight.
I also pay tribute to the young people in the various
diplomatic missions here at the United Nations. When
I walked through the United Nations corridors with
a police escort, a lot of those present here were a lot
younger than they are now.

Secondly, it would request the Secretary-General,
in consultation with the Inter-Agency Support Group
and Member States, and taking into account the views
expressed by the indigenous people, to report to the
General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
implementation of the draft resolution and present
options to the General Assembly at its seventieth
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
including recommendations regarding, first, using
modified and improved existing United Nations
mechanisms to achieve the aims of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People;
secondly, ways to enhance a coherent, system-wide
approach to achieving the ends of the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples; and
thirdly, concrete proposals to enable the participation
of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions,
building on the Secretary-General’s report on ways and
means of promoting participation in the United Nations
of indigenous peoples’ representatives on the issues
affecting them (A/HRC/21/24).

I am a Nobel Peace Prize laureate. I was the first
Ambassador of the first International Year of Indigenous
Peoples in 1993, I was appointed by the SecretaryGeneral at the time, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and
he gave me the opportunity to visit the 29 nations of
the world where indigenous people live. Today I see
them represented here, and I am very proud of that fact,
because I can see that the way is open. We have to build
it together. Peace is life. Peace is education and peace
is culture.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/69/L.1. I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/69/L.1, entitled “Outcome document of the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples”, I wish to put on record the following statement
of financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 31 and 40 of draft
resolutions A/69/L.1, the General Assembly would,
first, request the Secretary-General, in consultation and
cooperation with indigenous peoples, the Inter-Agency
Support Group on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues and
Member States, to begin the development, within
existing resources, of a system-wide action plan to
ensure a coherent approach to achieving the ends of the

The requested activities referred to in the draft
resolution related to paragraph 1 of the biennial
programme plan and priorities for the period 2014-2015
(A/67/6/Rev.1) and section 2 of the programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management”.
Pursuant to paragraphs 31 and 40 of the draft
resolution, the request for documentation would
constitute an addition to the documentation workloads
of the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of two pre-session documents of 8,500
words each in all six languages. This would entail
additional requirements in the amount of $100,800
for documentation service in 2015. As additional
conference- servicing requirement of $100,800
for 2015 under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management”, would be required under the programme
budget for the biennium 2014-2015 to implement the
additional workload. No provision has been made in
the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
for the implementation of the activities requested
under paragraphs 31 and 40 of the draft resolution.
At the current stage, it is not possible to identify

14-5439419/21

A/69/PV.4

activities within the section of the programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015 that could be terminated,
deferred, curtailed or modified during the biennium. It
is therefore necessary that additional resources in the
amount of $100,800 be provided through an additional
appropriation for the biennium 2014-2015.
It may be recalled that, under the procedures
established by the General Assembly in its resolutions
41/213 and 42/211, a contingency fund is established
for each biennium to accommodate additional
expenditures derived from legislative mandates not
provided for in the programme budget for those years.
If additional expenditures were proposed that exceeded
the resources available from the contingency fund, the
activities concerned will be implemented only through
the redeployment of resources from low-priority areas
or the modification of existing activities. Otherwise,
such additional activities would have to be deferred to
later in the biennium.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.1, it is estimated that an additional appropriation
of $101,800 would be required. It is anticipated that this
requirement cannot be met from within the resources
of the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015.
Accordingly, the General Assembly is requested to
approve an additional appropriation representing a
charge against the contingency fund in the amount
of $101,800 under section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management,” in the programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015.
The attention of the General Assembly is therefore
drawn to the present statement of programme budget
implications. During the main part of the sixtyninth session, the Fifth Committee will examine
both a detailed statement of the programme budget
implications arising from the draft resolution and the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions thereon.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/69/L.1, entitled “Outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly known
as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples”. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/69/L.1?
Draft resolution A/69/L.1 was adopted (resolution
69/2).

20/21

22/09/2014

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See for a statement.
Monsignor Urbanczyk (Holy See): First, I wish
to congratulate the President on convening this highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly, known
as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples. My
delegation has worked hard in a constructive way and
in a spirit of goodwill to make the outcome document
(resolution 69/2) a success. On the other hand, my
delegation would be remiss in its duty if it did not point
out areas where it strongly disagrees with the text. In
that regard, my delegation wishes to make the following
reservations on paragraph 13 of the resolution.
With reference to sexual and reproductive health
and so-called reproductive rights and other language
on which the Holy See registered reservations at the
United Nations International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD) and at the Fourth World
Conference on Women, we reiterate these reservations
as set out more fully in the report of the ICPD and in
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. In
particular, the ICPD rejects recourse to abortion for
family planning and denies that it creates any new rights
in this regard. My delegation will continue to respect
and promote the rights of the indigenous peoples.
Finally, my delegation takes this opportunity to
reiterate the long-standing commitment of the Holy See
to promoting the integral development of the more than
370 million indigenous people in the world.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express my sincere thanks to Ms. Marjon Kamara,
Permanent Representative of Liberia, and Mr. Andrej
Logar, Permanent Representative of Slovenia, who
so ably and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations in
order to bring them to a successful conclusion. I am
sure that members of the Assembly join me in extending
our sincere appreciation.
Representatives are reminded that the first and
second interactive round tables will be held concurrently
this afternoon at 3 p.m. in Conference Room 4 in
the General Assembly Building and the Trusteeship
Council Chamber, respectively.
Interactive round table 1, entitled “United Nations
system action to implement the rights of indigenous
peoples”, will be co-chaired by Her Excellency

14-54394

22/09/2014

Mrs. Edita Hrdá, Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic to the United Nations, and Mr. Ghazali
Ohorella, Representative of the Pacific Indigenous
Region.
Interactive round table 2, entitled “Implementing
the rights of indigenous peoples at the national and
local level”, will be co-chaired by His Excellency
Mr. David Choquehuanca, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Mr. Joseph
Ole Simmel, Representative of the African Indigenous
Region.
The third interactive round table and the interactive
panel discussion will be held concurrently tomorrow
afternoon at 3 p.m. in the North Lawn Building in
Conference Room 4 and the General Assembly Hall,
respectively.
Interactive round table 3, entitled “Indigenous
peoples’ lands, territories and resources”, will be

A/69/PV.4

co-chaired by His Excellency Mr. Pita Sharples,
Minister of Maori Affairs of New Zealand, and Ms. Joan
Carling, Representative of the Asia Indigenous Region.
The interactive panel discussion entitled
“Indigenous priorities for the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda” will be co-chaired by Ms. Patricia
Balbuena, Vice-Minister for Interculturality of Peru,
and Ms. Jannie Lasimbang, Representative of the Asia
Indigenous Region.
I wish participants profitable discussions.
I would like to express special thanks — I think
we all do — to two people: Ms. Mirna Cunningham
and Mr. Les Malezer, who have been at the service of
this historic meeting. They have been at the service of
all representatives of indigenous peoples. Once again, I
wish participants very profitable discussions.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

14-5439421/21
