UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
THIRTY-NINTH

2

522””

COUNCIL
YEAR

MEETING:

w
28 MARCH

1984

NEW YORK

C‘ONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2522). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ,................................................

1

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431) . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............

1

SlPV.2522

.

I

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed’of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
l$ocuments of the Security Council (symbol SI . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in Iwhich
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2522nd MEETING
Heid in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. Javier ARIAS

STELLA

28 March

which appears in a letter dated 22 March 1984 from the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
President of the Security Council.

(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the text of a letter dated 20 March 1984
from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
to the President of the Security Council [S/26425].
4. The first speaker is the Secretary of the People’s
Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mr. Ali Abdusalam
Treiki. I welcome him and invite him to make his
statement.

agenda (SIAgendaI2522)

of the agenda

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16431)
The meeting

5. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) [interpretation from Arabic]: Yesterday I had an opportunity to
extend to you, Mr. President, congratulations on behalf
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
It gives me pleasure
today to state again our satisfaction at the excellent way
in which you are conducting the business of the Council.

was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption

1984, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

6. During the past year the Council has met twice to
consider acts of provocation and aggression by the
United States against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. It
has also met on several occasions to consider acts of
provocation,
aggression and even occupation by the
United States Administration
against the territories of
small, non-aligned countries-for
example, the constant aggression committed
by that Administration
against Nicaragua and its invasion and occupation of
Grenada.

Letter dated 22 March 1984 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16431)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of the Democratic Yemen, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Poland, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Viet Nam in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

7. Today we are meeting to consider a dangerous,
indeed explosive,
situation resulting from United
States provocation
and harassment of Libya. This
could cause a deterioration
in the’region, threatening
international
peace and security.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya)
took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Natotf
(Poland), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

8. As I said yesterday [252Zst meeting], I wish that the
representative
of the United States would be kind
enough, although she represents a super-Power, to be
here to listen to representatives
of small Member
States. Perhaps her excuse for not being here is that it is
difficult for her to hear the truth; the truth is bitter, and
it could disturb her. But I am confident that her deputy
will convey to her in full the truths that will be spoken
here.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
The Council is meeting today in response to a request

9. I do not think I need dwell on the many details
which have been laid before the Council concerning the
1

acts of aggression, provocation and harassment constantly carried out by the United States against the
Jamahiriya, its revolution and its leadership. At Council meetings held on 22 and 23 February 1983 [241&h to
2418th meetings] and in August of that year [2464th,
2466th and2468th meetings], my delegation spoke of all
those acts. In addition, it has addressed to the Secretary-General and to the President of the Council several letters containing complete details of American
acts of aggression and provocation.

her country was beaten and wounded by an agent of
the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA);
during the trial ,-which
was widely covered by the
media-the
CIA agent testified that he had shot the
student as a warning against continuing his support for
the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), but that
student had assaulted him. Those are the facts of the
incident the representative mentioned, as published in
American newspapers.
vi
’ ,’
14. Why are all these hostile acts being carried out
against Libya? It is because of Libya’s position on the
Palestinian question. When, under the Carter Administration, I met with the United States Secretary of State,
he told me that there was no problem between us apart
from Libya’s stand on the Palestinian question, because Libya, he said, was supporting terrorism. I replied, “Let us first define terrorism.”
We make distinctions: we are against terrorism $s such, but we cannot
accept the label of terrorist td,be applied to Palestinians who are defending their right to liberate their own
land, or to the revolutionaries
of South Africa or of
the South-West Africa,People’s
Organization.
But, as
I said yesterday, this is American logic: the Palestinians
are terrorists, but the rebels iti Nicaragua are freedom
,’
fighters.
I
15. The United States Under-Secretary
of State for
African Affairs says that Libya is behind the failure
of all his Government’s
attempts to establish peace in
the Arab world. This, then, is’the cause for his country’s campaign of hostility, provocation and harassment against Libya. But American policy in the Arab
region-based
on support for the Zionist entity and
for occupation-has
been denounced not by Colonel
Qaddali or Hafez Al-Assad, but by King Hussein. I do
not think it is possible to say about King Hussein what
is being said about Muammar Qaddafi and Hafez AlAssad. King Hussein has said that the United States,
policy is biased. It is the policy of Israel, for there is no
difference between Israel and the United States.

10. The reasons for the differences which exist between the United States and the Jamahiriya are not
new;,they date back to the first days of the great September Revolution
in Libya.. Before the revolution,
Libya was among the protectorates
of the United
States. The United States maintained
five military
bases on the territory of the Jamahiriya, and monopolistic American corporations exploited the oil of the
Jamahiriya, which was being sold at that time for $1.50
a barrel. Libya and the United States bases on its territory were used in 1956 to launch an act of aggression
against the Arab nation and to attack Egypt; Those
aggressive bases on Libyan territory were used on
many occasions to launch acts of aggression against
States of the region.
11. In the early days of the revolution, those bases
were eliminated; Willis Air Force Base was renamed
as the Umm Aitiqah base. The representative of the
United States stated that two aircraft were photographed taking off from that base, but she did not mention that.Umm Aitiqah, after whom the base is named,
was an innocent six-year-old girl who was killed by
bombings during training exercises by the United
States Air Force near the base. Some may not know
that, and I do not think that the representative of the
United States was aware of that fact.
12. With the establishment of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, there began an economic blockade and a campaign of military harassment. United States Air Force
violations of Libyan airspace over the past years number more than 336; there have been acts of provocation
by the United States Navy, the most recent among
them being the dispatch of an aircraft-carrier
to our
territorial waters; our planes have been attacked, and
two Libyan jets have been downed, as members are
fully aware. Additionally,
the United States seeks to
turn other countries-including
some sister Statesagainst the Jamahiriya,
initiating
a hostile political
campaign and attempting to drive a wedge between
Arab States, and a cultural blockade was initiated. This
reached such heights that for the first time in the history
of the United States a law was enacted forbidding
Libyan students to study certain subjects, such as nuclear engineering and aeronautics. To all this must be
added the ongoing vicious media campaign and the
harassment of Libyan students.

16. They tell us, “You Libyans are requested to
accept Israeli occupation and the elimination
of the
PLO and the Palestinian people, or else you must be
destroyed and driven out and the Libyan Revolution
They are against Libyan policy
must be attacked.”
because, they say, Libya practices terrorism. But what
terrorism is that? I referred yesterday to American
terrorism: the Shah of Iran’was a friend and ally of the
United States and was protected by the United States
even though he killed thousands of innocent people and
displaced thousands of families. The same was true of
Somoza: he was no terrorist-he
was a friend of the
United States. It was true of Batista in Cuba, and so
on, through the whole chain of agents and terrorists
shedding the blood of peoples.
17. The hostile United States policy against Libya
was most recently manifested in the dispatch of
AWACS aircraft to the region in an act of provocation
against my country. Why were those AWACS planes
.“! :

13. Yesterday, the representative of the United States
referred to an incident in which a Libyan student .in
2

sent to the region?, Because, they said, there was a
Libyan threat againslf’the Sudan-this
is a repetition of
what took place last year at the request of two Arab
States. Libya’s populruion is 3 million; the total population of Egypt and Sudan amounts to 70 million. I wish to
assure the representative of the United States that he
will be disappointed’if he thinks that there is going to be
a war between Arab States; Libya, Egypt and the
Sudan are at war against American imperialism,
which
is hostile to Arabs and allied with Israel.

CIA and the American Administration
in various parts
of the world, as well as the history of American Administrations in Latin America since the Monroe Doctrine.
That history is one of occupation and starvation. As
I said last year when I visited Nicaragua, I was shocked
to see that Nicaragua was more underdeveloped than
many countries in our region. But the most important
thing for the United States was to keep Somoza in
power-Somoza,
who killed his people, as did Batista
in Cuba.

18. The underlying droblem is that the policy ‘of the
United States is underthe full control of zionism, which
uses that policy to serve its ,own interests and seeks to
destroy the Arab regiqn:This not only inflicts troubles
upon the United States, but it also undermines that
country’s interests. In,the current American presidential campaign we see a graphic example: the candidates
seem to be campaigning in Israel rather than in the
United States. Hart,.,Mondale,
Reagan-they
are all
scrambling to approve the move of the United States
Embassy in Israel to, Jerusalem. Last year The Christian Science Monitor, reported that Begin was more
powerful in Congress .than the President of the United
States himself. That is a fact. That President, leader of
the strongest country in the world, met with a number
of members of the Zionist lobby to ascertain their point
of view on providing Jordan with weapons. He had
decided to give weapons to Jordan, but then reversed
that decision when it became clear that King Hussein
ultimately is an Arab who will not sacritice the interests
of the Arab nation.

22. I also recall the occupation of the Panama Canal,
the changing of regimes, the occupation of the Dominican Republic and other acts of aggression against nearly
all the States of Latin America. I do not want to go back
into the history of what happened in Panama in 1909 and
1920 concerning the Government of General Jacobo;
in Guatemala in 1958 and 1964; or of what happened
in Chile, culminating in the assassination of President
Allende in 1973. In 1961, the CIA planned a military
coup in El Salvador and launched an act of aggression
against Cuba. It has carried out’acts of subversion
in Brazil. In 1964, the American forces stationed in
Panama launched an attack against a mass demonstration there. In 1950, the American armed forces landed
in the Dominican Republic. From 1979 up to the present day, the United States has been trying with all
the means at its disposal to overthrow the progressive regime in Nicaragua, I have also mentioned what
happened in Grenada in 1983.

19. There is no uroblem between Libya and the
United States as such; it is a problem between the Arab
nation and the United States. Senator Jackson has said
that the only friend of the United States in the region is
Israel and has described the Arab States that label
themselves moderates and friends of the United States
as agents. That is the truth.
20. The policy of the United States in the region encourages aggression. Is the United States interested
in protecting Egypt and the Sudan? Since when? As
I mentioned yesterday, was not Egypt attacked and
destroyed by American weapons? Did not the United
States try to use force against Abdel Nasser and to
inflict problems on him, including a CIA attempt to
assassinate him? Since when have the Americans been
so interested in protecting the sisterly Sudan? They
only want the Sudan to be antagonistic to Arab nationalism, the Arab nation and Libya.
21. We, the small peoples, who are destined to face
aggression and not-to have the right to choose our
policies, are either to be agents or to be attacked and
destroyed or subject to acts of provocation. The record
of American aggression against small peoples is very
well known to all representatives present. It ranges
from acts of subversion to direct attack, as is happening
in Nicaragua, or occupation, as was the case with Grenada. I recall some of the operations carried out by the

23. There is a similar pattern in Africa. In 1961,
Lumumba was killed in the Congo by United States
agents. In 1966, the Americans planned the coup which
overthrew President Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana. The
United States is financing UNITA
[Unitio Nucional
para a Independkncia
Total de Angola] bands led
by Savimbi, who is still launching his attacks against
Angola with the help of the American Administration.
The United States, which is keen to reach a solution to
the problems of southern Africa, is the main tinancer of
the UNITA
bands. Moreover, it provides the .rebel
Hissein Habre in Chad with all sorts of weapons to kill
his own people.
24. All this is in addition to .what happened in Iran
-the overthrow of the Government of Mossadegh because he nationalized
the oil-and
the continuous
provocation against the leadership of various countries
today.
25. Finally, there are the attempts at assassination
and physical liquidation.
We have finally heard that
President Reagan. has allocated $20 million for the
assassination of Colonel Qaddafi and Khomeini. These
are the humanitarian
acts of the United States, whose
policy has come under the control of the Zionist policy
in our region!
26. There is continuous aggression against my country, provocative acts against the Jamahiriya and other
small peoples-Grenada,
Angola, Mozambique,
Viet

Nam, Afghanistan and Poland. No small country in any
part of the world is safe from its share of direct American aggression.

seem to know very little about that region, just as we
knew very little about Indo-China in 1963. The peoples of Central America live in abject poverty. They
cannot feed themselves when they are hungry; they
cannot find a doctor when they are sick. They live in
shanty-towns without any services, without fresh
water. The majority of them are illiterate. The five
Spanish-speaking
States of that region need a whole
year to produce what our nation produces in less than
three days. If Central America had not been so poor,
there would have been no revolution.”

27. The policy of the present United States Administration, which is based on confrontation,
aggression
and the deployment of missiles, may lead the world to
war. In the past few years the world has gone through
no worse period than the present, because the current
United States Administration
has no consideration for
morals or international
norms. If we look at the decisions and resolutions of the United Nations, we find
that the current United States Administration’s
record
is replete with support for aggression. United Nations
resolutions of the past year alone make clear the extent
of this policy and how dangerous it is. It is a policy of
-provocative acts against small States whose only sin is
that they do not give in to American dictates and do not
accept American intervention.

He said also:

.’

“This is the formula for failure. We always choose
the loser. The American people know we have taken
this path before. It leads to nothing but an endless
series of interventions.‘*
He went on:

28. As a small people, what interest do we have in
having abnormal relations with the United States? We
want dialogue. We, the small, non-aligned States, want
to establish balanced relations on the basis of mutual
interest. We do not accept being agents. We do not
accept being Somozas or Batistas or Shahs of Iran. The
Jamahiriya sacrificed more than half its population in a
long war against the Fascists. We would not agree to be
agents; we would not agree to have American military
bases, or any foreign bases for that matter.

“The Administration
spends a billion dollars to
confront the revolutionary
army of no more than
7,000 men in El Salvador. That means that almost
$140,000 is being allocated for each revolutionary.
This is a losing policy,’ the policy of aggression
against starving peoples.”
’
That is the policy of the American

Administration.

32. Shamelessly, the United States admits it has sent
AWACS aircraft to spy on Libya. Mr. Shultz himself
has admitted that. Yesterday the representative of the
United States boasted that her Government has photographs; that is an admission of spying and the use of
reconnaissance. That Government threatens that any
Libyan attempt to attack those hostile aircraft will lead
to grave consequences. As I said yesterday, we are
supposed to welcome the jets that are there to carry
out acts of aggression, and to host them, because, of
course, they are American and display the American
flag.

29. I realize that the Security Council-despite
its full
conviction of the gravity of this aggressive policy followed by the United States Administration-will
remain paralysed because that Administration
has the
power to veto any Council resolution, as it did last
year in the case of Grenada and on other occasions.
But we are confident that the misled American people
-whose money is being spent in the service of aggression, whose money is being spent to serve the Zionist
entity, at a time when unemployment
is soaring and it is
looking for a way to make ends meet-can
and should
play a major role in deterring the United States Administration.

33. In conclusion, I would observe that the Council
must shoulder its special responsibility.
It is entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and security, and it cannot let one of its permanent members
pursue such a policy of aggression against whole peoples, ‘a policy of occupation of the territories of small
countries. If that law of the jungle is allowed to continue, a very dangerous precedent will be established,
and it will lead to nothing but war and destruction. It is
high time that the United States was told that it is not
the policeman of the ‘world; it is not entitled to carry out
these acts of aggression; it is not responsible for the
world. The United States must be told to put an end to
its acts of aggression. It is in the interest of the American people itself that it do so: indeed, the expansionist
and aggressive policies of Hitler led Germany to destruction. Throughout history the policy of arrogance,
gunboat diplomacy and military might has resulted in
nothing but catastrophe. In the end, the American peo-

30. The continued hostile American policy against the
Arab nation and against the Jamahiriya will not lead to
any change in policy on the part of the Arab nation. The
Arab nation cannot accept occupation or the Zionists; it
cannot accept aggression. Indeed, that policy will be to
the detriment of United States interests in that and
other regions.
31. From time to time a voice of reason is heard in the
United States. I shall now refer to some remarks made
last year by Senator Dodd in reply to President Reagan
during a joint meeting of Congress to discuss President
Reagan’s policy in Central America. He said:
“We cannot bear the consequences of adopting
such an important policy on the basis of ignorance.
The fact is that now, in 1983, some senior officials
4

pie will itself fall victim to such an aggressive policy
against all freedom- and peace-loving forces.

break out of the isolation
to impose on him.

34. In conclusion, I would remind the Council of the
advice given by an American journalist I mentioned
yesterday. He himself was a victim of racial discrimination. In an essay in The Toronto Sun, he writes:

41. President ‘Ahmed SCkou Toure’s death is a loss
inflicted on the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in
the establishment,
development and support of which
the late President played a fundamental role. It is also a
loss to the Organization of African Unity, for the establishment
of which the late President
struggled.
Similarly, we shall not forget his great contribution to
the establishment of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

“Perhaps the time has come for the Western leaders to finally decide which nations are truly worth
supporting, and which must be Ieft to their own fate.
As Frederick the Great said, ‘He who would defend
everything defends nothing.’ “*

which colonialism

attempted

42. We seize this opportunity to convey, through you,
Mr. President, our heartfelt condolences to the ueoule
and Government of Guinea and his bereaved family.
May his soul rest in peace.

35. Mr. CLARK
(United States of America): The
United States desires to make only three simple points.
36. AWACS aircraft are not aggressive weapons.
They are not instruments of violence. They are, however, effective observers. The aircraft were dispatched
at the request of the Government of the Sudan after it
had been attacked by Libya under circumstances that
have been reviewed in detail in the Council.

43. Before beginning my statement, Sir, allow me to
express our great satisfaction at your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this ,month. We are
confident that by the end of your term you will have
enriched the Council with your wisdom, your tact, your
outstanding diplomacy-and your deep understanding of
the problems of the international
community,
especially those of the developing countries.

37. The United States.understands full well why the
Government of Libya prefers that no one observe its
attacks on its neighbours: such deeds are best done in
stealth, covered with denials.

44. I should like also .to express to your predecessor,
-Mr. Shah Nawaz, representative of Pakistan, our great
appreciation and gratitude for the exemplary manner in
which he conducted the Council’s work during a period
fraught with grave events. Thanks to his deep understanding of the reasons behind international
crises
afflicting our world, he managed to conduct the Council’s work in an objective manner and with ideal wisdom. He has our full respect and appreciation.

38. United States actions are wholly consistent with
international
law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Libya’s neighbours have the right
to defend themselves; their friends have the right to
help them, as long as their actions are consistent with
the Charter and international law. United States actions
are consistent with the Charter and with the law.

45. We participate in this debate, on the one hand, to
express our grave concern at the threats to the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya represented in suspect United States
military
movements
and provocations
designed to
create a climate conducive to aggression against this
sister State-aggression
which is but one more link in
the chain of acts of aggression launched globally by the
.United States against the States and peoples of Asia,
Africa and Central America.

39. The PRESIDENT
finternretation
from Smnishl:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
40. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) [interpretation from Arabic]: I should like at the outset to
extend sincere condolences to the Government
and
people of Guinea on the death of President Ahmed
Stkou Tout-e. With his death the third world has suffered a great, irreparable ,loss. The Government and
people of the Syrian Arab Republic have the greatest
admiration and appreciation for the tremendous victories of President Ahmed Sekou Tour6 in his continuous struggle‘to liberate Africa and liquidate colonialism. President Stkou TourC was one of the first leaders
to realize the dangers of Zionist schemes to the peace
and safety of the Middle East region. We shall never
forget his valiant stand in refusing to acquiesce in plans
to prolong colonialism. Thus, he and his people, owing
to their attachment to principles, have faced many
problems. But, thanks to his courage, he was able to

46. On the other hand, we participate in this discussion to appeal to the Council to live up to its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations and
put an end to a United States policy pursued with the
force of arms or the threat of force on the pretext of
.protecting American interests. It is as though our globe
were created to serve American interests and as though
there were no legitimate national interests on the face of
the earth save those in the service of the United States
or those that acquiesce in American hegemony and
exploitation.
47. Although we know in advance that the Council
will not arrive at a decision leading to the containment
and deterrence of American superiority and the arro-

* Quoted in English by the ipeaker.

5

,

gance of imperialism based on military might and widescale proliferation in large parts of the world, we are
confident that these discussions are useful because they
promote an understanding of the greatest problem that
has emerged since the Second World War, that is, the
denial by the United States of the principle of the supremacy of law in international relations and the adoption of force globally as an instrument of United States
foreign policy.
8
48. We do hot exaggerate when we say that, although
today’s world is ‘on the threshold of the twenty-first
century, thanks to the technological revolution, regrettably, in the field of international
relations it is witnessing a return to the nineteenth century; which was
the apogee of the policy of force to dominate peoples
and their destinies.

scope, becoming more vicious and dangerous since
1980, especially since the coming into offrce of the
Reagan Administration,
which believes in the use of
force as an absolute value in its’intemational
relations.
It is worth recalling that the recent threats to the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and the bolstering of the Rapid Deployment Forces in the area have come this time in the
wake of the failure of the Israeli-American
alliance to
impose the agreement of 17 May 1983 on our sister
country of Lebanon.
‘.
52. Washington,
after its j’dishonourable
victory
against tiny Grenada, resorted to an intensification
of
tension in Central America,. southern Africa, the Gulf,
the Middle East and especiallyagainst
the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. It thus once again dispatched its AWACS
aircraft.
,’

49. The attempts of foreign hegemony faced by the
Libyan Arab,Jamahiriya
must be discussed in the context of the comprehensive policy of the United States
aimed at subjugating the forces that believe in freedom
and sovereignty and strive to consolidate their subjective identity and achieve their social and economic
development in solidarity with the forces of liberation
in the world.

53. We are told that the AWACS aircraft are a means
of defence. All the weapons provided to Israel by the
United States have been provided as defensive weapons. Have we forgotten that defensive weapons are
also offensive weapons? Is there a distinction? Are the
AWACS aircraft not a meansof espionage? Is espionage not a prelude to aggression? Therefore the American pretext that espionage is legitimate because the
AWACS aircraft are non-offensive does not accord
with the principles of international law. I am afraid the
representative of the United States will need some help
in selling that message to those present in this chamber.

50. Proceeding’from
our belief in the justice of the
struggle of those peoples yearning to rid themselves of
‘the yoke of foreign domination and hegemony, we consider that the United States, despite its colossal conventional and nuclear military arsenal and its tremendous material and agricultural capabilities, will fail in its
attempt to create a world devoted to the service of
American imperialist interests, which are in basic contradiction to the interests of the peoples. The third
world, despite its problems and scourges inherited from
colonialist exploitation and the austerity and stinginess
it faces on the part of those States that could help it
establish a new, all-round more equitable international
order, is capable, thanks to its enlightenment,
solidarity, varied relations of co-operation;
indigenous
capabilities
and self-reliance,
of resisting the allpervading American blackmail that extends even to
food supply and education. There are States that have
put up a heroic resistance-and
are still doing so-to
avoid falling into the sphere of American hegemony.
There is no doubt that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is
one of those States. Hence it is the target of an all-out
American onslaught, in contravention
of the Charter
and United Nations resolutions and of the most rudimentary principles of international conduct. Moreover,
the overt and covert acts of aggression against Nicaragua are further proof of United States resolve to
threaten every State whose policy is not in line with
its ambitions and self-interests and departs from the
sphere of American hegemony.

54. Espionage is part and :parcel of a military operation. The United States redispatched the AWACS aircraft for the purpose of provocation
and sent warplanes and missiles to create a new hotbed of tension. It
justified all these acts before the American people by
stating that they were for the protection of threatened
American interests and American allies. But no one,
believed these allegations, not even the American press
itself-known
for its general hostility to Arabs and for
its bias in favour of Zionism-which
uncovered the real
reasons for the American action. Suffice it to recall
the press reports referred to in yesterday morning’s
meeting [252&h meeting] which reveal the real nature
of the crisis in the region and the need to place the blame
on others, in this case on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
particular-this
despite the “general conviction of the
Council that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, because of its
principled support for progressive forces and Governments and its defiance of imperialism, is the target if not
the victim.
55. Suffice it to recall also the American aggression in
August 1981, when the United States Navy carried out
aggressive manoeuvres from 17 to 22 August in the Gulf
of Sidra, inside the territorial waters of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, in an area which the United States, the
owner of the AWACS aircraft, knew full well to be an
area set aside for Libyan Air Force training. Eight
American planes of the’ United States Sixth Fleet
attacked and shot down two Libyan planes. That act
of aggression gave rise to deep apprehension in the

51. The threat to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not
new, but is an escalation of provocations which began in 1969 out of opposition
to the principles of
the 1 September Revolution and which have widened in
6

Arab and the non-aligned countries. The Group of Arab
States at the United Nations addressed a declaration on
21 August 1981 to the President of the Council [S/14638/
Rev.1, annex] which isontained a strong condemn&tion of American threats and provocations against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya:The
Co-ordinating Bureau of
the Movement of Non-$iigned
Countries, in its meeting
on 28 August 1981, issued a communiqu6 condemning
the American aggress&n. ‘I shall not read out the text in
view of the lateness of the hour.
56. The Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries persisted, at the ministerial ‘and other levels, in warning
about the threats inherent‘in the repeated United States
acts of provocation against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. But these acts of provocation did not cease; nor
did the vicious media campaign cease against the regime and President of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya; in
fact, it intensified.
-_
57. The Security Coun&i was convened in February
1983 and on other occasions. However, the more the
United States and others escalate their attacks on the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya;‘the
greater is the international
support afforded to the Government and people of the
Jamahiriya. For everyone knows that the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya is a State of .confrontation and steadfastness, that it is a State of principles and not anyone’s
broker or lackey, that it is a State that has devoted its
capabilities to defending rights and has remained steadfast, despite the small siie of its human resources.
58. If the aim of the statement by Mr. Shuitz, United
States Secretary of State, dn 20 March 198Athe statement in which he accused the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
of having committed aggression, but did not furnish any
proof of that-was to make political mileage with the
Zionist lobby, to serve the interests of his President,
that is no concern of ours’. Indeed, the United States
President and his two rivals are allies of Israel and have
declared their allegiance to and their alliance with
Israel. Ail of them feel that this settler colonialism
in occupied Palestine is legitimate and is no impediment to peace. The electoral campaign in the United
States is boiling down to a rivalry over which of the
candidates will be the first to transfer the United States
Embassy from Tel Aviv to occupied Jerusalem. If,
however, the aim of Mr. Shuitz was to precipitate a war
among Arabs, to deplete Arab capabilities and divert
them from the aim of liberation from the Zionist-Israeli
aggression and of breaking the chains of Camp David,
he will not succeed, for the Arab people will stand up to
these attempts.
59. We did not participate in the discussions yesterday, for well-known reasons. We took no account of the
letter contained in document S/16420, because it does
not include elements which would enable the members
of the Council and others to reach the proper conclusion about the truth of what is happening in the
region and because of qur firm conviction that these
matters could and should have been discussed amica-

biy, among the parties concerned, in the League of
Arab States or the Organization of African Unity.
60. But the Libyan complaint before the Council today is a different matter, because it involves a violation
of Libyan sovereignty by a State that is a permanent
member of the Council, a State which threatens and
violates the sovereignty and interferes in the internal
affairs of other States. The information provided by the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya merits ail our concern. The
United States actions constitute ,provocation and are
hostile in their nature and their aims.’ ,,
61. Moreover, this information
has ,’b&n confirmed
by statements by United States offici~is, led by
Mr. Shuitz. He confirmed the presend&.of the AWACS
aircraft, as was done also by Mr. Roniberg, a spokesman for the State Department, when he said, according
to The New York Times of 20 March:
‘~.
“AWACS
will be part of comb&d.
air defense
operations being carried out by ,,Egypt and the
Sudan’:.*
7
According to the same article, anoth&
United States Administration
stated:

official of the

“Our planes are there and don’t, mess with them.
“We told the Libyans that we are deploying our
own military aircraft in the region, and any action
against them could have serious consequences”.*
62. Does that not constitute a grave.threat directed
against a Member State? We have also noted that, in the
statement that I have just quoted by an offX&.l spokesman of the United States Administration,
the word
“region”
is used. We conclude that the theatre of
operation of the AWACS aircraft includes the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
63. In addition to the provocations included in the
statement to which I have just referred, there was mention of certain internal situations, which are no concern
of ours. Furthermore, the spokesman’s words “there is
no evidence of preparations for a massive attack”*
constituted
an acknowledgement
that the alleged
Libyan threat of an invasion has no basis in fact.
64. There is every indication that the United States is
seeking to consolidate its aggressive military presence
in the region. All these pretexts are simply being used to
deceive both national and international public opinion.
Washington is seeking to create a hotbed of tension,
and the victims will be the Arabs. What other aim could
the barrage of these haphazard accusations have?
65. The truth is that the United States military aid
and the provision of United States weapons of ail kinds
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

are designed simply to cause Arab bloodshed and to
fan the flames of Arab differences. They are not designed to restore Arab rights. The only aim of the
weapons, including AWACS aircraft and other mate’riel, supplied by the United States is to create tension among the Arabs. This is indicated in the letter
from Mr. Ali Treiki, the Secretary of the People’s Committee of the People’s Bureau for Foreign Liaison of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The letter indicates also that
the United States Administration
is trying to deepen the
schism in the Arab homeland and to play the Arabs off
against each other.

a base or a way station for American
American policies aimed at achieving
the world.

interests or for
hegemony over

/
70. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Permit me first, Sir, to congratulate you briefly, not only on your assumption of
the presidency for this month, but also on the magnificent way in which you have already handled your
delicate office, in continuation of the excellent example
set by your immediate predecessor, Ambassador Shah
Nawaz of Pakistan. The brevity of this compliment is,
once again, dictated by the exigencies of time and is in
inverse proportion to the warmth and sincerity behind it
as well as to the outstanding merit to which, I shall be
the first to acknowledge, it pays only a poor tribute.

66. The basic idea behind the establishment
of the
Rapid Deployment
Forces and the strategic alliance
between the United States and Israel is aggression
against the Arabs, the consolidation
of the Israeli
occupation and the fulfilment of Zionist claims over the
region. The idea is certainly not to help the Arabs.

71. Permit me also to join you and the other speakers
who have lamented the untimely passing away of the
late President SCkou Tout-6 of Guinea. We had the
privilege of welcoming him in Malta not so very long
ago. We were impressed by his personality and the
breadth of his vision as much as we admire the sterling contribution
he rendered to his country and to his
young continent. We convey our sad condolences to his
family, to his people, to his country and to Africa.

67. The Council must understand the dimensions of
the scheme now being implemented. It must realize that
the aggression launched by the United States Administration against the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and against the peoples of the region is a grave
threat to international
peace and security by a State
member of the Council. These acts of aggression by a
super-Power, which is supposed to be a responsible and
prudent State, are flagrant violations of the Charter and
the principles of international law. We know, of course,
that the United states will, as in the past, prevent the
Council from shouldering its basic responsibilities,
despite the grave threat to the peace and security of the
region. Nevertheless, we call upon the States members
of the Council that cherish peace to do their utmost to
put an end to the United States military presence in ail
parts of the Arab region. The Arabs do not need the
might of the United States-actually,
the might of the
United States is the might of Israel.

72. If I might take a bit farther the analogy of ideas
associated with the letter P, introduced by our British
colleague yesterday, I might be allowed to add that the
letter P is also associated with prudence, with patience
and with perseverance in the pursuit of peace. These, it
may be recalled, are attributes which all members of the
Council should share, perhaps now as never before,
given the present acute state of tension throughout the
world.
73. Perhaps we also need to be reminded-all
of us,
big and small alike-that,
irrespective of our ideological
orientation or geographical location, we have to abide
strictly and fully by the obligations we freely assumed
when we joined the United Nations and the respective
regional organizations to which we may belong.

68. The only threat hovering over us is the Zionist
threat. If Arabs are temporarily
divided, this is only
because of the policy of the United States, which does
not understand that the nations and peoples of the
region reject alliances and foreign intervention,
and
that they are committed to the liberation of the occupied Arab, Lebanese and Palestinian
territories.
Friendship with the Arabs cannot be built on the ruins
of the Arabs. If the United States wants to deal honestly
with the Arab nation it must respect Arab national
interests and must establish relations based on mutual
respect.

74. We might perhaps also be permitted to stress that
internationally
recognized principles have specific content and lay down binding norms of inter-State behaviour, Those principles, therefore, are not merely
source material from which we embellish our statements; they are not academic shrines before which
we make ritualistic and absent-minded genuflections.
Rather, the carefully defined words of each relevant
principle constitute accurate descriptions of actual
international behaviour expected from and incumbent
upon each one of us.

69. The United States has shown-and
continues to
show in its strategic policies and daily practices-that
it is interested only in tearing .apart the Arab nation,
exploiting its wealth, and consolidating Israeli occupation by any means, including the unlimited assistance provided to Israel, which occupies Palestine and
portions of Lebanon and Syria. The United States is
ignoring the political reality that the Arabs will never,
under any circumstances, permit their lands to become

75. Today, more than ever before, it has become evident that, for better or for worse, in international relations for every action there is an opposite but unequal
reaction. It is also evident that with areas of overlapping tension all too widespread on the political
map any negative action carries with it the certainty of
setting off a chain-reaction, which has far-reaching consequences affecting the interests of entire regions.
8

76. We have also seen that the cumulative effects of
such negative actions over the years have not-1 repeat, not-rendered
any significant advantage to any
one side at the expense of the other. This applies not
only to the States concerned, but also to their neighbours and to the military and ideological division in I
the world today. On the contrary, negative actions
have produced uncounted damage, suffering and death,
while leaving permanent scars on the body politic,
which have now assumed frightening proportions.
77. In these circumstances, surely the time is overdue
to halt these negative processes, to reverse direction
and resolutely to embark on positive action. My Government, for one, firmly believes so. We have deliberately shed the military mantle of past centuries of
our history, turning our backs away permanently from
armed confrontation,
and instead firmly pursuing the
path of peaceful economic co-operation.

their lives and we send our wishes for a speedy recovery to the wounded.
80. We note that even in the midst of differences many
positive elements were contained in the statements of
the two Ministers. In particular, we noted their call for
help to resolve their differences and their expressed
willingness to do so. We welcome these sentiments, as
we firmly believe that the people of these two friendly
non-aligned countries are destined to live and to progress together in open co-operation.
81. We note that the possibilities offered by the regional organizations to which they both belong have not
yet been utilized in this case, but that they stand available. In keeping with our position of principle on the
role of regional organizations, we would urge and encourage early recourse to these organizations in the
first instance.
82. We would also urge restraint and advocate quiet
diplomacy,
because we firmly believe, from actual
experience, that course is the wisest-indeed,
the only
rational-course.
The further deployment of military
force only exacerbates tension; it is no way to find ajust
and durable solution.

78. So, even as I speak here today, back home in
Valletta special envoys from several Mediterranean
countries, including all the North African Mediterranean countries, are gathered together jointly searching
for new concerted initiatives on which we can peacefully embark, so as eventually to free the Mediterranean from its present foreboding and dangerous tension.
,The set objective is gradually but surely to transform
the Mediterranean
into a zone of security and peace,
free from outside interference, with the riparian countries assuming their rightful role as arbiters of their own
destiny. It is in the light of these wider ramifications
that we consider the two items before us, and that is
why we are speaking today.

83. As you know, Mr. President, we have privately
suggested that the Council lend its own authoritative
voice to encourage the utilization of the proffered good
offices and benevolent good will of friendly countries
and regional organizations. We repeat our opinion publicly today. We were gratified yesterday in our individual contacts with both friendly countries to detect a
willingness not to seek accusation and condemnation,
and not to exacerbate tension. We commend both sides
for this accommodating attitude, and we trust that in the
next few days positive results will emerge from the
high-level contacts which you yourself, Mr. President,
in response to the wishes of the Council, have initiated.
It is our collective duty to reduce tension and military
confrontation.
We for our part are ready and willing
to make our modest but maximum,
and exclusively
peaceful, contribution.

79. We with to welcome the presence in New York of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. We listened attentively yesterday to the eloquent outpourings of their respective
points of view in the statements they made. We greatly
regret the bombing incident brought to our attention,
which has caused damage and loss of life. We look on
the unfortunate incident with dismay. We convey our
heartfelt condolences to the families of those who lost

The meeting

9

rose at I p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

COMO

JIOJIYUHTh

CONSEGUIR

EI3AAHSifi

OPl’AHEi

PUBLICACIONES

3AI&HH

OE’bEAHHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAlVfFi

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en lib&as
y casas distribuidotas
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-hnuay

1993-2.050
