United Nations

S/PV.5482

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5482nd meeting
Thursday, 6 July 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Ikouebe
Mr. Christensen
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Mlynár
Mr. Johnston
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
Security Council mission
Report of the Security Council mission on the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2006/434)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-41819 (E)

*0641819*

S/PV.5482

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
July, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to our colleague Her
Excellency Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Permanent
Representative of Denmark to the United Nations, for
her service as President of the Security Council for the
month of June 2006. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Løj for the great
diplomatic skill with which she conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Report of the Security Council mission on the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2006/434)
The President: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Belgium, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Finland, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cools,
(Belgium), Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) and Ms. Lintonen (Finland) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/434, which contains the report of the

2

Security Council mission on the electoral process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that took place
from 10 to 12 June 2006.
I shall now take the floor in my capacity as head
of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
First, I should like once again to express my
thanks and the thanks of our colleagues who
participated in the mission to the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for their welcome
to the Security Council mission that visited Kinshasa
from 10 to 12 June.
I have already reported in detail on our mission,
so today I will address the essential points that I have
communicated to the members of the Council, drawing
also from the mission’s report, which has since been
published.
We came away from our meetings with the
understanding that conditions have now been met to
allow the holding of the elections that will mark the
culmination of the transition period in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In organizational, technical and
security terms, the legislative elections and the first
round of presidential elections should be carried out in
a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the
announced timetable on 30 July.
Nevertheless, during our mission we informed
our interlocutors of the concerns of the members of the
Council about the deterioration of the political
atmosphere, particularly as regards certain messages of
division and exclusion being broadcast by the media.
We stressed that such messages are dangerous and we
recalled other situations in Africa in which such
messages have had tragic consequences. The mission
therefore made recommendations in that respect in its
report, particularly in paragraph 51 regarding respect
for the code of conduct, paragraph 52 regarding access
to media, and paragraph 53 regarding the security of
the electorate and candidates.
During our mission to Kinshasa, we emphasized
the importance we attach to the campaign’s being
carried out as peacefully as possible. All should be able
to speak freely and the press must be allowed to do its
work. In that respect, it is regrettable that a
correspondent of one international media company,
Radio France Internationale, which is widely listened

06-41819

S/PV.5482

to in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was not
accredited and was expelled.
The elections will not be an end in themselves, as
we stressed during our mission. We underlined the
importance of the period to follow. We especially
stressed the need for all political actors to adopt a nonexclusive approach. Much work will remain to be done
following the elections. We note that the situation is far
from stable and that militias continue to be active in
the East.
In
that
respect,
our
report
contains
recommendations relating to two issues of special
importance. Ongoing reform in the security sector is
essential if we are to deal with the problem of armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I refer to paragraphs 54 to 56 of our report in
that regard. Moreover, improved governance is
essential if the Congolese nation and State are finally
to benefit from the country’s wealth after many years
of war and transition. That issue is addressed in
paragraphs 57 and 58 of our report.
Those are the main elements that I wish to stress
in opening this debate.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for July. I wish to assure you that my delegation is
fully prepared to work closely with yours during the
course of our work.
I also wish to thank our colleague, Ambassador
Løj, and her delegation for their excellent work in
June.
I welcome the opportunity to thank you, Sir, in
your capacity as the head of the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the excellent
report that was issued following the visit and which
you have just outlined for us. I simply wish to confirm
that everything you have just said perfectly reflects the
many discussions we held in Kinshasa on 11 and 12
June.
We sent two main messages to the political
protagonists and civil society in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I shall continue to use the full
name “Democratic Republic of the Congo” in my

06-41819

statement because, if I were to use the terms
“Congolese people” or “Congolese leadership”, I
would feel as if I were referring to my own country and
nation. My brother from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will therefore understand why I shall use the
full name of his country to make that distinction.
Our first message was one of thanks to all our
interlocutors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We told them that it is high time that democratic, free,
transparent and credible elections were organized there
in an atmosphere of peace and rejecting hateful and
divisive language. We, too, expressed our concerns
with regard to the tone adopted by the media and made
it clear that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must find a way to ease tensions before proceeding to
elections. With the launching of the campaign on
29 June, we note that calm is prevailing for the
moment, and hope that it will continue to do so up to
the elections and beyond.
The second message was that the international
community has been and continues to be ready to
support the Democratic Republic of the Congo during
this process without any interference, as we believe
that the future leaders of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should emerge exclusively from the ballot
box.
We also explained that, while the elections
certainly represent a crucial step, a great deal remains
to be done. The elections are unlikely to resolve all the
problems. There is still a long road to travel before
peace and stability are fully restored and the
foundations have been laid for sustainable
development. We must therefore bear in mind the need
to preserve the potential for ongoing cooperation with
the international community, which must remain
engaged, and with the United Nations in particular,
which must on this occasion ensure the successful
fruition of its partnership with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My Congolese sensibility leads
me to stress that point.
Six days ago, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo celebrated the forty-sixth anniversary of its
independence. It was precisely at the time that
independence was declared that the difficulties arose.
The crisis in that country has thus lasted 46 years. We
are all aware that the first United Nations intervention
was not successful. Now, however, I feel that the
moment has come for everyone — the international

3

S/PV.5482

community, and the United Nations in particular, as
well as the political actors, leaders and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — to ensure a
successful outcome this time around and to begin the
process of rehabilitation.
The Security Council mission undertaken a few
weeks ago to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was therefore very welcome to us. It was the ideal
opportunity, on the eve of an important event, to clarify
the rules of the game and to agree on the steps that
must be taken in the future to ensure an end to the
lengthy transitional process.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, I join in expressing the sentiments already
voiced regarding your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Denmark. We also join in expressing
our gratitude to you for having led the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
for your remarks this morning.
The mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was vital and timely. Not only was it a clear
demonstration of the commitment of the Security
Council to support and assist the country as it marches
towards the first democratic elections in four decades,
but it also provided an opportunity to learn first-hand
the status of the preparations for the historic elections
that are to take place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Ambassador Ikouebe complemented an important
aspect of what we wanted to say. Therefore, we will
not cover those items; we will only highlight a number
of issues.
First, we urge that the elections be held as
planned and that all the registered voters in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo go to the polls to
exercise their democratic right to choose their leaders.
We appeal to the people and to the leaders of the
various political parties to accept the outcome of the
elections and — once it is established that they were
free and fair — to support that political process and its
outcomes.
Secondly, it is our view that, having invested so
heavily in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including by sending seven
missions, the Security Council needs to remain
engaged in the country during its post-election period

4

to ensure that the political gains to be achieved are
consolidated.
Thirdly, it is also our view that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should continue to benefit from
the presence of the United Nations and its agencies in
maintaining peace, security and stability by instituting
reforms in all sectors that need them. Suffice it to say
here that the challenges are enormous but not
impossible to overcome.
Fourthly, within the region it is crucial to enhance
our efforts to support the people and the elected
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as they adjust in the post-election and post-conflict
phase so that they can find their rightful role as an
important and strategic player in the region. To that
end, we look forward to the holding of a second
conference on the Great Lakes region at an early date
to chart the way forward to regional integration and
cooperation. In that regard, Tanzania reiterates its
commitment to maintain and strengthen its policy of
good-neighbourliness with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Lastly, we believe that the gains that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo stands to secure can
be sustained only if there is a concerted effort to
alleviate the abject poverty of its people. We have
heard too often that a rich endowment of natural
resources can sometimes be a curse; the reverse is also
possible and is achievable. With sufficient political
will — especially on the part of the political leaders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — and with the
assistance of the United Nations, the rest of the
international community and the international financial
institutions, the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be transformed into an economic giant of the region
and, indeed, of Africa.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo now
stands at a point where it must rise to meet the
aspirations of all its people to peace, security and
development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Permit me at the outset to carry out
a pleasant duty — that of saying what a pleasure it is to
see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council during

06-41819

S/PV.5482

the month of July. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, and to congratulate her on a successful
mandate as Council President last month.
I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
kindly agreed to organize this public meeting to
consider the report of the Security Council mission on
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2006/434). I also wish to sincerely thank the
members of the Council mission, whom you led on
their recent visit of 10 to 12 June.
Indeed, this year, particular emphasis has been
placed on the implementation of the transition process
begun by the 17 December 2002 Comprehensive and
Inclusive Peace Agreement. The members of the
Council mission were able to evaluate the status of that
process, which is entering its final phase. They were
eye witnesses to the deep desire of the Congolese
people to go to the polls to freely and democratically
choose, for the first time in four decades, men and
women to preside over their destiny during the next
legislative session. From their discussions with their
many interlocutors, the members of the Council
mission undoubtedly understood that an unequivocal
consensus was emerging in favour of continuing and
concluding the peace process as soon as possible.
This last phase is a decisive step in the peace
process. The campaign for the general elections slated
for 30 July has been officially under way for several
days throughout the national territory.
Here, I should like to congratulate the Council
members on the drafting of their excellent report,
which I am sure will enable us to better chart the path
still ahead of us and will lead us together towards the
peace and development to which millions of Congolese
women and men aspire. The members of the Council
mission
formulated
a
series
of
relevant
recommendations; I agree with all of them. I hope that
the Security Council, which will undoubtedly discuss
the report, can follow it up in concrete terms.
In that connection, the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, has
reaffirmed his commitment to do everything possible to
ensure the smooth conduct of the elections, which are a
new rendezvous with history that my country cannot
miss. For the President, these elections are crucial and
sensitive. They are the right path towards
normalization and the resolution of the eternal problem

06-41819

of governmental legitimacy in my country. The
President believes that nothing else must delay the
holding of the elections. He has always tirelessly urged
the people to turn out to vote in massive numbers and
has asked the political actors to accept the verdict of
the ballot box out of respect for the Congolese people.
The President has also instructed me to express to
the Security Council his appreciation for resolution
1693 (2006). Adopted on 30 June — the anniversary of
the independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — the resolution sends a strong message to the
Republic with a view to the smooth conduct and
success of the electoral process.
I would like to share with the Council some
concerns expressed by the Congolese people regarding
the holding of the elections.
First, with respect to the organization of the
elections, we would like here highly to commend the
tremendous amount of work done by the Independent
Electoral Commission (IEC). Nonetheless, every effort
must be made to ensure that no new political or
technical constraints are allowed to prevent the IEC
from holding the elections in accordance with the
calendar.
Secondly, while reaffirming the importance of
fair access to the media, let me also stress the
importance of doing everything possible to ensure that
messages of hate and exclusion are expunged from the
electoral campaign. Indeed, sadly, certain radio
broadcasts bear a striking similarity to those aired by
Radio-Télévision libre des Milles Collines. We
welcome the fact that the IEC and the High Media
Authority are currently carrying out a publicity and
awareness-raising campaign on the electoral process.
We remain convinced that the campaign will fully meet
expectations. Let me add that measures have been
taken to enable the international media to cover the
elections.
Thirdly, with respect to new rounds of
negotiations and consultations, let me stress that the
referendum, the Constitution, the electoral law and the
upcoming elections all emanate from a comprehensive
and inclusive agreement that itself was the outcome of
several political dialogues and consultation processes.
The Congolese people have clearly expressed their
wish that an end be put to a seemingly interminable
transition period through the establishment of new
institutions and leaders of their choice. We must ensure

5

S/PV.5482

respect for that clearly expressed desire of the
Congolese people and not jeopardize the gains made to
date during the transition by engaging in fruitless
political dialogue.
We in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
believe in the value of dialogue. Along with
negotiations and consultations, it is the very essence of
democracy. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been engaged in an ongoing internal dialogue since
well before the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, signed on
10 July 1999, which marked the beginning of active
involvement on the part of the United Nations. That
will certainly continue to be the case before, during
and after the elections.
Fourthly, the security situation in the country in
general and in the eastern part of the national territory
remains a source of concern. We welcome the fact that
the Security Council and the European Union have
agreed - and I thank them for this - substantially to
increase their presence in my country. That will help to
set up mechanisms aimed at ensuring secure conditions
for the people and for the elections. We must also
ensure strict respect for the law and for public order,
without prejudice to efforts to promote national
reconciliation, restore the authority of the State and
rebuild the country. Those efforts must continue during
the electoral process.
Let me assure the Council that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will do everything in its power
to ensure that the elections take place in a calm
atmosphere. The support of the international
community will be crucial and decisive. In that respect,
the support of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
of the European Union and of bilateral partners is
greatly appreciated. It is important that together we use
all means at our disposal to ensure the success of the
elections.
Not only must the elections take place
successfully; we must meet, in a responsible manner,
the expectations of the people following the elections.
It should be clearly indicated — and the Council
mission stressed this point — that the elections are not
an end in themselves. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo is requesting additional assistance in the area of
the restructuring and reform of the army and the police
as well with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.

6

The support of the international community will
also be necessary in terms of the promotion of policies
aimed at national reconciliation as well as economic
recovery and the reconstruction of the country. The
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, are invited to consider continuing their
cooperation over the long term, because the peace and
security that the Congolese people desire so
wholeheartedly are prerequisites for the sustainable
development of not only my country but also of the
entire Great Lakes region.
Those are elements of a broader programme to be
developed by the first Congolese Government of the
Third Republic. That programme must include judicial
assistance so as to put an end to rampant impunity and
prosecute all those suspected of having committed
violations of human rights or of international
humanitarian law, particularly with respect to
vulnerable segments of the population, especially
women and children.
Before concluding, allow me to express to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo our gratitude for
their tireless efforts to restore peace to my country. I
would also like to thank the Security Council for its
periodic dispatch of missions to my country. Indeed,
we are pleased to note that each visit by a Security
Council mission has led to tangible progress in the
peace process.
Lastly, I cannot but mention the staff of MONUC,
the United Nations system and the international and
national staff, who are paying a heavy price — and
sometimes making the ultimate sacrifice — to restore
peace and dignity to my country.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Finland, to
whom I give the floor.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
country Norway, member of the European Economic

06-41819

S/PV.5482

Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this statement.
Mr. President, let me first thank you for having
led the recent Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for your
briefing on the results of the mission. We share the
assessment of the situation that you presented to the
Council on 16 June.
We are indeed at a critical juncture in the history
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The holding
of the first free elections in 45 years represents a
milestone marking the end of the transition period.
These elections must fulfil the earnest desire of the
Congolese people to select their representatives, at
different levels of the democratic institutions, in free,
fair and transparent elections.
We fully support the electoral calendar set by the
Independent Electoral Commission for the presidential
and legislative elections. We urge all political forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage in the
electoral campaign in a spirit of peace and
reconciliation and to hold a responsible debate. We
believe that, in order to create a favourable climate for
the elections, all possible measures must be taken to
ensure respect for freedom of expression, including
through fair access to the media. At the same time, it is
crucial that the media display a responsible attitude.
The EU condemns all appeals to hatred and
xenophobia. The negative messages of the pre-election
campaign on the subject of congolité must not be
repeated.
Successful elections require sufficient security.
While it is first and foremost the responsibility of the
large Congolese police force and the new integrated
units of the army, supported by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), to provide security, the EU,
upon a request by the United Nations and supported by
the Congolese authorities, has decided to deploy an EU
military operation in support of MONUC. The Security
Council authorized that operation by resolution 1671
(2006) of 25 April, and the EU Council of Ministers
officially took the decision to launch the operation on
12 June. In addition, the police assistance mission in
Kinshasa (EUPOL KINSHASA) is being reinforced
during the election period to help the Congolese police
forces coordinate their activities. We will thus be in a
position to make a significant contribution to creating a

06-41819

more secure environment for the elections. However, it
remains the responsibility of the Congolese authorities
to ensure the protection of all the candidates,
preventing attempts at harassment or at restricting their
mobility throughout the Republic.
Successful elections also require sufficient
resources. The European Union and its member States
have to date provided some €250 million —
approximately $320 million — or nearly 80 per cent of
the overall cost of the elections. We have full trust in
MONUC’s ability to support the Congolese authorities
effectively in the organization of the elections.
Furthermore, in order to verify the correct conduct of
the elections and to create trust in the results of the
elections, the European Union is deploying a large
election observation mission. The mission will liaise
closely with other international observer missions, in
particular those from the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community.
However, successful elections mark only the
beginning of the long and arduous process of recovery
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nobody
should be fooled into believing that the inauguration of
a new President and the swearing-in of the members of
parliament will be the end of this process. Equally,
continued strong support by the international
community will be necessary long after the elections.
In our view, the following elements are crucial
for the long-term success of our common efforts to
stabilize the Democratic Republic of the Congo. First,
it is important that the election results be accepted by
all political players. Conditions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are such that all those who wish
to do so will be able to participate. The European
Union therefore calls on all the political parties, even
those which have chosen not to take part in the
elections, to undertake to respect the verdict of the
polls. The real test of the success of the democratic
process will be the way in which the election results
are handled and the way in which the majority deals
with the minority. Everyone should look to the future
in a spirit of tolerance and reconciliation, a future in
which all political forces must participate in the
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Secondly, security has to be effective in the
whole territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Important progress has been achieved in the

7

S/PV.5482

field of security-sector reform, with the process of
army integration under way. Since June 2005, the
European Union has supported defence reform through
its mission of assistance for security-sector reform
which provides advice and assistance to the Congolese
authorities. A key project in this framework addresses
the chain of payments, aiming at ensuring that monthly
pay reaches the soldiers. Furthermore, the European
Union has helped in achieving important results in the
formation of the Integrated Police Unit in Kinshasa,
through, inter alia, its civilian police mission, EUPOL
KINSHASA.
However, much still needs to be done, and
therefore the European Union is currently drafting a
strategy in order to support security-sector reform in
the post-election period. The EU urges the Congolese
authorities to pursue further army integration as a
matter of urgency and to remedy the problems related
to command, discipline and, in particular, impunity, as
well as those concerning financial management and
social support.
The related problem of illegal armed groups in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to
remain at the centre of attention after the elections. We
welcome the increased attention the Security Council
has recently paid to the regional dimensions of this
problem. The EU stresses the crucial role neighbouring
countries can play and underlines the need for strict
enforcement of the arms embargo. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2006/310)
on a strategy to deal with the problems of armed
groups operating in the region. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue its work in this field, including
on the specific problem of the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA).
We welcome the firm action taken by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to combat impunity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and hope also
that there will soon be progress in apprehending the
leaders of the LRA. We also commend MONUC’s role
in the disarmament of illegal armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. MONUC
has paid a heavy tribute in human lives. We expect that
MONUC will continue to play its fundamental role for
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo after
the elections, long enough to ensure a proper security
environment in the eastern provinces.

8

Thirdly, economic development is key to the
long-term success of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The country is rich in natural resources which,
if illegal exploitation is halted and if these resources
are managed transparently, should provide ample
income to bring about a degree of prosperity for the
people.
Since the Pretoria and Sun City Agreements, the
international community has been an indispensable
partner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
important that the international community remain
committed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
beyond the election period and that it be given the
opportunity to do so. The European Union and its
member States are among the main development
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since 2002, programmes under the Cotonou Agreement
have been funded with some €750 million. For the next
indicative programme, from 2008 to 2013, the
European Commission will aim to build on the election
process with, inter alia, support for poverty reduction,
governance, judicial reform and security-sector reform.
In this regard, the European Union expects the new
President and Government to govern in the interests of
all Congolese and to stand ready to engage with the
international community in a fair and transparent
dialogue on governance.
The year 2006 might well be the most significant
year for the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
independence. The successful holding of the elections
will be the first, decisive step in the construction of a
new, brighter future for the people. That in turn
successful elections will also greatly contribute to
peace and development in the whole region of the
Great Lakes. Together, we have a responsibility to help
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
achieve this goal and to stand by them in support of the
authorities emerging from the elections for a long time
after the actual election period. The EU stands ready to
remain a part of any future engagement by the
international community in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Cools (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I would also like to thank your

06-41819

S/PV.5482

predecessor, Ambassador Løj of Denmark. Finally, let
me indicate that Belgium fully aligns itself with the
statement just made by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.

We welcome the establishment of a committee of
eminent personalities. We are certain that that initiative
and others will reduce tension and prevent the setbacks
that might result from inappropriate actions.

Last Friday, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo marked the forty-sixth anniversary of its
independence and launched its electoral campaign.
This campaign will culminate in elections, with the
first round of the presidential elections and the
legislative elections to be held on 30 July. Therefore,
today’s Council debate, following the recent mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is particularly
timely.

Our message must be simple: those individuals
who can demonstrate, in free and transparent elections,
that they enjoy the full support of the Congolese people
may legitimately take up their new responsibilities in a
democracy-based Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Let us not forget the essential role to be played in that
democratic regime by the future parliament, where the
representatives of the people will sit, and which will
give full expression to the notion of inclusivity for
which the Council appealed during its recent visit.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having provided my delegation with this opportunity to
share some thoughts on recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on what we feel
may help guide the Council’s future action.
First of all, I would like, on behalf of the Belgian
Government, to express our appreciation for the work
carried out by the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent years through the
Security Council, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
and the humanitarian and development agencies.
Belgium has provided unstinting support for United
Nations efforts to meet the real challenges of restoring
peace and stability and achieving reunification and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Belgian support in the form of logistics, equipment and
training for the deployment of a Beninese battalion in
Katanga is the most recent example of such assistance.
The electoral process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo represents a major challenge, and we
must ensure that it proceeds smoothly. We must
demand that the leaders and the candidates adhere to a
code of conduct setting the standards aimed at ensuring
correct and respectful behaviour by all parties towards
other candidates and the electorate.
The bold messages that you, Mr. President,
conveyed during your visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo were very important in that respect. We
must reject restrictions on the freedom of the press,
promote equal access to the media, prohibit the
intimidation of candidates and condemn hateful and
xenophobic speech.

06-41819

We cannot avoid the key issue of our future
involvement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
following the elections. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on MONUC (S/2006/390) contains a
number of valuable preliminary comments in that
respect. Belgium believes that the issue of maintaining
troops within the framework of MONUC must be
carefully and fully examined. In our opinion, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be able to
draw on MONUC support for as long as is necessary to
help it to restore State authority for the long term over
all of its national territory, in particular in the east of
the country. That is in the interests of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Great Lakes region and
Africa as a whole.
The report of the Secretary-General rightly points
out that the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains worrying and that
significant efforts are required in that respect. It also
highlights the need to begin reflection on
peacebuilding mechanisms in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome those proposals. Belgium
will do everything in its power to contribute to the
debate on such proposals, as well as to their
implementation, in full cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its partners.
The messages that the Council conveyed at
Kinshasa, in particular with regard to the need to
improve governance and turn the page on a tumultuous
past in that respect, demonstrate its political resolve to
make progress. Belgium remains convinced that
structural mechanisms geared towards improving the
management of natural resources can provide a
meaningful and lasting contribution in that respect.

9

S/PV.5482

The Secretary-General — and you, Mr. President,
in your report — mentioned the efforts that must be
made with regard to the reform of the security sector in
general and the army in particular. Together with a
number of other partners, in particular South Africa
and Angola, as well as the European Union, Belgium is
fully engaged in that sector. We have participated, in
particular, in training and equipping nine integrated
brigades of the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, in spite of those
efforts, there is a long road ahead. It is our duty to help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish a
professional republican army, which it needs if it is to
reassert its authority throughout its territory — an army
at the service of its people. Let us not waste time
drawing up plans that, for the most part, already exist.
Let us undertake solid efforts. Let us invest in effective
and sustainable reform of the army, the police and the
justice sector. That is the essence of peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): In my capacity
as head of the Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would like once
again to thank the Congolese authorities for the warm
welcome that they gave us. I would also like to thank

10

the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Bill Swing for
the excellent work the United Nations is doing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like to conclude by repeating the words
of Ambassador Ileka of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who said that his country has a new rendezvous
with history. The international community, in particular
the Council, is mobilized and ready to help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to succeed.
I believe that I am expressing the view of all of
the members of the Council in saying that we are
determined to remain partners with the Congolese
people after the elections in order to help them with the
process of the recovery of the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

06-41819
