THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
st

MEETING:
NEW

7 JULY 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/202 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*......*.*

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of the Republic of Djibouti for membership in the United Nations
(S/12359) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . 0.. . , . . . . . . . ,

1

S/PV. 2021

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Officiul Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2021ST
Held in New York

MEETING

on Thursday,

President: Mr. CHEN Chu (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2021)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of
Djibouti for membership in the United Nations
(S/12359)
The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of the Republic of
Djibouti for membership in the United Nations
(S/l 2359)
I, The PRESIDENT (transbtion from Chinese): I have
received letters dated 7 July 1977 from the representatives
of Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Oman, Somalia and Yemen in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussionof the application of the Republic of Djibouti
for admission to membership in the United Nations.
Therefore, in accordancewith the provisions of Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, as well as the usual practice of the Council, I
propose to invite those representativesto participate in tlic
discussionwithout the right to vote.
2. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
placesreservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usualunderstandingthat they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation?of the President, Mr. Baduwi (Egypt),
Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Admina [Gabon), Mr. Aboul-

7 July 1977, at 3.30 pm.
Nasr (Oman), Mr. Mussa(Somalia)und Mr. Sallam( Yemen)
took the placesreservedfor them nt the sideof the Council
chamher.
3. The PRESIDENT (transhtior~ from Chinese): The
Council will now consider the report of the Committee on
the Admission of New Membersconcerningthe application
of the Republic of Djibouti for membershipin the United
Nations, which appearsin document S/12359. Membersof
the Council have also received a draft resolution sponsored
by all membersof the Council and circulated in document
S/12358.
4. Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation from Frelzch):
Mr. President,may I, first of all, extend to you my heartiest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency. I
should like to say how pleasedthe French delegationis to
see the representative of a State with which my country
enjoys the best of relations acting as Presidentthis month.
The reputation that you have earned here assuresus that
our work will be conducted successfully.1 should alsolike
to congratulate AmbassadorBarton on the effective, skilful
and wise manner in which he dischargedhis exalted task
during a difficult month. I ask Mr. Lapointe to convey
thesecongratulations to Mr. Rarton.
5. Finally, I should like to welcome to this hall
Mr. Abdallah Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning ancl
Development, who is one of the leaders of the new
Republic of Djibouti and is already well known at the
United Nations. I should also like to welcomeMr. Abdoulkadcr Waberi Askbar.
6. In introducing draft resolution S/12358, sponsoredby
all members of the Council, whereby the Republic of
Djibouti is recommended by the Council for admissionto
membershipin the United Nations, the French delegationis
not going through a mere formality. It is not merely acting
as spokesmanof the Council in observing that the new
State fulfils all the requirementsof the Charter, is anxious
to respect the commitments imposed by it and should
therefore be admitted to membership in the LJnitcd
Nations. In warmly recommending to the Council that it
should view with favour the candidacy of the Republic of
Djibouti, the French delegation recalls, not without emotion, the bonds forged by time between France and the new
State that hasjust come into existence by the Red Sea.
7. As is known, about 125 years have passed since
Frenchmen came into contact, in the last century, with
that part of Africa which becamethe French Territory of
the Afars and Issasprior to accedingto independenceunder

adjective-that, on 8 May 1977, by a very large majority
and in all freedom, the people decided in favour of
independence,following a referendum which took placein
the presence of representativesof the Organization of
African Unity, the Leagueof Arab States and the United
Nations. Taking note of the resultsof the referendum,the
French Parliamenta few weekslater endorsedthe decision
of the people and, on 27 June, the Republic of Djibouti
accededto full international sovereignty.

the name of the Republic of Djibouti. Throughout that
entire period, our two peoples have engaged in a friendly
dialogue which, I am convinced, will continue in the future
in the entirely new circumstances brought about by history.
8. If I have referred to that distant period of the French
presence, it is, as was stated by Mr. Galley, French Minister
of Co-operation, on 27 June in Djibouti,
“because those times were of primary importance in the
destiny of that country, aild in spite of the difficulties
and problems which marked, here as elsewhere, the
forward movement of men and events throughout the
colonial era, it is clear that from the outset human
sympathy and affection played an important role in the
life we shared for more than a century”.

14. There is no need to stress to the international
community the importanceof the birth of this new State.
As the representativeof the French Government saidat the
independenceceremonies,
“Located at the crossroadsof Arab and African civilizations, at the junction of Africa and Asia, at the outlets of
the Red Sea and the East African highlands, Djibouti
occupies a position of great economic and strategic
importance. In former times it wasa stagingpoint on the
road to the Far East. Today it takes a very active part in
modern shipping and is an outlet for the inland
countries.”

Need 1 recall that we bore arms together in two world
conflicts?
9. Is that at all surprising’? The new State of Djibouti is an
attractive country. It is not an inhospitable land, as some
would have it. It must be accepted and loved for many
reasons,Courageous, and mindful of their faith and
traditions, but also anxious for further development, the
peopleliving there are rightly proud of their country.

15. Thus, Djibouti is today the master of its fate. France,
which endeavoured strictly to respect the will of the
peoples, believes that each State has the sole ability to
determine its goals,to decide the types of society appropriate to its characterand to agreeto the sacrificesthat any
kind of developmentpresupposes.
France, for its part, will
continue to lend the new State all co-operation, in termsof
men, capital and equipment, so long as that is desired.In
his messageof 26 June, the President of the French
Republic forcefully madethat point when he said:“France
intendsneither to forget nor to ignore Djibouti.”

10. But 1 should like also to refer briefly to the institutional and political developmentsthat led the Republic of
Djibouti to independence.
11. In responseto a desire expressedby the people,more
than a year ago France defined the processthat wasto lead
the French Territory of the Afars and Issasto independence. That processwas scrupulously adhered to, in close
agreementwith the local political groups. Each time-limit
wasmet, confirming for the inhabitants of the Territory the
indispensable
nature of the dynamics of unity. At the same
time, France consistently stated its policy before various
international bodies--which, moreover, were invited to go
to Djibouti to judge on the scenethe democratic natureof
the processthat had been set in motion-and it statedits
policy alsoto the neighbouring countries,

lb. We shall, in all spheres,accede to requeststhat are
freely made, with respectfor the sovereignty and independenceof the new Kepublic. My country intendsto conform
strictly and faithfully to the line of conduct it hasthus set
for itself.
17. Finally, on behalf of France, I should like today to
greet the leadersof the Republic of Djibouti. and particularly its President,Mr. MassanGouled. I extend to the new
Republic and its peoplemy country’s warmestwishes.The
Republic of Djibouti and its people may rest assuredthat
our friendship, born of mutual esteemand knowledge,will
be constant. They may also rest assuredof our determination to maintain the spirit of solidarity so indispensable
to our times-while respectingthe sovereignty of everyone.

12. As the membersof the Council are aware,our concern
was to enablethe Republic of Djibouti to begin its new life
in the best possibleconditions. With regard to internal
policy, the aim was to bring together all the political
movementsand to create a truly national consensus.
That
aim was to a very considerable extent achieved. On the
diplomatic level, our desire was to contribute to the
establishmentof an atmosphere of peace, which would
militate in favour of Djibouti and would be of advantageto
all the nations of the region. I am convinced that, in that
respecttoo, our intentions were very well understood.

18. The PKESIDENT (trunslatio~~ jkm CYhitzesc): I thatlk
the representativeof France for his kind words, including
his remarksabout the relations bctweon France and China.

13. That was no easy path, but France, in view of the
result, has no regrets about having taken this calculated
risk. Indeed, it was in those circumstances,which 1 would
venture to describe as “exemplary’‘-the report of the
mission*of the Organizalion seemsto me to justify that

19. Mr. JAlPAL (India): I should like to extend to YOU,
Sir, the felicitations of my delegationon your assumption
of the presidencyof the Security Council for the month of
July. Weassureyou of our co-operation ancl wish you every
successin guiding the Council’sdeliberations.We have no
doubt that your wide political and diplomatic experience
will be of the greatestvalue to the Council and will produce
fruitful resultsfor the Llnited Nations.

1 United Nations Mission to Observe the Refcrcndum and
Elections in I~rench Somaliland (Djibouti). For the text of the
report, SW A/32/1 07 and Corr. 1 and Add. 1,

2

20. I should like also to congratulate your predecessor.
Ambassador Barton of Canada, on a difficult job well done
last month. He had some complex problems and several
awkward moments, but he was able to overcome them with
patience, good humour and gentle persuasion at all hours of
the day or night.

29. This new member of the international community will
become the 148th Member of our Organization. It has
already said it is prepared to abide by all its obligations and,
like any newly born entity, it will need protection,
assistance and understanding of its brothers in the rest of
the world.

21. The delegation of India is happy to join in the
Council’s recommendation to the General Assembly that
Djibouti, being qualified, should be admitted to the United
Nations. It is a matter of great joy to welcome the
liberation of a people and a country like Djibouti from
colonial rule, and its entry into the United Nations as a
sovereign Member State will represent not only the fulfilment of a sacred international trust but also the rcalization
of one of the important objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations.

30. It is the unanimous desire of the Council to submit to
the General Assembly the application of Djibouti for
membership. That is borne out by the draft resolution
before the Council. The Assembly will certainly be in
complete agreement when the matter is presented to it for
consideration. That is why we wish, as of now, to bid
welcome to Djibouti, a country we were fortunately
honoured to see come into existence and for which we have
special affection.
31. We know that the courage demonstrated by the people
of Djibouti during the two electoral events we witnessed
proves they will be able to move forward in the building of a
prosperous country free from foreign interference. Its
participation as a member of the regional organization, the
stability or its relations with its brothers on the African and
Asian continents and, finally, its membership in this
Organization augur well for Djibouti.

22. The journey of Djibouti to independence has not been
easy. Fortunately, the supervision exercised by the United
Nations since 1960 has ensured respect for Djibouti’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. It has
also ensured that the process of self-determination has been
free and fair. It is noteworthy that 98.7 per cent of the
people voted for independence and for no other form of
termination of the colonial rule.

32. In his letter to the Secretary-General /see S/12357/,
the President of the Republic of Djibouti, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Gouled Aptidon, stated clearly that his Covernment assumed its obligations under the Charter of the
LJnited Nations and that it was in a position to abide by
them faithfully and conscientiously.
The delegation of
Venezuela would add that it considers that Djibouti not
only fulfils the requirements of the Charter for admission as
a full member of our Organization but also, as an
independent sovereign State, has the right to be represented
in this universal forum.

23. My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
the Government of France on the objective and impartial
role it played in discharging its responsibilities under the
Charter as the former administering Power in Djibouti. It is
in the finest tradition of France to offer to help Djibouti in
the early stages of its independent existence.
24. The Prime Minister of my country has conveyed to the
Government of Djibouti India’s interest in establishing, and
desire to establish, close and fruitful co-operation with it.

33. For all these reasons we welcome Djibouti’s application and we are one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution before the Council.

25. We wish the Government and people of Djibouti every
success in consolidating and maintaining their independence, and we look forward to co-operating with them at
the United Nations and outside it.

34. At the same time we wish to express our pleasure at
the attitude of the French Government in taking this step
towards the elimination of the last vestiges of its colonial
past in Africa.

lirztev~,Ptrrtior? fkoiiz
26. Ms. LOPEZ (Venezuela)
Spar?ishl: I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of’ the Council. You are
beginning your term of office as the Council considers a
particularly important subject, the admission of a new
Member to the United Nations.

35. We repeat our welcome and extend our best wishes to
the people of Djibouti. It is with pleasure that we see the
two representatives of Djibouti now present in the Council,
the Minister of Planning and Development, Mr. Abdallah
Mohamed Kamil, and Deputy Abdoulkader Waberi Askbar.

27. I should like, too, to say how much we cstecm
Ambassador Barton of Canada for the outstanding work he
did last month. Thanks to his patience and skill we were
able to adopt resolutions on two delicate questions.

3G. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): Mr. President, may
1 say how pleased we are that this meeting should be taking
place under your presidency. We hope that this month may
prove to be a reasonably quiet one for the Security Council,
but ncverthcless I can say that, should this hope be
disappointed, we have full confidence that WC shall be able
to rely on your wisdbm and. sBilI’ in guiding our work. At
the same time I should like to associate my delegation with
the message of congratulations which you, on behalf of us
all, sent to your predecessor, Ambassador Barton of
Canada, for the admirable way in which he conducted the
work of the Council during the difficult month of June.

28. As a member, together with two other Member
States-Sri Lanka and Norway-of
the United Nations
observer mission which witnessed the referendum in
Djibouti, we were able, two months ago, personally to
experience the emotional cvcnt of the referendum in
Djibouti. We saw the civic spirit of a people which, facing
up
to the problems of nature and other difficulties,
participated in a vote to show the world that they desired
to become independent and freely to exercise their sovereignty .
3

for freedom, provides an opportunity for it to achieveits
aspirationsto be masterof its own future and to ensure
economic, social and cultural development and progress
in conditions of complete sovereigntyand in accordance
with its national interests.This event isa reflection of the
profound national and social changesthat have taken
place in our world as a result of the increaseddesireof
peoplesto live freely and independently and to promote
new relations among States basedon equality and on
respect for independenceand national sovereignty, in
order to bring about a new international economicand
political order, an order that would provide every nation
with an opportunity to develop freely and in accordance
with its own desires.”

37. It is always one of the more pleasant duties that fall to
members of the Security Council to welcome aspiring new
Members. My delegation will therefore be very pleased to
vote in favour of the draft resolution the Council has before
it recommending the admission of Djibouti.
38. We have followed Djibouti’s progress to independence
with very great interest, and note with satisfaction that this
process has been accomplished in a peaceful and democratic
fashion, This satisfaction was given expression in a message
of congratulations
which my Prime Minister sent to
President Hassan Gouled on independence day.
39. I should like to pay a tribute to the statesmanship and
understanding shown by the authorities of both France and
Djibouti, which have made this peaceful transition possible.
At the same time I should like to say how much we
welcome the statements that have been made by the
countries neighbouring Djibouti in support of Djibouti’s
sovereignty and independence, All this augurs well for the
future of the new State. My Government hopes to establish
close and friendly relations with the Government of
Djibouti in the near future.

44. The Romanian delegationwould like also to take this
opportunity warmly to welcomethe presencein our midst
of the delegation of the Republic of Djibouti, headedby
Mr. Abdallah Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning and
Development.
45. In expressing our satisfaction at the fact that that
country has accededto independence,we shouldlike once
again to emphasizethe paramount need to eliminate the
aftermath of colonialismfrom African soil.

40. If the General Assembly agrees in due course to accept
our recommendation,
Djibouti will become the 148th
Member of the United Nations. In this way we shall move
one step further towards the goal of universality to which
my Government, like other Governments represented here,
attaches very great importance. We look forward to
welcoming the delegation of Djibouti here as representativcs of a Member State and to worlcing closely with them
in the future. In the meantime we wish the Government
and people of Djibouti well in dealing with the important
tasks that now fact them.

46. The admissionto the United Nations of the Republic
of Djibouti will constitute a new step towards the universality of the Organization. On this occasionwe shouldalso
like to repeat our conviction that the Security Councilwill
view favourably the request of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam to occupy its legitimate place at the United
Nations.
47. In conclusion, I should like to expressthe profound
satisfaction of my delegation at the fact that the Council
seemsready unanimously to recommendthe admissionof
the Republic of Djibouti to United Nations membership.
We are convinced that the Republic of Djibouti will make
its contribution to the realization of the noble aimsof the
Organization.

41. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intelpretatio?? from F)er~dt):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Romanian delegation I
should like to extend to you our warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. It is a pleasant task for me to recall here the
relations of close friendship and co-operation which so
fortunately exist between our peoples, our parties and our
countries, I wish you every successin your responsible
office and should like to assure you of the entire
co-operation of the Romaniandelegation.

48. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):I thank
the representativeof Romaniafor his friendly sentiments.I
share his gratification at the growing friendly relations
existing between our two parties,countries and peoples.

42. At the sametime I should like to requestthe Canadian
delegation to convey our cordial congratulations to Ambassador Barton on the extremely effective and competent
way in which he presided over our work in the month of
June.

49, Mr, AKE-lUND (Pakistan): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasureto extend to you, on behalf of the delegation
of Pakistan and on my own behalf, our very warm
felicitations on your assumptionof the presidencyof the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that,
under your experienced guidance,the Council will acquit
itself well and dischargethe tasks before it in a spirit of
harmony and with dispatch.

43. The Security Council is at present considering the
application of the Republic of Djibouti for membershipin
the United Nations. We fully support that request,particularly since Romaniawas one of the first States to recognize
the new State and to welcome the proclamation of the
Republic of Djibouti. In a messageaddressed to His
Excellency Mr. HassnnGouled Aptidon, the President of
the new republic, the Presidentof the Socialist Republic of
Romania,Mr. Nicolae Ccausescu,stated:

SO. I take this opportunity also to pay a tribute to
AmbassadorBarton of Canadawho, during the previous
month, guided our deliberationsto successfulconclusions
with ability and patienceaswell aswith ;I firm hand.
51. We arc indeed glad that another African country has
achieved independence. We congratulate the people of
D.jibouti on the successfulculmination of their strugglefor

“The accession to independence of the Republic of
Djibouti, expressing as it doesthe desireof your people
4

Y

bique, which will undoubtedly be a substantial contribution
in helping to overcome and destroy the remnants of
colonialism on the African continent.

63. I should like to take this opportunity to express once
more to Ambassador Barton of Canada my delegation’s
appreciation for the tact and spirit of compromise with
which he conducted our debates last month.

72. The family of African States has been joined by one
further member. The people of Djibouti has achieved
independence. According to the statement of President
Hassan Gouled, the new State intends to base its foreign
policy on prblciples of neutrality and to develop friendly
relations with its neighbours. Such a Policy is fully in
accord witi the atis and principles of the United Nations.

64 I now wish to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Abdallah Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning and
Development of the Republic of Djibouti, and Mr. Abdoulkader Waberi Askbar.
65. The agenda for our meeting today concerns the
admission of the Republic of Djibouti to membership & the
United Nations. Benin welcomed with greatest pleasure the
news that the fraternal State of Djibouti was acceding to
national and international sovereignty on 27 June 1977,
after more than a century of coltinial domination and after
many painful vicissitudes in its long struggle for national
liberation. However, in order to be able fully to exercise
that national and international sovereignty, which was so
painfully won, it is necessary that the Republic of Djibouti
become a member of the international community; hence,
my delegation warmly supports the admission of the
Republic of Djibouti to membership in the United Nations.

73. On the day when the independence of Djibouti was
declared, the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Chairman
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR,
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, sent a telegram to the President of
the Republic of Djibouti which read as follows:
“On behalf of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of
the USSR, on behalf of the Soviet people and on my own
behalf, I send you and the people of Djibouti our
heartfelt congratulations on the proclamation of the
independence of your country.

66. The Security Council, by unanimously recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of the Republic of
Djibouti to the United Nations, is taking one more step
towards the objective of universality laid down in the
charter.

“In pursuing its unchanging policy of equality, friendship and peaceful co-operation with all States, and also
mindful of the principles of self-determination, national
freedom and independence for peoples, the Soviet Union
proclaims its recognition of the Republic of Djibouti as a
sovereign and independent State and its willingness and
readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it.

67. My delegation is here and now convinced that the
Republic of Djibouti, by accepting the obligations of the
Charter, is solemnly committing itself to assume the new
responsibilities incumbent upon it internationally. My
delegation is convinced that the Republic of Djibouti will
surely make a contribution to the activities of the United
Nations and to the maintenance of peace and security
throughout the world.

“I congratulate you on being elected to a very
responsible post in this new State and express the hope
that friendly relations will develop between the Soviet
Union and the Republic of Djibouti in the interests of the
peoples of both countries and in the name of peace and
social progress,”

68. In conclusion, 1 should like to address to the Government and the brother people of Djibouti best wishes for
peace and prosperity from the Government and the people
of the People’s Republic of Benin.

74. At a time when the Soviet people is preparing to
celebrate the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October
Socialist Revolution, the Soviet delegation would like to
take this opportunity to declare once again the complete
and total solidarity of the Soviet Union with those African
peoples which are struggling to destroy the bastions of
colonialism and racism. In the draft of the new Constitution of the Soviet Union, the unshakable principles of a
peaceful foreign policy and of support for peoples in their
struggle for national liberation and social progress have
taken on the force of law. The delegation of the Soviet
Union, guided by these Leninist principles, supports the
application of the Republic of Djibouti to be admitted as a
Member of the United Nations.

69. The PRESIDENT (trunslution j?o!?~ Clzinese): I thank
the representative of Benin for her reference to the
friendship between our two countries.
70. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (iuterpretation fiafn Russiun): Mr. President, I
should like first to congratulate you, the Permanent
Representative of the People’s Republic of China, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
July and wish you success in the discharge of your
responsible tasks.

75. In the letter relating to this item which was sent to the
United Nations by the President of the Republic of
Djibouti /see S/12357/, that country accepts the obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations aiid
has solemnly pledged to abide by them

71. We should also like to express our gratitude to the
representative of Canada, Ambassador Barton, on the
successful manner in which he performed the functions of
President of the Council during the month of June. Under
his skilful guidance, the Council adopted some very
important decisions. I am thinking of the decision to
extend the mandate of the United Nations forces in Cyprus
and also the decision regarding the complaint of Mozam-

76. The delegation of the Soviet Union became a sponsor
of the draft resolution on the admission of the Republic of
Djibouti to United Nations membership in the conviction
6

that a positive recommendation of the Council on this
matter would represent a further step towards the final and
complete destruction of the colonial system, and would
help to realizc the principle of universality in the United
Nations and promote the development of equitable relations and co-operation among all States, large and small.
The Soviet delegation also wishes to note with some
satisfaction that the admissionof the Republic of Djibouti
is a practical step towards implementingthe provisionsof
the France-Soviet Declaration of 22 June 1977, which,
inter alia, stressesthat the Soviet Union and France “hope
that all States will respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the new State” [see S/l 2362, amex I].
77. The Soviet delegation would like to take this opportunity to wish the peopleof the Republic of Djibouti peace
and success
in its national development.
78. In conclusion, the delegationof the Soviet Union also
takes this opportunity to expressits conviction that shortly
the Security Council will be ableto take a positive decision
on the question of the admissionto United Nations
membershipof one further State: the SocialistRepublicof
Viet Nam. With the admissionof that major Asian State, an
important step will have been taken towardsconsolidating
and strengthening the principle of the universality of our
Organization and ensuringinternational peaceandsecurity.

the delegation of the Republic of Djibouti here at the
United Nations, as well as in other international and
regionalforums.
83. I should like to take this occasionto welcomeon
behalf of my delegation, Mr. Abdallah Mohamed Kamil
Minister of Planning and Developmentof the Republic0;
Djibouti.
84. My delegationwould like to congratulatethe Government and people of Djibouti on their attainment of
independenceand commendthem on their wisedecisionto
apply
for immediate admissionto membershipin the
__.
United Naions. In view of the fact that His Excellency
Mr. HassanGouled Aptidon, Presidentof the Republicof
Djibouti, has declaredhis Government’sacceptanceof its
obligationsunder the Charter of the United Nationsandits
solemnundertakingfaithfully and conscientiouslyto carry
them out, the application for admissionto the United
Nations by the Republic of Djibouti should be warmly
welcomedby all Membersof the Organization.
85. Finally, the delegationof the SocialistPeople’sLibyan
Arab Jamahiriya supportsthe applicationby the Republic
of Djibouti and wholeheartedly requests the Security
Council to recommend that the Republic of Djibouti
shouldbe immediatelyadmittedto membership

79. Mr. AL GAYED (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Sir, I
86. Mr. McHENRY (United Statesof America):Mr. Presishould like first of all to congratulate you upon your
dent, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulateyou
assumptionof the duties of the presidencyof the Security
on your assumptionof the presidencyof the Security
Council. We are confident that, with your accustomed Council and I wish YOU well-beingduring your tenure as
wisdom and extensive experience,you will be ablesuccess- Presidentof the Council. I alsowishto askMr. Lapointeto
fully to guide the affairs of the Council for the month of
convey the thanks of the United States delegationto
July,
AmbassadorBarton for the leadershiphe showedduringhis
presidencyof the Councillast month.
80. I should also like to take this opportunity to
commend your predecessorto this high post, the represen- 87. The United Statesis pleasedto supportthe application
tative of Canada,AmbassadorBarton, who presidedover for membershipin the United Nationsof the Republicof
Djibouti. As for so many nations before it, the road to
the Council through a number of difficult debates.
independenceand sovereigntyfor Djibouti hasoften been
difficult. Djibouti hasachievedits nationhoodin peaceand
81. The Sbcialist People’sLibyan Arab Jamahiriyahasfor
concord with the support and friendshipof Franceand of
a long time strongly supportedthe struggleof the peopleof
many other countriesamongwhich we count ourselves.
Djibouti to throw off the yoke of colonialismand attain
independence. My delegation has consistently advocated
88. Djibouti occupies a location that is significant for
the granting of independenceand self-determinationto the
people of Djibouti in several regional and international many other nations. With major port facilities situated
forums. The attainment of independenceby the Republic alongone of the oldest and most important trading routes
of Djibouti on 27 June this year waswelcomenewsto us in the world, Djibouti servesa vast regionof the Horn of
Africa. Its peopleare linked by religion, by culture andby
and marked another milestone in Africa’s struggle for
languagewith many of the peoplesof surroundingnations.
freedom and self-deterniination.
both in Africa and in the Arabian Peninsula.Thoseties,and
the historicalknowledgeof the world that a tradingnation
82. In this context, my delegation would like to inform
like Djibouti has,lend to its emergence
into an independent
the Council that Colonel Qadhafi the leader of the first
role
in
regional
and
world
affairs
an
unusual
meaningand
September revolution, has already congratulated the GOVpromise.
ernment and people of Djibouti on their attainment of
independenceand haswishedthem progressand prosperity.
The two countries have already decided to establish 89. The inhabitants of the new Republic will now guide
their own destiny. We believethat a tranquil and independiplomatic relations at ambassadoriallevel. We look fordent Djibouti will bc an assetto the internatiOnalcomward to co-operating with the Government and people of
munity
andmost especiallyto its immediateneighbours.
Djibouti with whom we share many bonds of cultural,
religious and fraternal affinity, in various fields of human
90. The United States has extended recognition to the
endeavour and for the benefit of both our peoples.My
Republicof Djibouti and raisedits ConsulateGeneralto the
delegation,furthermore, looks forward to co-operatingwith

Development of Djibouti. We are very pleased that this
leader of the new Republic of Djibouti has honoured us
with his presence and we can assure him of Canada’s warm
support, both with regard to the application 0f his country
for admission and to the actual future of this new African
country.

status of an Embassy. We support the application of the
new Republic of Djibouti for membership in the United
Nations with the confidence that the principles that inspired
the leaders of the new State to guide iheir people
successfully to independence will continue to guide them in
our common effort to establish a world of peace, justice
and prosperity.

97. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to extend to
you and t0 all the members of the Council the expression
0f our delegation’s sincerest gratitude for the very kind
remarks that they have made about Ambassador Barton, 1
shall certainly not fail to convey their feelings to him.

(Canada) (i?ztetpretation
from
91. Mr. LAPOlNTE
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to extend to
you the warmest congratulations of the Canadian delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Ever since you were appointed to head the Chinese
delegation, we have admired your talents as a diplomat and
the friendly relations that you established with all your
colleagues. We arc convinced that, under your leadership,
the Council will very ably and effectively discharge all its
obligations in the month of July.

98. Mr. RAMPI-IUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, it gives me
immense pIcasure to welcome your presidency of the
Security Council during this month of July. I congratulate
you on the assumption of your duties and am particularly
happy that your first duty is to guide us towards admitting
as a new Member of this Organization yet another new
independent and sovereign African State, namely, the
Republic of Djibouti.

92. It is with pleasure that the Canadian delegation will
support the draft resolution just introduced by the representative of France recommending to the General Assembly
the admission of the Republic of Djibouti to membership in
our Organisation.

99. Your great and proud country, the People’s Republic
of China, and my own small and modest country,
Mauritius, have always enjoyed the best of friendly and
cordial relations. These are now even further enhanced by
economic and cultural co-operation.

93. The entry of Djibouti to the United Nations will be an
event of special significance. With the independence of
Djibouti, colonialism, in the f0rm that it has traditionally
taken in Africa, has come to an end. The crucial role played
by France in the final process of self-determination which
has just taken place in Djibouti should also be recognized,
just as it must be stressed that that independence has been
attained thanks to the active encouragement not only of
the United Nations but also of the Organization of African
Unity and of the League of Arab States. It is also to be
noted that those three organizations sent missions to
observe the referendum and the elections of 8 May in
Djibouti, As far as the report of the United Nations Mission
to the General Assembly is concerned, it mentions the
unmistakable determination of the people of Djibouti to
accede to independence and to become a part of the
international community.

100. We are aware of how much the People’s Republic of
China has contributed in practical ways towards the
liberation of African countries from the yoke of colonialism and imperialism, as well as towards their economic
development. Thus we have witnessed, inter alia, the
miracle of the Tan-Zam Railway, which was so efficiently
constructed in record time with Chinese and Africans
working side by side. In my own country, we are on the eve
of the construction of a second futuristic international
airport, which will likely be the best airport of the region
catering for the needs of at least the next century. This is
made possible only by the generous economic, technological and material assistance of your Government, and we
are grateful.

94. The report very eloquently also draws our attention to
the fact that the people and Government of Djibouti must
now embark on a course that will require not only the
exercise of all their natural talents if they wish to meet the
challenge of building a lasting and viable independence, but
also the firm and complete support of the international
community and of the regional organizations concerned. In
this context, we have great satisfaction in calling attention
to the recent announcement that France and Djibouti have
concluded an agreement whereby Djibouti will receive very
substantial economic and technical assistance.

101. Your country was the first, chronologically speaking,
officially to recognize the independence and sovereignty of
my country. when it became independent in 1968-even
before it was recognized by the United Kingdom, the
former colonial Power. Out of a population of some
900,000, some 50,000 Mauritians are of pure Chinese blood
and all of them were at Plaisancc Airport lo salute the
arrival and departure of Ambassador Huang Nua, our
former colleague, now Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
People’s Republic of China, when he came to Mauritius to
participate in our celebration of independence in 1968.

95. We should also like to stress the support and guarantees which the Governments of Ethiopia and of Somalia
have given to Djibouti’s independence. We arc confident
that all States Members of the Organization will encourage
the people and Government of Djibouti to develop their
nation in a way that will contribute to the peace, security
and economic prosperity of the entire region.

102. SO today, as the representative of Mauritius, an
African and non-aligned country, I proudly salute you as
President of the Security Council and as a friend of long
standing. It would be superfluous for me to speak here of
your personal qualities-they are well known at the United
Nations and internationally, In many respects they are
legendary.

96. My delegation has noted the presence in this hall of
Mr. Abdallah Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning and

103. I should like also to congratulate your predecessor,
my good friend Ambassador Barton of Canada, who so
8

patiently and efficiently conducted the business of the
Council during the busy and somewhat difficult month of
June, He did so with rare talent and great wisdom.

intention of joining the international community as a free
and independent State with the name of Republic of
Djibouti.

104. I salute the presence among us of Mr. Abdallah
Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning and Development of
the Republic of Djibouti. I also welcome Mr. Abdoulkader
Waberi Askbar. They are both well known to us and I am
particularly happy to see them in the Council chamber on
such an auspicious day.

111, My country also enthusiastically welcomed the appli.
cation for admission to the United Nations submitted by
the Republic of Djibouti in its letter of 30 June 1977,
addressed to the Secretary-General by the President of the
Republic of Djibouti, His Excellency Mr, Hassan Gouled
Aptidon. The delegation of Panama took an active part in
the procedures related to Djibouti’s application, to show
that it complied with the provisions of Article 4 of the
Charter, rule 134 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly and rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council. Hence, my delegation has cosponsored the draft resolution which will be adopted
unanimously by the Council, whereby the Council will
recommend the admission of the Republic of Djibouti as a
State Member of the United Nations.

105. J shall have the opportunity of speaking in some
detail, and in French, about the Republic of Djibouti when
the question of its admission is taken up by the General
Assembly at its forthcoming session. In the meantime,
suffice it for mc to say that my delegation has over the
years been working constantly for the independence of
Djibouti. We are naturally, therefore, very happy indeed
that Djibouti is today free, independent and ,sovereign. We
.congratulate the Government and people of Djibouti, as
well as the Government and people of the former colonial
Power, France.

112. The admission of Djibouti to the concert of nations
is not a mere formality. It is one more step in the process of
decolonization on the African continent and in the entire
world. It is directly linked to the application of the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.

106. Mauritius has close cultural ties and trade links with
Djibouti. They go back several generations. Thus, to mark
these traditional and historical neighbourly bonds, which
are very strong, the Prime Minister of Mauritius, The Right
Honourable Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, made a special
point of going to Djibouti a few days ago to participate
personally in the celebration of independence.

113. The peoples of Latin America rejoice at the independence of the Republic of Djibouti and its imminent
admission to the United Nations, not only because of what
that represents in terms of the socia1, economic and cultural
aspirations of the people of Djibouti, but also because it is a
historic reaffirmation of the purposes and desires of the
international community in respect of the termination of
the other colonial situations in other parts of the world.

107. Since then, the Republic of Djibouti has been
admitted as a full member of the Organization of African
Unity, during its recent Summit Conference at Libreville.
108. Today, it gives me great personal pleasure, on behalf
of my country, a member of the Security Council, fully to
support the application of the Republic of Djibouti for
membership in the United Nations. We have therefore
proudly co-sponsored the draft resoIution introduced by
the representative of France, At the United Nations,
nothing pleases an African representative more than membership of the world Organization.

114. in latin America, there is a clear view of what the
process of decolonization means for the rule of peace,
justice and law. Whe, For the first time, the Security
Council met in Latin America, in the city of Panama from
15 to 21 March 1973, it was stated that
“the general feeling expressed was one of hope that WC
should soon see the day when colonialism was no longer
an issue before the United Nations, once the principles
contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV) had
been applied to the residual colonial situations in Latin
America and elswhere” /I 704th meeting, para. 1.531.

109. The PRESIDENT (translation jiom Chinese): 1 wish
to thank the representative of Mauritius for his friendly
sentiments and warm praise for our country, the People’s
Republic of China, I regard these friendly sentiments and
warm praise as an encouragement and spur to us. China has
done some work for Africa. But, owing to the limitation of
our strength, we have not done enough. We hope that with
the development of China’s revolution and construction, we
shall be able to make greater contributions to Africa. I
believe that the friendly relations and co-opeiation between
the great people of Mauritius and Africa and the Chinese
people will continually develop and grow stronger. I wish
also to thank the representative of Mauritius for his
congratulations to me personally.

115. That quotation was from the statement made by the
President of the Council on 21 March 1973, in which he
summed up the principal elements of the deliberations of
the Council in the capital of the Isthmus, and the question
of the Panama Canal was at the top of the list of matters
discussed at that time. In that: same statement, the
President of the Council recalled that the majority of
speakers had stressed that every State had an inalienable
right to full jurisdiction over all its territory. Therefore, it
was essential that all States should abstain from any action
likely to impair the national unity and territorial integrity
of any other State. In that respect, it had been pointed out
that the denial to Panama of its inherent right to full
sovereignty and jurisdiction over its entire territory, in&ding the Panama Canal Zone, had been a constant source of
tension and consequently a threat to peace and security in

110. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
Spa?zish): The Republic of Panama was particularly pleased
to learn that the Territory of the Afars and Issas had
attained independence, under the aegis of the United
Nations, on 27 June 1977 and that it had proclaimed ‘its
9

Latin America. In order ta remove that threat, it was
essential that Panama’s sovereignty over the Canal Zone
should be fully established and that foreign military bases
should be removed from the area. Almost all the speakers
had held the view that Panama was undoubtedly entitled to
use its primary natural resource, namely, its geographical
position, to the fullest extent for the benefit of its own
economic development. Resides,tfle sitllation in the Canal
Zone was in complete violation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Some
delegations,while expressingtheir support for the aspirations of the Panamanian people, had stated that the
question was essentially a matter for negotiation between
the parties principally concerned and they had expressed
the htipe that negotiations would be resumed and a
settlement reached without foreign intervention. They had
also expressed the hope that the Council’s meetings in
Panamawould contribute to the fostering of a climate in
which that processof negotiation would move forward. It
had further been pointed out that any solution of the
PanamaCanal question must be based on respectfor law
and the search for justice and must take into account the
basic principles enshrined in the Charter such as the
principle of territorial integrity and the principle of the
sovereign equality of all States. Moreover, it should
safeguard the principle of the freedom of international
waterways.
116. After 13 years of difficult negotiations, the Carter
Administration now seemsto have openedup new horizons
for hope that there wiil be a solution of the colonial
situation in the PanamaCanal Zone. Statements made by
president Carter at his press conference of 30 June,
following a visit to Washington by the President of
Venezuela, Mr. Carlos Andrt;ls Z%rez,indicate a balanced
approach to the problem and the conflicts that have existed
between Panamaand the United States that accords with
commitments solemnly entered into by both countries in
lhe Council of the Organization of American States and in
documents officially signedby the Secretary of State of the
United States and the Minister for External Relations of
Panama.Ilowever, the harsh lessonsof history oblige us to
be cautious and not to be unduly optimistic, since in this
country there exist powerful circles which conspireagainst
good relations between the United States and Latin
America. For that reason we need the support of public
opinion in our countries. WC need the support of the
countries of Latin America, the support of the countries of
the third world and, finally, the support of all sectorsof the
international community.
1 17. There is no more appropriate quotation to point out
the chargesurgently neededto put an end to colonialismin
our area than that given by Ambassador Young last
Thursday in this chamber when he referred to the thinking
of the late President John F. Kennedy of the United States,
who had written that those who made peaceful revolution
impossible made violent revolution inevitable. Ambassador
Young’s own thoughts are relevant when he says,
“It is clear that changeis oil the way and that changewill
be achieved. That is why it is now urgent that the United
Nations, which has the responsibility and so much hope
for just and peacefu1changein the world, shouldbecome

more persistent in the various efforts to find peace
through peace.”(2019th meeting,prim. 611.
118. Unquestionably, the independenceof Djibouti and
its admissionto membershipin the United Nations will
contribute to the strengtheningof international security,
just as the elimination of residual colonial situations in
Latin America and in other parts of the world will
contribute to the strentheningof international security.
119. We recall that, in its resolution 31/91, the General
Assemblyreaffirmed the inalienablesovereignright of every
State freely to determine its political, socialand economic
systemand its relations with other Statesand international
organizations.In this connexion, we are particularly pleased
to note the pledgesof respect for and co-operation with
Djibouti madeby delegationsparticipating in this debate,in
particular the former administeringPower, France, and the
neighbouringcountries of Ethiopia and Somalia.
120. At this morning’s meeting I referred to the great
value of public information in the United Nations system
and its direct relationship with the work of the Security
Council. The fortunate circumstanceof the Council’sbeing
about to adopt unanimously a draft resolution whereby it
will recommendto the GeneralAssemblythat the Republic
of Djibouti should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations-undeniably-one more step towards the
complete elimination of colonialismthroughout the world
prompts me to stress the need for information to be
disseminatedregarding the debate that has taken place
today becauseof its impact on the processof decolonization.
1?I. It must be recalled that the Central Assembly, in its
resolution 3482 (XXX), on the disseminationof information on decolonization, reaffirmed
“the importance of effecting the widest possibledissemination of information on the evils and dangers of
colonialism, on the determined efforts of the colonial
peoplesto achieveself-determination,freedom and independenceand on the assistancebeing provided by the
international community towards the elimination of the
remainingvestigesof colonialismin all its forms”.
In the sameresolution the Secretary-Generalwasrequested
by the Assembly
“to continue to take concrete measuresthrough all the
media at his disposal, including publications, radio and
television, to give widespreadandcontinuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization”.
122. I must conclude by congratulatingthe Committee on
the Admissionof New Membersand you, Mr. President,for
t’ie work which has been done and which will culminate
today in the unanimousadoption of the draft resolution
recommendingthe admissionof the Republic of Djibouti to
membershipin the United Nations,
123. The Government and people of Panama,like the
other peoples of the third world, share the great and

10

justified pleasure in the achievements of the people of the
Republic of Djibouti. For that reason we offer a most
cordial welcome to Mr. Abdailah Mohamed Kamil, Minister
of Planning and Development, just as we extend our
warmest congratulations to His Excellency President Hassan
Gouled Aptidon, the able leader of that new country whose
people is entitled to progress and well-being.

other bonds that stretch back to time immemorial. My
delegation therefore considers it a great privilege and
honour to have had the opportunity to speak today on
behalf of the Arab Group in support of the draft resolution
before the Council.

124. The PRESIDENT (translatiou Ji-om CXnese): The
next speaker is the representative of Oman. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

1.32. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Gabon, who wishes to
speak on behalf of the Organization of African Unity. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

125. Mr. ABOULNASR
(Oman): Mr. President, before
addressing myself to the subject on the agenda may I first
convey to you the felicitations of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. My delegation is confident that, under
your experienced guidance, the Council will be able to
discharge its important responsibilities.

133. Mr. ADMINA (Gabon) (interpretation from Frenclz):
In the absence of my Ambassador, His Excellency Mr. Lion
N’Dong, who is at present on mission, I have asked to be
allowed to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council in order to speak both on behalf of my delegation
and on behalf of the current Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo.

126. I should like equally to pay a tribute to the outgoing
President, Ambassador Barton of Canada, for the wisdom
with which he guided the deliberations of the Council
during the month of June.
127. In my capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group for
the month of July, 1 should like to express on its behalf full
support for the application of the Republic of Djibouti for
admission to membership in the United Nations, which is
now before the Council, We firmly believe that the newly
independent sister country fulfils all conditions for membership in the United Nations as set forth in Article 4 of the
Charter.
128. We were happy a moment ago to witness the
introduction by the representative of France of the draft
resolution sponsored by all members of the Council
recommending to the General Assembly the admission of
the Republic Djibouti as a New Member of the Organization.
129. On this occasion, we should like to wish its people
and Government peace, prosperity and progress. We are
looking forward to sincere co-operation with it, both inside
and outside the Organization.

134. Speaking on behalf of the delegation of Gabon and
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), I should like,
Mr. President, to tell you, the representative of a friendly
country, China, and at the same time a respected diplomat,
how pleased we are to see you presiding over the Council
during the month of July. Your experience and your
integrity added to the wisdom of all the other members of
the Council are guarantees that the work of this meeting
will achieve its ultimate result and consequently will be a
complete success. I ask you, therefore, to permit me to
welcome the delegation of the Republic of Djibouti
among wi.
135. My delegation considers it a privilege to come here
taday to express support for the admission to the United
Nations of the Republic of Djibouti. President El Hadj
Otnar Bongo ardently believes that the valiant people of
Djibouti will see their triumphant independence culminate
in the admission of their country to the United Nations.
136. Our fraternal support for the struggle of the Kepublit of Djibouti is well known and the position of OAU on
the request for the admission to United Nationsmembership
of the young Republic of Djibouti has been clearly shown
by tlie mctnbers of OAU in the decisions taken by the
Council of h4inisters at the meeting of Neads of State and
Government held at Libreville, Gabon, frotn 23 June to
5 July 1977.

130. Djibouti’s declaration of independence on 27 June
brought to an end one of the problems that had attracted
international concern and attention. For many years the
United Nations, the League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity and the non-aligned countries had
expressed concern and made appeals for the process of
independence of the people of Djibouti to be speeded up,
and today I should like to express satisfaction at the fact
that the lasl step of the evolution towards the implernentation of the principle of self-determination
and the
attainment of independence has, as has already been said,
taken place in an atmosphere of understanding which we
consider to be a tribute to the wisdom and goodwill of all
concerned and in particular of the people and leaders of the
sister republic of Djibouti.

137. Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations states
that membership in the United Nations is open to all
peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained
in the Charter and, in the judgcment of the Organization,
are able and willing to carry out these obligations. The
Republic of Djibouti has amply demonstrated that it is
capable of fulfilling the provisions of Article 4 and is
anxious to do so. The recognition which has been received
by the Republic of Djibouti not only in Africa and in the
third world but also among the socialist and the Western
countries has demonstrated eloquently that that country
meets the conditions which are laid down both in law and
in international usage.

131. The people of Djibouti have always been linked to
the Arab world by tradition, custom, culture and many

138. In his request for admission /see S/12357/, the
President of the Republic of Djibouti officially stated that

the Government of the Republic of Djibouti accepted the
obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations,
was able to carry out those obligations and gave its solemn
undertaking faithfully and conscientiously to do so.
139. The Organization of African Unity is entirely convinced that that country has not only demonstrated its faith
h the lofty principles contained in the Charter but that it
has &o demonstrated its determination to ensure that they
are applied in all circumstances. In admitting the Republic
of Djibouti,
the United Nations will be admitting to its
ranks s State Member which firmly supports the struggle
for peace, international security, mutual understanding and
friendship among peoples. I am deeply convinced that the
Republic of Djibouti, like all other Members of the
Qrganization, will make a faithful effort to help to achieve
the ideals contained in the Charter.
140. Most of the countries represented here have waged a
long struggle to accede to independence. We should not
forget tliat most of our countries began their independent
existence as rather fragiIe and weak sovereign States, but, as
time passed, many of us became able to make a constructive contribution to bringing about the well-being of all
peoples throughout the world. Therefore, in a spirit of
co-operation and understanding, we should provide all
possible assistance and friendship to the newly independent
countries and warmly welcome them to our ranks.
141. On behalf of my own country, Gabon, and the
Organization of African Unity, I support the request of the
Republic of Djibouti and I state unreservedly that it is
entitled to take its place at the United Nations as a full
Member in accordance with the most noble principles of
the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
142. The PRESIDENT (trmslatim from Chjmw): I t/la&
the representative of Gabon for his reference to the friendly
relations between China and Gabon and for his congratulations to me personally.
143. The next speaker is the representative of Somalia,
who has asked to speak in his capacity as Chairman of the
African Group for the month of July, I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
144. Mr. MUSSA (Somalia): In the absence of the
Permanent Representative of Somali Democratic liepublic
to the United Nations, I requested to be allowed to
Participate in this meeting on behalf of my country and the
African Group at the United Nations.

of the developing world. The excellent friendly relations
existing between the People’s Republic of China and the
Somali Democratic Republic not only have their roots in
history but are also based on mutual respect, co-operation
and solidarity against both colonialism and the arch
enemies of mankind, namely, hunger, disease and poverty,
147. The admission of the Reptiblic of Djibouti to
membership in the United Nations will mark the end of the
colonial rule over that Territory which lasted almost 100
years. It will crown the efforts and sacrifices made for
many years by a people seeking its rights to self-determination, freedom and independence.
148. My Government takes pride in the fact that it gave its
unequivocal support to the people of the new State in its
struggle for its independence. I recall with satisfaction that
it was on the initiative of Somalia that that question of the
independence of Djibouti, a Non-Self-Governing Territory
and therefore subject to the provisions of the Charter and
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), was inscribed on
the agenda of the General Assembly.
149. In fact, since my country achieved independence in
1960, it has been the policy of my Government and my
country to work for the independence of the Territory in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and that
of the Organization of African 1Jnity. As representatives of
the Somali delegation have stated in the LJnited Nations and
at the meetings of OAU, Somalia’s sole wish has been to see
the people of that new State free and independent in unity
under the flag of its own choice. It is a matter of great
satisfaction to my country, to the African Group and,
indeed, to the international community that the people of
the Republic of Djibouti has been able to exercise its
legitimate and inalienable right to self-determination and
freedom. I am glad that the referendum and the elections of
May 1977 were conducted in a fair and peaceful manner
and that representatives of the United Nations, OAU and
the League of Arab States were able to observe them. In
this connexion, I should like to commend the Government
of France for the manner in which it conducted the transfer
of power and administration to the people of the Republic
of Djibouti after its independence. In this context, I wish to
put on record the successful contribution made by the
United Nations and the regional organizations, namely,
OAU and the League of Arab States, in the clecolonization
process of the Territory.
150. The new State of the Republic of Djibouti will have
to face the challenges of establishing the social and
economic infrastructure needed to provide its people with a
viable economy and with those opportunities by which it
can achieve a better life. Unfortunately,
in the past the
options for economic development have not been fully
explored and the possibilities which its strategic position
holds have not been exploited. It is our sincere hope that
the international community will provide the Republic of
Djibouti with all the co-operation and material support it
requires for its development and effective participation in
the work of the international community for peace atid
progress.

145. 1 wish first of all to thank the members of the
council for having allowed my delegation to participate in
ais meeting, which has been convened to consider the
aPPlication of the Republic of Djibouti for admission to
membership in the United Nations.
I46
Mr. President, we are pleased that the meeting is
taking Place under your presidency. The Government ,and
the People of the Somali Democratic Republic are deeply
aPPreciative of the positive and constructive role of your
countrY
in the organs of the United Nations and, in
particular, with regard to the problems facing the countries

15 1. The independence of the people of the Republic of
Djibouti comes at a time when the attention of the
12

international CommUnity 1S focused on the elimination of
the last vestiges of colonial and racial domination in our
time in Africa. We hope that the accession of the Republic
of Djibouti to independence will serve as yet further
encouragement to the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa for the complete elimination of
colonialism and racial discrimination.
152.
111 COIlChSiOn,
I should like, on behalf of the African
Group and my Government, to extend to the new
independent State our warmest brotherly welcome to the
United Nations family. I wish to request Mr. Abdallah
Mohamed Kamil and Mr. Abdoulkader Waberi Askbar to
convey the whole-hearted congratulations of the African
Group to the President of the Republic of Djibouti, His
Excellency Mr. I-lassan Gouled Aptidon, and to the Government and the people of this new independent State.

commitments. The Government of the Yemen Arab Republit hopes that the Members of the United Nations will
contribute ge*erOuslY to the economic prosperity
and
self-reliance of Djibouti, with a view to enhancing its
independence and sovereignty. It is the obligation of all
Countries to contribute to the peaceful existence of this
new and young Republic, so that it can concentrate all its
efforts on the building of its economy and on the
development of its own life style and experience,
15’9. The PRESIDENT (tmrzskztion from Chinese): Tile
next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

153. Finally, we in the Somali Democratic Republic are
confident that the f\lture will see a continuation of the
close brotherly relationship which exists between the new
independent State and the Somali Democratic Republic, a
relationship already made strong by historical ties and by
the COI~IUOII
social and cultural heritage of our peoples.

160. Mr. IBRAHIM (Ethiopia): Mr. President, may I first
of all express my gratitude to you and, through YOU, to the
other mmbers of the Council for acceding to our request
to participate in the deliberations on the question on the
Council’s agenda. I wish also to take this opportunity to
express my satisfaction at seeing you, the reprcscntative of
the People’s Republic of China, a country with which
Ethiopia has warm and irater& relations, presiding over
these deliberations.

154. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I
thank the representative of Somalia for his praise of the
relations of friendship and co-operation between China and
Somalia and for his congratulations to me personally,

161. I should like also to greet Mr. Abdallah Mohamed
Kamil, Minister of Planning and Development of the
Republic of Djibouti, and his colleague, hlr. Abdodkader
Waberi Askbar.

155. The next speaker is the representative of the Yemen
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

162. The Ethiopian delegation has asked to he allowed to
participate in the Council’s deliberations on the admission
of the Republic of Djibouti to the United Nations in order
to confirm Ethiopia’s unreserved support for the application and to express its satisfaction with the draft
resolution before the Council. This support is based not
only on our commitment to respect the genuine independence and territorial integrity of the new State, but aho 011
our certainty that the Republic of Djibouti fulfils the
requirements of the Charter.

156. Mr, SALLAM (Yemen): Mr. President, allow me first
of all to extend my appreciation and gratitude to you and
to the Security Council members for extending to me this
opportunity to participate in the debate on the item before
us. It gives me great pride and pleasure to congratulate you
on
the assumption of the presidency of Ihe Council for the
month of July. It would bc even more appropriate at this
stage to say that a Council decision, under your guidance
and leadership, to recommend the admission of the Young
Republic of Djibouti to membership in the United Nations
will bc a great event in itself, as well as a source of pride
and honour to the friends and brothers of the new young
Republic.

163. The people of Djibouti, by its exercise of the right to
self-determination, has conclusively confirmed its choice of
an independent and sovereign existence. Its Struggle
for
independence and territorial integrity has not been an CasY
one, but from that strugglea nation that cherishes
genuine
independence
has been born. Ethiopia, which has deep
rooted ethnic, historical, economic and cultural ties with
the Republic of Djibouti, salutes all those who have
struggled towards this end, andwelcomesthe newRepublic
to the community of independentnations. Ethiopia believes that Djibouti’s emergence
andits continuedexistence
as a free and independent
Stateconstitutesa Positivefactor
for the consolidation of peace and tI?iIlqUillity
iI
(mr

157. 111view of the excellent relations which have existed
for centuries between the Yemeni people and the people of
Djibouti, the Yemen delegation welcomes whole-heartedly
the independence of the new young Republic of Djibouti
and its Government. At the same time, it gives me great
pleasure to see t,hat our dear neighbours and friends, after
years of occupation, will very shortly be taking their Place
among the family of nations. I am quite certain that this
new Republic, significant though small, will contribute
immensely to the knowledge and experience of the international family.

region.

Ethiopia,

which

has

COIlSiSteIltly

StI’iWIl

for

the

and territorial
integrity of Djibouti.
will respect
this hard-won independenceand hopesthat
others
also,
especially
those
who havebeenequivocalin the
past, will join Ethiopia in this commitment to respectand
genuine

independence

hoIlour

the

independence

and

territorial

integrity

Of

the

new State, particularly
now that the peopleof Djibouti has
madeclear, by its solemnacts of 8 May and27 June 1977,
its resolve to be free and to remain a sovereignand
independentState.

15X. The Ycmcn Arab Republic, which was one of the
first countries to rccognize the new Government of the
sister Republic
of Djibouti, expresses its profound appreciation to the French Republic for the fulfilment of its
13

--

-

164. The Republic of Djibouti has wisely joined OAU. Its
membershipin the United Nations will, no doubt, further
consolidate this hard-won independenceand contribute to
the continued sovereign existence of the new State. The
United Nations, OAU and the Conference of the nonaligned countries contributed immensely to the decolonizalion of Djibouti, and now that independencehas been
attained, it is the sincerehope of Ethiopia that they will
not be satisfiedby the mere admissionof the Republic of
Djibouti to their midst but will alsoassistthe peopleand
Government of the New Republic in their endeavoursto
promote their economic well-being and national identity.
Ethiopia firmly believesthat suchUnited Nations assistance
would bein keeping with the lofty ideals&f&Charter.
165. The PRESIDENT (translation j?om Chit?ese): I thank
the representative of Ethiopia for his complimentary
remarks on the friendly relations between Ethiopia and
China, aswell asfor his congratulations to me personally.
166. The next speaker is the representative of Egypt,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make hisstatement.

Afro-Arab family and itIt the movement of non-alignment asa magnificent embodimentof the victory of the
people’swill for liberation, independenceand salvation.
“The glorious struggle of the people of Djibouti, in
complete consciousness
of the scopeof their historic and
cultural responsibilities at this strategic spot of the
African continent, is but a record of heroism, sacrifice
and victory. It is also a vivid exampleof the vitality of
our strugglingpeoplesand the inevitability of victory for
our common march towards the attainment of freedom
and the elimination of colonialism and all forms of
exploitation.
“Egypt, which has always supportedthe struggleof the
people of Djibouti towards full independenceand continued progress,renewsits solidarity with that peopleand
pledges its support for all their endeavours towards
economic and social development as well as for the
safeguardingof their independenceand territorial integrity, Egypt is confident that the independentState of
Djibouti will play a constructive and positive role in the
Arab, African and international arenas.”
171. The Government of the Republic of Djibouti has
solemnly declared its acceptanceof the obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nationsand affirmed its
ability to carry out those obligations.It hasgiven its solemn
undertaking to carry out thoseobligationsin good faith.

167. Mr, BADAWI (Egypt): Sir, I should like first of all to
extend to you my delegation’s congratulations on your
assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to express our happinessat seeingyou
presiding over the deliberations of the Council on this
happy occasion.We are confident that you will ably and
effectively guide the Council in whatever tasks may lie
ahead.

172. There is no doubt whatsoeverthat the peopleof the
Republic of Djibouti, having achievedtheir sacredgoal of
liberation and national independence,enjoy the potential
that will enablethem to carry out the obligationsplacedby
the Charter upon MembersStates.

168. I alsowish to thank the membersof the Council for
affording me the opportunity to addressthe Council on this
occasion.We have asked to be allowed to participate in the
discussionof this important question in order to reaffirm
our unreservedsupport for the admissionof the Republic
of Djibouti to membership in the United Nations. It is
therefore with a deep sense of gratification that the
delegation of Egypt welcomes the draft resolution submitted to the Council and sponsoredby its entire membership, recommending to the General Assembly the
admissionof the Republic of Djibouti to membershipin the
Organization.

173. We are convinced that the admissionof the Republic
of Djibouti to membershipin the Organization will not
only constitute a significant step towards the fulfilment of
genuine universality of the United Nations, which is an
eminently desirable objective, but will also enable the
United Nations to benefit from the positive contributions
of this new African State.
174. The adoption of the draft resolution now before the
Council will forever mark the history of the African
liberation struggle, and we earnestly hope that it will be
soon followed by the adoption of other draft resolutions
concerning the admissionof independent Zimbabweand
Namibiato membershipin the Organization.

169. Egypt has followed the unremitting struggle of the
people of Djibouti for independence.Ours was one of the
first countries to recognize the Republic of Djibouti
immediately after its independence.Egypt was also one of
the first countries to establishdiplomatic relationswith the
newly independent sister Republic. Egypt took the initiative to sponsorDjibouti’s candiclaturefor membershipin
the League of Arab States and in the Organization of
African Unity.

175. While welcoming the CoLmcil’saction today, we
should like to addressto our brothers in Djibouti our
sincerecongratulations,to welcomethem most warmly into
the fold of the Organization and to convey to them our
best wishesfor a new era of success,prosperity andpeace.
The delegation of Egypt is looking forward to working in
close and brotherly co-operationwith the representativesof
Djibouti at the United Nations. We pledge them our
continued support and co-operation in their endeavoursto
achieve the common goalsand aspirationsof the peoplesof
Africa and to benefit the international community.

170. In this conncxion, I should like to quote from a
statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at
Cairo on 27 June 1977:
“The Arab Republic of Egypt takes pride in declaring
its official recognition of the sister Republic of Djibouti
and the immediate exchangeof diplomatic relations with
it. Egypt also welcomes the new Republic into the

176. Before concluding, we seize this opportunity to
extend to the Government of France our appreciationfor
4

its constructive and understanding role in the furtherance
of the process of independence and to note with gratification its readiness to continue its assistance to Djibouti
after independence.
177. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): Since
there are no further speakers inscribed on the list, I wish
now to make a statement in my capacity as the representative of CHINA.
178. First of all, on behalf of the Chinese delegation I
should like to express a warm welcome to Mr. Abdallah
Mohamed Kamil, Minister of Planning and Development of
the Republic of Djibouti.
179. On 27 June 1977, the Republic of Djibouti proclaimed its independence, thus becoming the forty-ninth
independent African State. On 6 July, the Republic of
Djibouti applied for membership in the United Nations and
declared its acceptance of the obligations contained in the
Charter. The Chinese delegation holds that, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Republic of
Djibouti is qualified for membership in the United Nations.
We fully support its application and are in favour of the
Security Council’s recommending to the General Assembly
the admission of the Republic of Djibouti to membership in
the United Nations. In view of the foregoing, the Chinese
delegation has also decided to sponsor the relevant draft
resolution.
180. The independence of Djibouti is a result of the
protracted struggle persistently carried on by the Djibouti
people with the support of the independent African States
and the entire African people. It is another new victory
won by the entire African people in their struggle for
national liberation. The victory of the Djibouti people once
again demonstrates that no force on earth can resist the
historical trend whereby countries want independence,
nations want liberation and the people want revolution.

foreign policy of non-alignment and positive neutrality and
has given firm support to any proposal regarding the
maintenance of security in the Red Sea area. We believe
that, after their accessionto independence, the Djibouti
people, united with the other Red Sea countries and
peoples, will make positive contributions to safeguarding
the security of the region. We sincerely wish the Djibouti
people continued new victories in their efforts to combat
imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism, to safeguard
national independenceand State sovereignty and to build
their own country.
182. On the occasion of the proclamation of independence of the Republic of Djibouti, Hua Kua-feng, Premier
of the State Council of the People’sRepublic of China, sent
a cable to His Excellency Mr. Hassan Gouled Aptidon,
President of the Republic of Djibouti, expressing the
warmest congratulations to him and informing him of the
ChineseGovernment’s decision to recognize the Republic
of D.jibouti. Both China and Djibouti belong to the third
world and the peoples of our two countries have sympathized with and supported each other in the long years of
struggle. It is certain that the friendly relations and
co-operation between China and Djibouti and between the
two peoplesforged in the common struggleagainstimperialism, colonialism and hegemonismwill develop continually, We are convinced Lhat upon its admission to
membership in the United Nations, the Republic of
Djibouti will make positive contributions to the realization
of the purposesand principles of the Charter together with
all the other Member States that uphold justice.
183. In my capacity asPRESIDENT, 1 proposeto put to
the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/12358, sponsored by all 15 members of the Security
Council.
A vote wastaken by show of hands.
The draft resoluticmwasadopted una~zimoudy.~

181. At present, the super-Powers are stepping up their
aggression and rivalry in the Red Sea area, causing
turbulence and unrest in the region. In particular, the
super-Power which flaunts the banner of “supporting the
national liberation movement” is sowing dissension and
creating disputes in this area in an attempt to control the
Red Sea area so as to strengthenits position in the rivalry
for hegemony over Europe and the globe. This hasnaturally
evoked firm resistancefrom the countriesand peoplethere.
We are pleased to note that the Government of the
Republic of Djibouti has declaredits readinessto pursuea

184. The PRESIDENT (translation fvom Chinese): I shall
immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit this
recommendation to the General Assembly, together with
the verbatim records of the Security Council meetingsat
which it wasconsidered.
The meeting roseat 6. I5 p. m.
2 Seeresolution412 (1977).

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Netions
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informee-vous
aupres de votre libraire
A : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC

I-IOJW~IHTh

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHlt

OPSAHM

PUBLICACIONES

3A4HR

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, SecciBn de Ventas, Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00

(or equivalent

OIS-hEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

et les sgences
ou adressea-vous

HAl&HEI

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirijaae
s: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77.70001-April

1978-2,200
