S/2014/525

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
This fifth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) and paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165 (2014), in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the
implementation of the resolutions by all Syrian parties to the conflict.
2.
The report covers the period from 18 June to 21 July 2014. The information
contained in the report is based on the data available to the United Nations actors on
the ground as well as reports from open sources and sources of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Conflict and high levels of violence continued across the Syrian Arab Republic
during the reporting period, in particular in the Aleppo, Hama, Deir ez-Zor, Rural
Damascus, Al-Hasakeh, Homs, Idlib and Dar’a Governorates. Indiscriminate aerial
bombings by Government forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition,
extremist and designated terrorist groups 1 continued to result in deaths, injuries and
displacement of civilians.
4.
In Aleppo Governorate, indiscriminate air strikes and the use of barrel bombs
by Government forces continued on opposition-held areas of the city and in rural
Aleppo, reportedly resulting in the deaths of hundreds of people, including children,
women and the elderly. Analysis of satellite imagery by Human Rights Watch shows
that there was continued heavy air and ground bombardment by Government forces
on opposition-held districts in the city of Aleppo from 6 June to 14 July 2014 with
at least 130 major damage sites across many districts in the city. Most of the major
damage sites identified by Human Rights Watch are consistent with air strikes,
specifically the impact of barrel bombs dropped from helicopters, with the heaviest

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, the Islamic State, formerly the Islamic State in Iraq and Al-Sham (ISIS), and

Jabhat al-Nusra were designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution
1267 (1999). These two groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

14-58046 (E)

250714

*1458046*

S/2014/525

concentrations in the residential districts of Rasafeh, Hanano, Sheikh Said,
Haydariyeh, Sakhur, Tareeq al-Bab and Dahret Awwad. At the same time,
indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups has intensified in Governmentheld areas of Aleppo city. For example, on 8 July, at least 10 mortar shells and
domestic-made shells (gas cylinders known as “hell cannons”) landed on
Government-held areas in Al-Midan, Al-Aziziyeh, Al-Ashrafiyeh and Al-Neil areas,
killing and injuring civilians and causing significant damage.
5.
In Dar’a Governorate, barrel bombs were used on opposition-held areas,
including the Old City of Dar’a, Ankhel and Nawa. On 16 July, two bombs exploded
in the middle of a Palestinian refugee camp in Dar’a, killing nine Palestine refugees
and three other people, and injuring several others. On 29 June, in Idlib
Governorate, Government airstrikes on Salquin town and Kafr Nubul resulted in the
deaths of dozens of civilians.
6.
Government-controlled cities and towns continued to be subject to
indiscriminate mortar attacks, shelling and vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices by armed opposition groups and extremists, notably the cities of Homs,
Damascus, Rural Damascus and Hama. One attack in a suburb of Hama city killed
at least 34 people on 20 June; another killed at least 15 people in Al-Shouq in Rural
Damascus; while six people were killed in the Wadi al-Dahab area of Homs. On
19 July, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded in Douma, in a
densely populated area, killing at least 22 people and injuring more than 50. In
Damascus, indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups and extremists
intensified from 11 to 17 July, resulting in civilian casualties. For example, on
16 July, shelling resulted in the deaths of four people and injured 22 people in the
Al-Shaalan neighbourhood.
7.
All parties to the conflict are increasingly targeting vital services resulting in
interruptions to the supply of safe drinking water and electricity. This is
compounding the already dire water, sanitation and health conditions in conflict
areas and resulting in an increased risk of outbreaks of waterborne diseases. In
Aleppo city, damage caused to the main water pumping station by opposition groups
on 2 June continues to limit water to approximately 2.5 million people, almost
1 million of whom require urgent assistance. Negotiations to access the water
pumping station to conduct repairs and provide fuel have been ongoing since 2 June.
On 19 July, repairs to the damaged water network began after technicians were
allowed access to the site. Repairs are expected to be completed in a month. As at
23 June, power supply in Idlib city has been intermittent, owing to cuts by armed
opposition groups in rural areas housing the electric cables. This has resulted in
reduced availability of water supply to the city.
8.
The Islamic State declared an Islamic Caliphate on 29 June, stretching from
Aleppo Governorate to Diyala Governorate in eastern Iraq. This area has an
estimated population of up to 7 million people. Fighting intensified in the Syrian
Arab Republic between the Islamic State and the Government and armed opposition
groups in Deir ez-Zor, Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakeh and the Kurdish areas of northern
Aleppo Governorate, resulting in the displacement of a total of 250,000 people.
9.
Recent developments in the Ninewa Governorate of Iraq have resulted in
displacement to the north-eastern parts of the country and insecurity in areas along
the Syrian-Iraqi borders. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has started the registration of an estimated 3,000 newly arrived

2/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

Iraqi refugees in the Syrian Arab Republic, while an estimated 1,000 Syrians
previously seeking refuge in Iraq have crossed back into the eastern part of the
country. Estimates indicate that hundreds of Syrians are returning to the Syrian Arab
Republic on a daily basis.
10. While the United Nations does not have the means to independently verify
their number and origins, non-Syrian fighters from a number of countries are
increasingly participating in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic, supporting all
sides of the conflict, including designated terrorist groups. On 29 June, the Islamic
State issued a statement announcing that the Caliphate included people of the
following nationalities: Caucasian, Indian, Chinese, Shami (Levantine), Iraqi,
Yemeni, Egyptian, North African, American, French, German and Australian.
Non-Syrian fighters also continue to support Syrian Government forces, with reports
of Lebanese Hizbullah fighters operating with Government forces in Aleppo, Dar’a
and Damascus Governorates. Unverified reports indicate that a number of Shia Iraqi
militia, who fought in support of Syrian Government forces, mainly in Rural
Damascus, have returned to Iraq, to repel the recent advances of the Islamic State in
the country.
11. There are a number of ongoing negotiations on ceasefire agreements between
the Government and armed opposition groups, including in Yarmouk, Homs and
Dar’a. In Yarmouk, an agreement on cessation of hostilities was reached between
Syrian authorities and armed opposition groups on 21 June. However, reports
indicate that the agreement has not yet been fully implemented and that further
negotiations are ongoing. In Homs, negotiations on a ceasefire are continuing in the
Al-Wa’er neighbourhood. A ceasefire started in Al-Wa’er on 26 June but was
breached on 29 June following reports of shelling. In Dar’a, negotiations on a
ceasefire are under way in the Dar’a al-Balad area, including with Jabhat al-Nusra.
12. On 22 June, firing into the Israeli-occupied Golan resulted in the death of an
Israeli teenager and injured three others. The Israel Defense Forces fired several
rounds of tank fire and conducted air strikes in the early hours the following day. No
personnel of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) were
affected.

B.

Human rights
13. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) continued to receive reports of arbitrary
arrest, detention, torture and ill-treatment, allegedly perpetrated by members of the
Syrian security apparatus. OHCHR received information indicating that at least
seven detainees died as a result of torture in Government-run detention facilities,
including at the Military Intelligence Branch in Damascus and the Political Security
Branch in Hama. Meanwhile, OHCHR received reports that from 18 to 22 June at
least 12 civilians were taken by security forces from their homes in the Salamiyah
district of Hama, with no reason given for their detention. The Government has yet
to put in place a mechanism to investigate serious and credible allegations of torture
and ill-treatment.
14. In Homs, OHCHR received reports that over 100 detained evacuees from Old
Homs are being held in different locations in Homs following their transfer from
Al-Andalus school. OHCHR received reports that some of those evacuees were

14-58046

3/21

S/2014/525

tortured and ill-treated during their interrogation by members of the security
branches at the Al-Andalus school facility. Around 29 families and 40 men currently
remain at the facility, who are unable to leave as they lack documentation or who
choose to stay because of insecurity in their area of origin.
15. As at 7 July, the fate of at least 200 prisoners and detainees from Aleppo
Central Prison remains unknown. On 25 June, OHCHR sent a note verbale to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the status of those detainees, but
no reply had been received as at 16 July. Information obtained by OHCHR indicates
that conditions in makeshift places of detention, such as Al-Wahda School where
prisoners from Aleppo Central Prison were transferred in May 2014, continue to be
overcrowded and inhumane.
16. Children continue to be severely affected by the conflict. According to a report
by Human Rights Watch, armed opposition groups, including the Free Syrian Army,
Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic State, and the People’s Protection Units have been
recruiting and using children under 18 in combat and in direct support roles.
However, some armed groups have taken steps to end the use of children in the
conflict. On 5 July, the People’s Protection Units, the Women’s Protection Units and
the Democratic Self-Administration in Rojava demobilized 149 children from their
ranks and signed the Deed of Commitment protecting children in armed conflict
developed by the non-governmental organization Geneva Call.
17. On 29 June, while returning home from school, four girls were killed and four
other children were injured when mortars landed in front of a secondary school in
Ar-Rastan in Rural Homs. Meanwhile, as at 14 July, around 130 of the 153 students
abducted by the Islamic State on 29 May in Ain al-Arab continue to be held by the
group.
18. The Government stated that 1,205 individuals were pardoned between 3 and
16 July following Legislative Decree 22 of 9 June 2014. According to reports, the
Governor of Homs stated that 118 men detained at the Al-Andalus school facility
were pardoned. However, OHCHR has not been able to verify the information.
19. OHCHR was informed that the Islamic State continue to hold approximately
250 civilians, including approximately 160 migrant workers, who were abducted
some six months ago when returning to Kobani/Ain al-Arab from Iraq. OHCHR also
received reports of a massacre on 9 July in the rural town of Khattab in Hama
Governorate, during which 14 civilians were reportedly killed by unknown armed
men.
20. On 27 June, the Human Rights Council adopted resolution 26/23 on the
continuing grave deterioration in the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic, in which it demanded, inter alia, an end to the violence,
including the demilitarization of medical facilities and schools, and full cooperation
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic with the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic. On 4 July, the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women considered the second periodic
report of the Syrian Arab Republic (CEDAW/C/SYR/2), noting a range of human
rights challenges and violations facing women and girls in the country.
21. Members of the independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, OHCHR, and United Nations human rights mechanisms, including

4/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

special procedures mandate holders, continued to be denied access to the Syrian
Arab Republic during the reporting period.

C.

Humanitarian access
22. Approximately 10.8 million people continue to be in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance within the Syrian Arab Republic, including more than
6.4 million people who are internally displaced. It is now estimated that 4.7 million
people reside in areas that are hard to reach. This includes at least 241,000 people
who continue to live in areas that are besieged by either Government or opposition
forces.
23. Insecurity and challenges with implementing the new truck sealing procedure,
put in place by the Government, continue to affect sustainable delivery of aid.
Intense negotiations by the United Nations with the Government continued during
the reporting period to resolve these issues. In June, food deliveries continued to be
fewer than in the first quarter of the year, reaching only 81 per cent of the target —
compared to 97 per cent in March. However, thanks to some progress in
negotiations, food deliveries started to increase in July. By 15 July, the World Food
Programme (WFP) had dispatched food rations for nearly 1.6 million people, an
increase of approximately 15 and 10 per cent in comparison to the same period in
May and June, respectively.
24. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to hard-to-reach areas remains
extremely difficult in view of the new procedures which have centralized approvals.
Overall, assistance reached only 49 (or 17 per cent) of the 287 locations identified
as besieged or hard to reach. The number of people reached in hard-to-reach
locations has dropped since the last reporting period. Food assistance by WFP and
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) reached 95,838 people in 14 hard-to-reach locations during the
reporting period compared to 348,819 people during the previous reporting period.
From 18 June to 21 July, UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) delivered non-food items to 62,090 people in 29 hard-to-reach locations
compared to 268,960 people during the previous reporting period.
25. During the reporting period, armed opposition groups and designated terrorist
groups have severely constrained access to the eastern governorates. Deir ez-Zor
continues to suffer from severe access constraints as a result of the Islamic State’s
efforts to block humanitarian and commercial access into the Governorate from
Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakeh and the southern desert region — areas in which the Islamic
State control all major access routes. Some 711,000 civilians are estimated to be
affected. Similarly, in Ar-Raqqa, the Islamic State and armed opposition groups are
blocking humanitarian and commercial access to areas that are under the control of
others. As a result, access to Al-Hasakeh is also constrained.
26. During the reporting period, United Nations agencies and partners continued
their efforts to deliver assistance to those in need. In June, WFP dispatched food for
over 3.4 million people across 13 of the 14 governorates. Deliveries of chlorine by
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) benefited 16.5 million people with
clean water. In order to address the water crisis in Aleppo, UNICEF provided water
trucking services and fuel for water stations in partnership with non-governmental
organizations, the municipalities and the Aleppo Water Authority. From 18 June to

14-58046

5/21

S/2014/525

8 July, UNHCR dispatched core relief items to 243,222 people, many displaced
from hard-to-reach areas. The World Health Organization (WHO) delivered medical
assistance to over 2.1 million people.
27. In a note verbale dated 14 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested
United Nations agencies to send humanitarian assistance to Adra Ummaleya and
Adra al-Balad, in Rural Damascus, as those areas have not received assistance from
the United Nations for more than six months.
Besieged areas
28. Approximately 241,000 people remain besieged — 196,000 in areas that are
besieged by Government forces in Madamiyet Elsham, Eastern Ghouta, Darayya
and Yarmouk, and 45,000 in areas besieged by opposition forces in Nubul and
Zahra.
29. During the reporting period, assistance reached only two besieged
communities, Yarmouk and Madamiyet Elsham. Food was distributed to 42,084
people, or 17.4 per cent, and non-food items to 20,000 people, or 8.2 per cent of
people in besieged areas.
30. Eastern Ghouta: 150,000 people remain besieged in Eastern Ghouta. A convoy
request was submitted for Douma on 9 July for 14 to 16 July targeting 50,000
people. No response has been received from the Government. Eastern Ghouta
(Douma) was last reached with humanitarian assistance on 24 May.
31. Madamiyet Elsham: as a result of new arrivals from Darayya, the population
has increased from 20,000 to 24,000 in the city. Although a local ceasefire is still
holding, civilians inside the city are facing a shortage of basic needs and movement
constraints. After intense negotiations, with 20 requests submitted for access to the
area since March 2013, an inter-agency team was able to access the town with
supplies on 14 July. It was originally scheduled for 9 and 10 July but faced delays
because of extensive negotiations on the type of supplies, quantities, procedures to
move the trucks and additional screening and processing imposed. From 14 to
21 July, seven convoys have proceeded, providing supplies for a total of 30,000
people — 20,000 inside the besieged area of Madamiyet and 10,000 in Governmentheld areas of the town. No medical supplies, including primary health-care kits for
children, were allowed on the convoy in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. However, two mobile clinics of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
(SARC) accessed the area and provided medical services and 1,000 doses of
vaccines (polio and regular immunization) on 15, 16, 17 and 21 July. The health
situation remains critical as there is only one health centre in the area and severe
shortages of medicines.
32. Darayya: approximately 4,000 people remain besieged in Darayya, Rural
Damascus, with no access to assistance during the reporting period. Owing to an
increase in hostilities, an estimated 4,000 people have fled Darayya to Madamyiet
Elsham which is adjacent. Darayya was last assisted in October 2012.
33. Yarmouk: 18,000 people remain besieged in Yarmouk. UNRWA accessed
Yarmouk from 7 to 13 July and from 16 to 19 July, reaching 22,084 people with
food parcels, after more than a month of interruption following its food distribution
on 23 May and its distribution of non-food items on 7 June. Distributions remain
insufficient to cover the minimum food needs of the civilian population in Yarmouk.

6/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

Three thousand doses of polio vaccine and a range of smaller items were also
delivered on 16 July, including baby hygiene kits, rehydration salts, vitamins and
lice treatments. In response to unconfirmed reports of approximately 100 typhoid
cases on 18 July, UNRWA medical staff initiated an immediate investigation and
were permitted to take blood samples from 12 patients, 4 of whom tested positive
for typhoid. On 19 July, UNRWA transferred typhoid medicines comprising a range
of antibiotics, syrups, tablets and injections to the Palestine Red Crescent Society,
sufficient for approximately 100 patients, for treatment of patients inside Yarmouk.
Water purification tablets were also provided.
34. Nubul and Zahra: 45,000 people remain besieged by opposition forces in
Nubul and Zahra. Nubul and Zahra were targeted by domestic-made rockets on
9 July causing an unspecified number of casualties. No humanitarian assistance has
reached the two villages since 8 May.
Cross-border assistance
35. On 14 July, the Security Council, by resolution 2165 (2014), authorized United
Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners to use additional
border crossings for delivery of humanitarian assistance: Bab al-Salam and Bab
al-Hawa with Turkey, Al-Yarubiyah with Iraq and Al-Ramtha with Jordan. The
Council established a mechanism to monitor the loading of all humanitarian relief
consignments of the United Nations humanitarian agencies and their implementing
partners at the relevant United Nations facilities with notification to the Syrian
authorities.
36. Since the adoption of the resolution, the United Nations has conducted
preliminary consultations and scoping to set up the monitoring mechanism, deploy
staff, identify loading points and prepare convoys to reach areas through the four
additional border crossings, as part of its whole of approach to the Syrian Arab
Republic.
37. Relief items are urgently needed in Qamishly because of the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Al-Hasakeh Governorate. On 9 July, UNHCR commenced
airlifts from Damascus to Qamishly to transport 10,000 non-food item kits,
sufficient for approximately 50,000 people, to provide assistance to people in hardto-reach areas in Al-Hasakeh Governorate. Joint airlifts led by WFP from Damascus
to Qamishly to transport food for over 50,000 people as well as water, sanitation and
hygiene items and medicines are scheduled to commence shortly.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
38. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic continues to deny approvals of
injectable medicines and surgical equipment destined for hard-to-reach areas in
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. In some cases, the Government
has denied the inclusion of any medical aid, such as in Madamiyet Elsham. This has
resulted in denying supplies and the pre-positioning of life-saving treatment for six
months for 24,000 people. During the inter-agency convoy to Madamiyet, two
SARC mobile clinics were unable to carry any critical medicines for treatment of
medical cases.
39. During the reporting period, WHO delivered medicines and medical equipment
for 2.1 million people in nine governorates (Aleppo, Al-Hasakeh, Ar-Raqqa,

14-58046

7/21

S/2014/525

Damascus, Dara’a, Homs, Idlib, Quneitra and Rural Damascus). This included
treatments 2 for 412,049 people in opposition-controlled areas in Aleppo and
Ar-Raqqa, where medicines and supplies for 344,363 people were delivered to
health authorities and are currently being distributed. Further treatments for around
1.1 million people have been provided to health authorities in governorates for
further distribution, predominantly to Government-controlled areas; and treatments
for 439,250 people are pre-positioned with SARC for distribution through partners
and inter-agency convoys.
40. The seventh countrywide vaccination campaign for polio was conducted from
15 to 19 June. The latest campaign reached 2.7 million children across the country,
including children in contested and hard-to-reach areas.
41. There are now 389 confirmed measles cases out of more than 2,800 suspected
cases in the Syrian Arab Republic. Most of the cases are found in the hard-to-reach
Governorates of Deir ez-Zor and Ar-Raqqa. UNICEF and WHO supported a Ministry
of Health-led campaign from 15 to 26 June which aimed to reach up to 1 million
children aged between 6 months and 10 years in high-risk areas. Preliminary figures
from the campaign show that around 746,279 children were reached. The measles
campaign, including provision of vitamin A, was conducted in all 14 governorates,
including Deir ez-Zor (123,144), Aleppo (88,773) and Al-Hasakeh (83,539).
42. Attacks on medical facilities have significantly increased over the reporting
period. During the month of June, Physicians for Human Rights documented
12 attacks on medical facilities. This is the second highest number of facility attacks
recorded in a single month since December 2012. The attacks occurred in Aleppo,
Hama, Homs, Idlib and Rural Damascus Governorates. All 12 documented attacks
were committed by Government forces. The deaths of 19 medical personnel were
also documented; 18 were committed by Government forces and one by an armed
opposition group.
Administrative procedures
43. The implementation of the new procedure for the sealing of trucks intended to
facilitate passage at checkpoints continued to slow down the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. During the reporting period, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic reiterated that the new procedure for movement of relief supplies
applied to regular programmes only and not to hard-to-reach areas. 3 The movement
of supplies to hard-to-reach areas has to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis
through meetings of the Joint Committee, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
Ministry of Social Affairs and security personnel nationally. This directive is also
applicable for authorization for hard-to-reach areas from United Nations hubs at the
governorate level, which previously did not require authorization at the
central/national level. In Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Idlib, the Governors have
implemented the new directive and convoys are no longer authorized at hub level.
__________________
2 One standard treatment course (e.g. a course of antibiotics for 8 days) is considered to be

treatment for one person. Treatment courses are determined for each medicine distribution on
the basis of international WHO standards.
3 The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested
by the United Nations on 16 July for the definition and criteria of hot spots but has not been
received to date. For the purpose of this report, these are referred to as hard-to-reach areas until
this is clarified, owing to the difficulty in reaching these locations.

8/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

WHO has received exemption from some of these procedures with respect to
medicines, vaccines and some medical equipment.
44. On 18 June, UNHCR officially opened a field office in the city of As-Sweida
to oversee its activities in the southern Syrian Arab Republic, in addition to
establishing a logistics hub for humanitarian supplies arriving across the
Syrian/Jordanian border. This will permit improved coverage of needs of internally
displaced people in the Governorates of Dar’a, As-Sweida and Quneitra.
45. As at 18 July, a total of 68 visas or renewal requests remained pending;
29 within the 15 working day limit and 39 exceeding the 15 working day limit.
Requested visas for the much-needed crop and food security assessment mission
were granted for one week and only after crops had already been harvested,
hampering the conduct of a credible and independent assessment. During the
reporting period, there has been an increase in the number of pending visas for
international non-governmental organizations, with 17 requests now pending, up
from 13 during the last reporting period.
46. During the reporting period, there has been no change in the number of
national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner with United Nations
agencies: as at 17 July, 85 national non-governmental organizations are operating
through 142 branches throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
47. International non-governmental organizations continue to be unable to conduct
independent (or joint) needs assessments; open sub-offices; monitor the impact of
their work; and participate in inter-agency cross-line convoys.
Safety and security of staff and premises
48. On 5 July, a tank shell hit a vehicle in an UNDOF convoy, lightly wounding
two peacekeepers. On 7 July, tank fire struck United Nations vehicles on patrol.
49. Twenty-eight United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or
are missing: 27 from UNRWA are detained or presumed missing and one from the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is detained. The total number of
humanitarian workers killed since March 2011 is 59. This includes 14 United
Nations staff members, 37 SARC staff members and volunteers, seven Palestine Red
Crescent Society volunteers and staff members, and one staff member of an
international non-governmental organization.

III. Observations
50. As I have made clear to the Security Council on many occasions, a political
solution is urgently needed in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 10 July, I appointed
Staffan de Mistura as my Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic. Together with
his deputy, Ramzy Ezzeldin Ramzy, he will work with Syrian parties, as well as
with regional and international stakeholders, to identify new elements for a political
process that brings an end to the violence and facilitates a peaceful Syrian-led and
inclusive political solution, and that meets the democratic aspirations of the Syrian
people.
51. On 20 June, I set out six key areas for urgent action. First, bringing an end to
the violence. I repeat my call for an arms embargo. Second, protecting the human

14-58046

9/21

S/2014/525

rights, safety and dignity of the Syrian people. Third, starting a serious political
process for a new Syrian Arab Republic. Fourth, addressing the issue of
accountability for the serious crimes committed by all sides. Fifth, completing the
destruction of the chemical weapons production facilities. This has now been
achieved. Sixth, the need to address the regional dimensions of the conflict,
including the extremist threat.
52. Ways must be found to build bridges that promote peace and reconciliation,
and to halt the influence of radical armed groups, including those affiliated with
Al-Qaida. The world must come together to stop funding and other support for
organizations designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council, including
Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic State.
53. This month, thousands of people were killed, displaced and traumatized by
indiscriminate attacks by the parties to the conflict, including by the continuing use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. Children continue to be killed, maimed
and recruited by parties to the conflict. The Government continues to drop barrel
bombs and carries out indiscriminate aerial bombardments in populated areas, with
horrific consequences for Syrian women, children and men. The indiscriminate use
of mortar and shelling of residential neighbourhoods by armed opposition groups is
relentless. Human rights violations continue to be widespread, and attacks on
medical facilities are on the increase in a blatant violation of international
humanitarian law. Fundamental principles of humanity continue to be ignored every
day. Deliberately targeting civilians is a war crime for which there can be no
impunity.
54. The parties have continued to obstruct humanitarian assistance to those most in
need and to withhold consent for operations in a completely arbitrary manner as a
tactic of war. I call upon parties to the conflict to lift the sieges immediately and
facilitate access to people in need of humanitarian assistance. I remind the parties to
this conflict of their obligation to allow and facilitate access for humanitarian
assistance, as demanded by the Security Council, by international humanitarian law,
and by the most basic principles of humanity.
55. It is continuing violations that have led the Council to adopt resolution 2165
(2014), a resolution which should not have been necessary. Resolution 2165 (2014)
makes four additional border crossings available to the United Nations and its
implementing partners and could help humanitarian actors to reach up to 2.9 million
more people, if security and other conditions allow. But this will be possible if, and
only if, the parties to the conflict live up to their responsibilities to enable and
facilitate access.
56. I call upon the parties to the conflict, in the strongest terms, to comply with the
demands of the Council contained in resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014). This
could make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of people. But it will not
replace the need for a political solution in the Syrian Arab Republic. No one is
winning the Syrian war, and no one can win this conflict militarily. It is ordinary
people who are paying the price for war and who crave a return to stability and
security in their country.

10/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

Annex
1.

Protection of civilians
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps, places
of worship)
Attacks on schools and hospitals during the reporting period
• On 19 June, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device went off near
Maysaloun School in Al-Nuzha neighbourhood of Homs city; 11 civilians were
killed and dozens injured.
• On 29 June, a mortar landed near Al-Sabaat secondary school, in Al-Rastan
area of Rural Homs. Four young girls were killed and at least four children
were injured.
• As at 18 July, around 130 students kidnapped by the Islamic State on 29 May
in Ain al-Arab are still being held.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services
• The conflict continued to disrupt health-care services. Hospitals have been
damaged in 12 of the country’s 14 governorates. Out of 97 Ministry of Health
hospitals:
– 45 per cent are reported as fully functioning; 30 per cent are reported as
partially functioning; and 25 per cent are reported as not functioning at all.
– 69 per cent are reported as accessible to patients seeking treatment, while
31 per cent are not accessible because of insecurity.
• Water production in Aleppo is reportedly at less than 50 per cent capacity
following damage caused to water, sewage and electrical networks by an
explosion on 2 June. As a result, an estimated 1 million people are reportedly
facing difficulties in regularly accessing safe water supplies in the area. Access
to repair the pumping station was secured on 19 July and repairs were started;
they should be completed in one month.
• The Early Warning and Response System has reported over 1,650 cases of
suspected typhoid in Deir ez-Zor Governorate, mostly in the towns of
Al-Bukamal and Al-Mayadin owing to the reported cuts in the water and
electricity supply by the Islamic State on 8 June.
• On 1 July, there were two explosions close to the main police station in Khan
Eshieh Palestine Refugee Camp, resulting in the death of at least one Palestine
refugee, injuring seven, and causing significant material and structural
damage.

2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas
• Latest estimates indicate that 4.7 million people are located in “hard-to-reach”
areas and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.

14-58046

11/21

S/2014/525

• Food assistance was provided to 95,838 people during the reporting period in
hard-to-reach areas (73,754 by WFP and 22,084 by UNRWA).
• Non-food items were provided to 62,090 people in hard-to-reach areas.
UNHCR provided 30,855 people with non-food assistance in hard-to-reach
areas from 18 June to 8 July. Non-food items were also delivered to 20,000
people inside besieged Madamiyet Elsham and 10,000 people in the
Government-held eastern part of Madamiyet Elsham town. The International
Organization for Migration provided non-food items for 1,235 people.
• WHO distributed medicines and supplies for 364,363 people in hard-to-reach
areas.
• UNICEF reached 24,755 people with water, sanitation and hygiene items and
24,220 children with educational support in hard-to-reach areas.
• Because of ongoing insecurity and the impact of new procedures for reaching
hard-to-reach areas, there were no deliveries of health supplies by UNICEF,
while UNFPA was unable to distribute any dignity kits or reproductive health
commodities.
Inter-agency convoys
• There were five inter-agency convoys during the reporting period:
– From 14 to 21 July, five inter-agency convoys reached Madamiyet
Elsham and provided food, non-food items and hygiene supplies for
30,000 people in total (20,000 inside Madamiyet and 10,000 in
Government-held areas of the town). No medical supplies were allowed
on the convoy, including primary health-care kits for children; however,
two SARC mobile clinics accessed the area and provided medical
services and 1,000 doses of vaccines (polio and regular immunization) on
15, 16, 17 and 21 July.
• Six inter-agency convoys were requested but could not be sent during the
reporting period:
– On 15 July, the United Nations hub in Homs submitted a request for a
cross-line convoy to Sahel Gahab (north-western Rural Hama), and
requested follow-up for a pending inter-agency convoy request from
3 June. The convoys have yet to be approved.
◦ An inter-agency convoy to Douma planned for 14 to 16 July could
not be sent for lack of approval from authorities.
◦ An inter-agency convoy to Abu al-Thohur, Idlib Governorate,
planned for 29 June could not be sent for lack of approval from
authorities. On 6 July, a reminder was sent to the Idlib Governor
requesting approval for the convoy on 7 July. The Governor
confirmed that the convoy should be approved by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
◦ In Homs, on 23 June, the Homs Governor informed the United
Nations hub that cross-line convoys should be approved directly by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On 15 July, the United Nations hub

12/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

submitted a request for a convoy to Al-Houla, which has yet to be
answered.
◦ An inter-agency convoy to western Rural Hama requested on 4 June
(with a reminder on 25 June) could not be sent for lack of approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
◦ In Aleppo, the United Nations hub sent a request to the Governor’s
office on 15 June to continue the implementation of the Aleppo
convoy plan, which had already been approved on 22 May. The
Governor resubmitted the plan to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
but no response has been received.
• In a note verbale dated 14 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requested
United Nations agencies to send humanitarian assistance to Adra Ummaleya
and Adra al-Balad, in Rural Damascus, as these areas have not received
assistance from the United Nations for more than six months.
Besieged areas
• 241,000 people remain besieged in total.
• During the reporting period, food was distributed to 42,084 people, or 17.4 per
cent, and non-food items to 20,000 people, or 8.2 per cent of people in
besieged areas.
• UNRWA delivered food assistance to 22,084 people in Yarmouk Camp during
the reporting period. UNRWA also delivered 3,000 polio vaccines for use
inside Yarmouk.
• Food, non-food items and hygiene supplies were delivered to 20,000 people
inside besieged Madamiyet Elsham.
Cross-border assistance
From Turkey
• According to the Turkish Red Crescent Society, humanitarian actors have
channelled around US$ 23 million worth of humanitarian assistance on average
per month from Turkey to the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero-point
delivery system administered by the Turkish Red Crescent Society. This monthly
average does not include assistance delivered via commercial or other channels.
• UNHCR submitted two requests for the importation of items from Turkey
which were approved.
From Jordan
• UNHCR submitted 46 official requests to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic for importation of core relief items across the Jordanian border. All
were approved.
• On 24 June, following the opening of the new UNHCR office and logistics hub
in As-Sweida, core relief items for 5,000 people were dispatched directly from
the Jordanian border through to As-Sweida and then to hard-to-reach areas in
Dara’a Governorate, without the need to pass through Damascus.

14-58046

13/21

S/2014/525

From Lebanon
• The Masna and Al-Arida border crossings between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic remained open for the transportation of relief items during the
reporting period.
• UNHCR submitted 16 requests to import core relief items, medicines and
telecommunications and security equipment across the Lebanese border; 13 were
approved and 4, relating to telecommunications and security equipment, are
pending.
From Iraq
• UNHCR submitted one request for the importation of items from Iraq which
was approved.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• Syrian humanitarian workers continued to face a number of risks, including
summary executions, kidnappings, arrests, violence and harassment. The
number of humanitarian workers killed since March 2011 stands at 59,
including 14 United Nations staff, 37 SARC staff and volunteers, seven
Palestine Red Crescent Society volunteers and staff and one staff member of
an international non-governmental organization (NGO).
• 28 United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or are missing
(27 from UNRWA are detained or missing and one from UNDP is detained).
Declaration of commitment
• A total of 23 armed opposition groups have signed the Declaration of
Commitment, affirming their core responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and of their commitment to facilitate action to meet the
needs of civilians on the basis of need alone. Of the 23 signatories, 14 groups
signed during the reporting period:
◦ Shuhada al-Badr/16th Division: signed 11 July
◦ Liwa Suqur Jabal al-Zawiya: signed 4 July
◦ Jabhat al-Sham: signed 4 July
◦ Jabhat al-Haqq: signed 4 July
◦ Jabhat Inqaz: signed 27 June
◦ 13th Division: signed 26 June
◦ Jabhat Tahreer al-Furat (Euphrates Liberation Front): signed 26 June
◦ Jabhat Inqaz al-Thawra al-Islamiya (Front to save the Islamic Revolution):
signed 26 June
◦ Jabhat Syria lil Tahreer (Syrian Front for Liberation): signed 26 June
◦ Jabhat Shaabialil Tahreer Syria (Popular Front for the Liberation of Syria):
signed 26 June
◦ 7th Division: signed 26 June

14/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

◦ Ahrar al-Shimal (Freeman of the North): signed 24 June
◦ Quwwat al-saiqa: signed 24 June
◦ Faylaq al-Sham/Al-Sham legion: signed 24 June

3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• On 9 July, an airstrike shelled Dakkak Hospital in Aleppo city with two barrel
bombs, causing damage to the hospital and resulting in death and injury to
civilians.
• On 29 June, a medical facility in the besieged city of Jisreen in Eastern Ghouta
was attacked, causing destruction to the medical facility and injuring several
staff.
• On 29 June, the Orient Hospital in Kafranbel, Idlib, was attacked, killing two
people and damaging the hospital.
• On 26 June, warplanes with missiles targeted medical facilities in Jisreen,
Eastern Ghouta, resulting in destruction of the medical facility and severe
injuries to the staff.
• On 24 June, two barrel bombs landed on Wesam Hospital in Kafarzeita, Rural
Hama. The hospital was destroyed, one child was killed and the medical team
was injured.
• On 24 June, the Daret Izzeh Surgical Hospital in western Rural Aleppo was
targeted by warplanes resulting in the partial destruction of the hospital.
• On 23 and 24 June, a field hospital in Aleppo city supported by an
international NGO was targeted by barrel bombs. Extensive damage was
reported to infrastructure and life-saving equipment including oxygen and
electric generators.
• On 23 June, a hospital in the Al-Sakhour area of Aleppo city was hit by barrel
bombs, resulting in the destruction of the hospital.
• Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) documented 12 attacks on medical facilities
in June. Four attacks were by barrel bombs, six by missiles or rockets, one by
aerial bombardment, and one by shelling. Six attacks occurred in Aleppo
Governorate, one in Hama Governorate, one in Homs Governorate, one in
Idlib Governorate, and one in Rural Damascus Governorate. All 10 attacks
were by Government forces. In total, PHR has documented 175 attacks on
143 separate medical facilities by the end of June 2014.
• Physicians for Human Rights documented that 19 medical personnel were
killed during June; 18 were killed by Government forces and one by armed
opposition groups. Overall, PHR have recorded the deaths of 526 medical
personnel since the start of the conflict.

14-58046

15/21

S/2014/525

Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
• Access to medical supplies and equipment continues to be hampered by
insecurity and by constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. During the reporting period,
medicines and medical equipment for approximately 24,000 people in hard-toreach areas were unavailable because of lack of approval and removal of
supplies.
◦ 24,000 people were unable to receive six months’ worth of medical and
basic surgical supplies and critical supplies that had been readied by
WHO for delivery as part of the five convoys to Madamiyet Elsham from
14 to 19 July.
Polio vaccination campaign
• As at 9 July 2014, there have been 36 confirmed cases of polio; 35 cases from
October to December 2013, and one case in 2014. The confirmed cases were in
Deir ez-Zor (25), Aleppo (5), Idlib (3), Al-Hasakeh (2) and Hama (1).
• During the polio vaccination round from 15 to 19 June, 2.7 million children
were reached in all 14 governorates. Around 30 per cent of children were
located in hard-to-reach areas.
• UNICEF provided 28.5 million doses of oral polio vaccine to the Government,
which is the total amount needed to cover the polio response plan until
September 2014. The next polio round will begin at the end of August and will
be part of the Sub-National Immunization Days.
Measles vaccination campaign
• There are 389 confirmed measles cases in the Syrian Arab Republic to date,
most registered in Deir ez-Zor and Ar-Raqqa. In addition, more than
2,800 cases of suspected measles have been reported through the early warning
system, double the number reported for the whole of 2013.
• UNICEF and WHO supported a Ministry of Health-led measles vaccination
campaign from 15 to 26 June, targeting up to 1 million children in high-risk
areas. Preliminary results indicate that around 746,279 children were reached
across all 14 governorates, including Deir ez-Zor (123,144), Aleppo (88,773)
and Al-Hasakeh (83,539).
• UNICEF delivered 6.5 million doses of vitamin A to the Ministry of Health,
which were used during the measles campaign and will also be used in the
routine sessions of vaccinations.

16/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

4.

Administrative hurdles
• On 9 June, the Ministry of Social Affairs communicated to governors that all
convoys or missions to “hot spot areas” a required the approval of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the High Relief Committee and the National Security
Office. Previously, the governors were delegated to coordinate and authorize
delivery of assistance within their respective governorates including across
lines of conflict, in areas where hubs are approved. Delivery of assistance to
cross-line locations has been significantly hampered throughout the reporting
period as a result of the roll-out of this new directive.
• On 2 July, the Humanitarian Coordinator requested, in writing to the
Government, clarification of the new procedures for the importation of goods
issued on 29 May. The new procedures added administrative layers to the
customs clearance process, including approval from the local governor and
submission of weekly importation plans.
• On 7 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated a time frame for
submitting the weekly loading plans according to the truck sealing procedures
rolled out for the movement of trucks for regular programmes: loading plans
are to be submitted by United Nations agencies on Monday each week during
working hours. The Government has committed itself to clearing the weekly
loading plans on Thursday, for distributions to start on Saturdays.
• WHO has received exemption from some of these procedures with respect to
medicines, vaccines and some medical equipment.
Clearance procedures for telecommunications equipment
• Government approvals to import and operate information and communications
technology equipment remain a lengthy process. UNHCR obtained approval
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for VHF radios (at the customs awaiting
clearance), VSATs for Qamishly and Damascus (at Damascus airport customs
awaiting clearance), and ProGres servers/laptops (soon to be shipped to
Damascus). The import permit is still pending approval from Ministry of
Foreign Affairs for a VSAT for Aleppo and CISCO telephony system.
Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The joint United Nations and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic Committee established following the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) includes a security focal point. Regular
meetings are held between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Humanitarian Coordinator on an almost daily basis. The Committee includes a
security focal point.
• Opposition. The opposition is still unable to designate empowered
interlocutors. The fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to
clearly identify an interlocutor for armed opposition groups.

__________________
a The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested

by the United Nations on 16 July for the definition and criteria of hot spots but has to date not
been received. For the purpose of this report, these are referred to as hard-to-reach areas until
this has been clarified, owing to the difficulty in reaching these locations.

14-58046

17/21

S/2014/525

• Ad hoc local engagement is ongoing to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary
depending on the localities where access is being negotiated.
Visas
• The revised visa policy established by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 4 March continued to be implemented. As at 18 July, a total of
68 United Nations visas or renewal requests remain pending, 29 within the
15 working day limit and 39 exceeding the 15 working days. There has been
an increase in the number of pending visas for international NGOs, with
17 requests now pending, up from 13 during the last reporting period.
• The six visas requested for the members of the crop and food security
assessment mission from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) and WFP were not obtained in a timely fashion. The mission
originally intended a three-week period from 11 June to ensure adequate field
crop observation. On 3 July 2014, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs granted
visas for a one-week mission and valid only until 20 July. However, the
proposed timing (during Ramadan and after the harvesting of crops) hampers
the conduct of a credible and independent assessment.
Humanitarian hubs and presence
• On 18 June, UNHCR officially opened a field office in As-Sweida to oversee
UNHCR operational activities in the south, in addition to establishing a
logistics hub for humanitarian supplies arriving across the Syrian/Jordanian
border.
• The Aleppo hub is still being operationalized and is currently staffed with
international and national staff. Further progress has been made in establishing
a UNICEF office in Aleppo, with the recruitment of new staff under way.
International non-governmental organization partners
• The number of international NGOs approved to work in the Syrian Arab
Republic stands at 16; no new international NGOs requested approval to work
in the country during the reporting period.
• International NGOs are still not authorized to work directly with national
NGOs and are not allowed to accompany United Nations convoys to the field.
• There was no progress during the reporting period on the revision of the
standard memorandum of understanding for international NGOs with SARC
and line ministries.
National non-governmental organization partners
• The number of national NGOs authorized to partner stands at 85, operating
through 142 branches.

5.

Funding
• $27.2 million of funding for the Syrian crisis was registered during the
reporting period. Of that amount, $10.9 million were for activities inside the

18/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

Syrian Arab Republic and $16.3 million were for support to Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting
period, 45 per cent ($4.9 million) was for activities included in the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring countries, 89 per
cent ($14.5 million) of the amount reported was for activities included in the
Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan.
• As at 21 July, the total funding for the Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan and the Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan stands at 33 per
cent ($6.02 billion requested, $1.98 billion received). The Syria Humanitarian
Assistance Response Plan is 27 per cent funded and the Syria Regional
Refugee Response Plan is 37 per cent funded.

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• During the June cycle, WFP dispatched food in support of over 3.4 million
people across 13 of the 14 governorates, reaching 81 per cent of the planned
4.25 million people.
• The July food dispatch cycle started slowly but has since improved. As at
15 July, WFP has dispatched 316,210 family food rations in support of nearly
1.6 million people in 11 of 14 governorates, an increase of approximately
15 and 10 per cent in comparison to the same time in May and June,
respectively.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR dispatched core relief items for 243,222 vulnerable people during the
reporting period. In total, over 2.5 million people have received core relief
items in 13 out of the 14 governorates since the beginning of the year;
approximately 9.1 million items have been distributed overall.
• So far in 2014, UNHCR has completed the rehabilitation of collective shelters
in six governorates benefiting 8,207 people. Further, private shelters have been
upgraded for 23,933 people in Homs, Rural Damascus and Aleppo
Governorates.
• IOM delivered a total of 7,287 non-food items in Aleppo, Al-Hasakeh,
As-Sweida, Homs, Idlib, Damascus and Hama Governorates.
Health
• During the reporting period, WHO delivered and/or dispatched medicines and
medical equipment for over 2.1 million people in nine governorates (Aleppo,
Al-Hasakeh, Ar-Raqqa, Damascus, Dara’a, Homs, Idlib, Quneitra and Rural
Damascus). This included treatments for 412,049 people in oppositioncontrolled areas in Aleppo and Ar-Raqqa, where medicines and supplies for
344,363 people were delivered to health authorities and are currently being
distributed. Further treatments for around 1.1 million people have been
provided to health authorities in governorates for further distribution,

14-58046

19/21

S/2014/525

predominantly to Government-controlled areas; and treatments for 439,250
people are pre-positioned with SARC for distribution through partners and
inter-agency convoys.
• 14,600 women received reproductive health services including emergency
obstetric care and safe delivery through the UNFPA-assisted reproductive
health clinics, vouchers, mobile teams and maternal hospitals in Damascus,
Rural Damascus, Aleppo, Hama and Homs.
Nutrition
• Nutrition support was provided to over 36,000 children through WFP in
collective shelters in Homs, Hama and Tartous, while children in Aleppo and
Al-Hasakeh received nutributter to address micronutrient deficiencies.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
• During the reporting period, UNICEF continued to reach 16.5 million people
with access to safe water through the supply of sodium hypochlorite; 41 per
cent of people assisted are in areas not controlled by the Government.
• UNICEF and partners continued to reach children and families in hard-toreach areas with access to water, sanitation and hygiene services. In
Al-Hasakeh Governorate, 11,790 people were reached with water, sanitation
and hygiene supplies in collaboration with SARC and Al-Bir Association. In
Ar-Raqqa, UNICEF supported 2,250 displaced people residing in camps in the
Mansoura area with drinking water services in partnership with Al-Bir.
Meanwhile, agreements with two local NGOs will see water, sanitation and
hygiene services provided to 22,000 displaced people at the Tishreen shelter
and another 51 buildings.
• UNICEF supported immediate responses to address the water crisis in Aleppo
including through water trucking services in partnership with NGOs, the
municipality and the Aleppo Water Authority. UNICEF is also undertaking
hygiene promotion activities among internally displaced persons and host
communities living in the western part of Aleppo city.
Education
• Schools are currently closed in the Syrian Arab Republic and so current
education activities are focused on preparation for the start of the next
academic year in September.
• UNICEF, along with the Directorate of Education, distributed 8,235 school
bags in Al-Hasakeh City.
• 15,745 children continued to have access to learning through 48 UNICEFsupported learning centres in Homs, Al-Rastan and surrounding areas.
Palestine refugees
• UNRWA provided food assistance to 22,084 people in Yarmouk Camp, health
consultations for 77,357 people, cash assistance to 337,838 people,
422 microfinance loans and water, sanitation and hygiene/shelter support to
13,901 people.

20/21

14-58046

S/2014/525

• UNRWA participated in the WHO-led campaign to vaccinate or re-vaccinate
all children in the Syrian Arab Republic, which covered 65 per cent of at-risk
Palestine refugees. Vaccination rates among Palestine refugees relative to the
Syrian population were high (99 per cent prior to the conflict).
Agriculture
• FAO provided agricultural support to 11,956 people overall, including in hardto-reach areas: 3,346 people in Idlib and Hama Governorates received animal
feed, 6,300 people in Hama were assisted with vegetable seed packages and
2,310 people in Rural Damascus received poultry production packages or
animal feed.
Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued its protection monitoring activities through staff on the
ground in seven key locations, 11 community centres, partnerships with
international and local organizations, and more than 200 outreach volunteers.
UNHCR conducted protection monitoring visits to Al-Andalus school facility,
the shelter that housed individuals evacuated from the once besieged Old City
of Homs.
• UNHCR and partners have provided 3,874 internally displaced persons with
legal assistance related to personal status documentation and birth registration
related issues since the start of 2014.
• UNICEF in collaboration with partners reached 7,832 children with
psychosocial support in Damascus, Rural Damascus, Dar’a, Quneitra, Tartous,
Lattakia, Hama and Homs Governorates. This included reaching 385 children
in Al-Waer, Homs, in cooperation with the NGO Al-Aoun.
• UNFPA continues to provide gender-based violence support services through
three centres in Damascus: 680 screening services (including for sexual
violence) and 5,689 counselling services were delivered by UNFPA partners.
• UNHCR provides support to the approximately 35,000 registered refugees in
the Syrian Arab Republic. As at 8 July, UNHCR had completed the initial
registration of 622 Iraqis in Al-Hasakeh Governorate out of an estimated
3,000 Iraqi arrivals.

14-58046

21/21
