UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

2178”
NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

MEETING:

4 DECEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/Z 178) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...............
Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13646) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.2178

1
1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such. a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in qtirterly Suppkments of the Oflcial Recor& of the Security CounciI. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
.adopted in 1961, are published in yearly volumes of ResoIutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1%5, be&me fully operative on that date.

.‘

2178th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesdaj,
Presiuknt:

4 December 1979, at 4 p.m.

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

that representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance withthe relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Katapodi (Greece)
took the place resewed for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Chinese): Members of the Council have before them document S/13677,
containing the text of a draft resolution which has been
prepared in the course of consultations among members of
the Council. I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
S/13673, which contains the text of a letter dated 3 December from the Permanent Representative of the Ivory Coast
addressed to the President of the Council; and S/13675,
which contains the text of a letter &ted 3 December from
the Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia addressed to
the President of the Council.

Provlslonal agenda (S/Agenda/2178)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13646)
The meeting was called to ordm at 4.45 p.m

Adoption of the agenda
Tie agenda was adopted.

4. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): Very briefly, I
should like to bring to the attention of the Council the
statement which was issued on 22 November by the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, over which
Portugal currently presides:
“The Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe expressesits deep concern at the hostage-taking
at the United States Embassy in Teheran, which constitutes a flagrant violation of the most elementary rules of
international law, and in particular of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, to which Iran is a
party. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the 21
member States of the Council of Europe, an organization firmly committed to the defence of human rights
and the rule of law, make an urgent appeal to the Iranian
authorities to release the hostages and put an end to a
situation which dangerously impairs international rela-

Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
comcil w3646)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
[2172ndand2175th to 2177th meetings], I invite the representatives of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Egypt, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Malawi,
Mauritius, the Netherlands, Panama, Spain, Sri Lanka;
Swaziland, Yugoslavia and Zaire to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the tnvitation of the president, Mr. Anderson (Australia),
Mr. Batter (Austruz), Mr. Elliott (Belgium), Mr. Barton (Can&), Mr. AbaWMeg& (Ejgypt) Mr. von Wechmar (Federal
ReHlic
of Germany), Mr. La Rocca (ItaIy), Mr. Nisibori
(3tpan). Mr. l&nan @be&)), Mr. Muwamba (Malawi),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. Scheltema (Netherhmds),
Mr. IEueca (%mma.), Mr. de Pinikr (Spain), Mr. F-do
(Sri Lunka), Mr. Malinga (SwazUandI, Mr. Komatbta (Yugoslavia) und Mr. Kantat& wa Kamanda @a&e) took the
* p&es reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber

tiOnS.”

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Greece. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
6. Mr. KATAPGDIS
(Greece): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to thank you and, through you, the other
members of the Council, for giving me the opportunity to
express the views of my delegation on the item under
consideration.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Greece in
which he asks to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite

7. The Security Council is seized of a question of utmost
importance and of far-reaching implications on future rela1

12. The PRESIDENT (interpretationjivrn Chinese):It is
my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote now on the draft resolution before it. Since there is
no objection, I put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/13677.

tions between two, and possibly more, members of the
international community. The facts are well known, and so
is the reaction of practically all Member States. All the
statements heard so far in the course of this debate have
underlined two aspects of the problem: that the occupation
of the premises of the United States Embassy at Teheran
and the taking of its diplomatic personnel as hostages contravene elementary principles of international law, and that
whatever differences may exist between the United States
and the Islamic Republic of Iran must be settled through
peaceful means.

A vote was takenby show of hank
l%e &@I resobtion was adoptedunanimous~.l
13. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom Chinese):I
now call on the Secretary-General.

8. My delegation wholeheartedly supports both these
views. We believe that the protection of persons serving in a.
diplomatic capacity in any given country is of primordial
importance for keeping open the channels of communication between States, and therefore is a fundamental prerequisite for safeguarding international peace. This practice
dates from the first periods ofknown civilization. It wasone
of the basic principles governing relations among the cities
of classical Greece. It was adhered to uninterruptedly during succeeding historical eras. It has been embodied in a
long series of treaties, conventions and agreements, both
bilateral and multilateral, the last of which is the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961, to which Iran
isaparty.

14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, I
should like first of all to express my appreciation to you and
all the other members of the Security Council for the positive and understanding response to-my letter of 25 November requesting an urgent meeting ofthe Council to consider
the very serious crisis in the relations between Iran and the
United States.
15. The extensive consultations which the Council has
held since that time, as well as its public meetings, have been
conducted in a most responsible and constructive spirit and
without polemics. That not only testifies to the seriousness
of the crisis but also-does great credit to the Security Council
as the world institution with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

9. There has been in the past, especially in the post-war
years, a great number of casts. where pcrsons enjoying
diplomatic immunity were taken hostage, deprived of their
freedom, ill-treated and even killed. Running such risks has
become an occupational hazard for diplomats all over the
world. But at least they were assur.edthat the authorities of
the host country would do their utmost to ensure their
safety and to provide them with the necessarypeace of mind
for carrying out their duties. The sanctity of the diplomatic
envoy-not because his life and safety are of greater value
than that of his fellow human bein@ but because the protection of his person is an essential prerequisite for the conduct
of international life-resides in a long tradition. It would be
both sad and dangerous if this tradition were to be broken.
The consequences might be incalculable for peace in the
world, as the Secretary-General has pointed out in his letter
in which he asked for the urgent convening of the Security
Council.

16. In the past weeks we have all recognixed that we have
been dealing with a situation which is as unusual~as it is
dangerous. We have al1 recognixed that the release of the
hostages is of primary and urgent importance. We have also
recognized that there are many other aspects of this problem which need to be seriously considered. The resolution
which the Council has just adopted unanimously reflects
the concern of the Council for the immediate. demands of
the situation as well as for the points of view of the parties
concerned. I earnestly hope that this unanimous decision of
the Council will provide the basis on which we may proceed
towards the peaceful solution which is unquestionably in
..
the interests of all concerned.
17. The resolution requests the Secretary-General to lend
his good of&s for its immediate implementation and to
take all appropriate measures to thisend. I need hardly say
that I take this broad mandate with the utmost seriousness
and that I shall devote all my dforts to carrying it. out as
expeditiously and effectively as possible.

10. Therefore, we feel that we should join the delegations
which have already spoken and, for that matter, practically
all the members of the international community, in appealing to the Government of Iran to free the hostages without
further ado and without pm-conditions. My Government
has already conveyed this view to the appropriate authorities at Teheran. In so doing, we are acting on two premises:
first of all, because we believe that respect for international
law and, in this particular case, for the Vienna Convention
is an absolute necessity if we want to preserve international
order, and, secondly, on humanitarian grounds as well.

18. As members of the Council are aware, I have tried to
maintain contact with all concerned during this period of
crisis, and I shall continue to do so. I am sure that I may also
feel free to call upon Member States for their assistance and
advice when this, may seem to be likely to help in achieving
the objective which we all seek.
19. I shall explore intensively the various modalities which
might prove useful in resolving the present crisis. I am aware
that there are few, if any, precedents for the present situation and that innovation may well be necessary. At the
present time I wish .only to say that, in carrying out rzly
mandate, I shall be guided first and foremost by what is best

11. We are confident that the authorities in Iran will heed
this appeal of world public opinion and choose the path of
negotiation for settling whatever differences they have with
the United States. For his part, the United States representative has clearly indicated in his opening statement in this
debate [2175thmeeting]the willingness of his Government
to reciprocate such a desire.

‘See resolution 457 (1979).

2

for the achievement of the objectives we allhave in mind: I
shall of‘course not fail to keep the Council informed of all
developments.
20. In conclusion, may I reiterate the appeal contained in
the resolution for the exercise of the utmost restraint in the
prevailing situation. The Council has addressed itself to this
situation in a spirit of the highest responsibility and understanding. It has articulated very clearly the concerns of the
international community and its unanimous wish to find
acceptable solutions and to reduce the present very dangerous level of tension. I earnestly hope that this spirit will be
communicated to, and understood by, all concerned in the
coming days. If the spirit and intentions of the Council
guide the parties concerned, I am confident that, with
patience and determination, we can resolve the present
crisis and remove the threat to peace.
21. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The 15
members of the Security Council in their action today have
given unanimous expression once more to their urgent call
on the Government of Iran for the immediate and unconditional release of the American Embassy personnel being
held hostage in our embassy at Teheran. They have called
on the Government of Iran to provide the hostages protection and to allow them to leave the country. It is clear from
this vote and from the debate of the last four days, in which
representatives from all parts of the world have participated, that the family of nations speaks with one voice in
calling for the immediate release of the hostages, and we are
deeply appreciative.
22. We hope that this call by the Security Council will be
heeded and carried out by the Government of Iran in a
matter of hours. Whatever the time required, we urge the
Secretary~eneral, in the exercise of his good offices, to
provide all humanitarian support possible to those being
detained against their will. We remain deeply concerned for
their safety, their well-being and their health on this, their
thirtieth day of suffering and isolation.
23. The United States wishes to place on record that the
adoption of this resolution by the S&urity Council clearly is

not intended to displace peaceful efforts in other organs of
the United Nations. Neither the United States nor, I believe,
any other member intends that the adoption of this resolution should have any prejudicial impact whatever on the
request of the United States for the indication of provisional
measures of protection by the International Court of
Justice.
24. With the hostages released, the resolution calls on the
Governments of Iran and the United States to take urgent
measures to resolve peacefully the remaining issuesbetween
them in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. The United States is fully prepared to
-perate
with this call.
25. Many speakers in this debate have also referred to the
grievances of the people of Iran. I myself did so when I
remarked that:
“‘None of us is deaf to the passionate voices that speak
of injustice, that cry out against past wrongs and that ask
for understanding. There is not a single grievance in this
situation, alleged or spoken, that could not be heard in
an appropriate forum.” [2Z75th meetjngt para. I7’J.
The Security Council has now also noted those grievances
in its acknowledgement of the Iranian letter of 13 November [,S/Z3626j.
26. Neither the United States nor any other member of the
community of nations has a desire to isolate Iran or to
intervene in its internal affairs. We are all Members of the
United Nations and of the community of nations. Let us
then, all of us, be true to the purposes and principles which
we have pledged ourselves to honour.
27. The PRESIDENT (krpretationfrom
Chkve): The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite1
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from
bookstores
and distributora
or write to: United
Nations,
Sale$

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIBS

IM publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d@ositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vous
auprAs de votre libraire ou adresses-vous
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenAve.
KAIC
EIJAaHHR

sHbax
Barney

IfOJfYPHTb
ODraxmaqnn

HBAAHHX

OPrAHH3AIUiM

06'be~HHeHHblX

Hawiti

P areHTcT8ax
a0 acex pattoxax
~mixuio~
mara3nne
nn~ mimnre

OIiTbELWHEHHhIX
YOXXO

KyllHTb

HAU¶H
B KHHXCRblX

uspa. WasoAHTe
cnpaaxx
no anpecy:
OpraWitaq~n

Mara-

06 n3AaxHax

a

O@beAUHeHRbIX

~a~~R.CeKqHnnonpona~e~3~a~~R.Hb~-HOpXn~~~e~esa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
es&In en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

L&ho ih United Nations, New York

Price: su.s. 1.50

79-7OlM2-March

19824250
