202

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

by the consequent flight into those three countries of
large numbers of families, including children of school
age,
A ware of the problems confronting the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland created by the entry into their school systems of large numbers of children from the South African side of the border and their
need to determine more precisely the number of children involved and the extent of the assistance required to
relieve the Governments of this particular burden.
Recognizing the need to enable former student
refugees from Zimbabwe to continue their education in
neighbouring countries until alternative arrangements
can be made for their education in their own country.
I. Endorses the assessments and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources and organize the programme of assistance to
student refugees in the host countries of southern
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the assistance which they are giving to the student refugees
and for the extent of co-operation which they have extended to the Secretary-General and to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on matters
concerning the welfare of these refugees;
3. Notes with satisfaction the financial and material
support provided for the student refugee programmes
by Member States, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations;
4. Decides to make provision in the student refugee
programme for former student refugees from Zimbabwe until they complete their studies in the country of
asylum or until alternative arrangements can be made
for the completion of their education in their own country~
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to organize and implement an effective programme of educational and other appropriate assistance for student refugees from Namibia and South
Africa who have taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to contribute generously to the assistance programmes for these students, through financial support of the regular programmes of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and of the projects identified in the report of
the Secretary-General;
7. Appeals to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. the World Food
Programme, the World Bank and the United Nations
Children's Fund, as well as other international and nongovernmental bodies, to provide humanitarian and development assistance to expedite the resettlement and
integration of refugee families from South Africa who
have been given asylum in Botswana. Lesotho and
Swaziland;
8. Calls upon all agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations High Commissioner

for Refugees in the implementation of humanitarian
programmes of assistance for the student refugees in
southern Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to continue to keep the matter under review and to
apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second
regular session of 1981, of the current status of the programmes, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/185.

Human rights in Bolivia

The General Assembly,
Noting that all Member States have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Recalling its resolution 34/175 of 17 December 1979
on effective action against mass and flagrant violations
of human rights.
Having taken cognizance of reports on violations of
human rights in Bolivia,
Taking note with satisfaction of the decision of the
Preparatory Committee of the General Assembly of the
Organization of American States to include the question of Bolivia in the agenda for its tenth regular session, and of resolution 308 of 25 July 1980 of its Permanent Council. 1"''
Taking note also of the letter of the Bolivian
authorities to the Secretary-General, dated 29 October
1980, indicating their readiness to fix a date on which a
delegation from the Commission on Human Rights may
visit Bolivia, 1111
l. Urges the Bolivian authorities to ensure respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of expression and trade union rights;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
accept the invitation by the Bolivian authorities, in order to study the human rights situation at first hand and
to review at its thirty-seventh session the human rights
situation in Bolivia.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35 / 186.

Exchange of information on banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 /173 of 17 December 1979,
in which it recognized the urgent need to take concrete
measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a
world-wide basi~.
Noting with regret that the Secretary-General was unable to present the report requested in General Assembly resolution 34 · 173.
.... See Organi1.ati,,n of American States. Annual Report of the InterAmerican Commission on Human Rights to the General Assembly
(Oh\ Ser.I'. ,\(i 'd"c 12.:'9 'XO). chap. II. sect. H.

'" ,\ c.' \'i l)

VI.

Aware that the Commission on Transnational Corporations will examine the report on _the activities o~ the
United Nations Centre on Transnat10nal Corporations
and the study on transnational corporations in the pharmaceutical industry in developing countries, according
to the agenda approved by the Economic and Social
Council in its decision 1980 / 170 of 24 July I 980,
Aware also that many organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system have an interest in
and expertise on this subject and can theref'?re provide
valuable assistance to the Secretary-General m his preparation of the report for next year,
Taking into account that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Economic
Commission for Europe, the United Nations Centre on
Transnational Corporations, the Division of Narcotic
Drugs of the Secretariat, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Health Organization
have already been involved in this exercise,
.
Conscious of the importance of the information
system on transnational corporations for the analysis of
transnationals in certain sectors of special social and humanitarian interest to host countries, particularly developing countries,
Mindful of the importance of objective information
about banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products,
I. Invites Member States to provide information on
the measures they have taken to exchange information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products that have been banned in their countries;
2. Requests the Commission on Transnational Corporations to study, during its seventh session, the ways
and means within the information system on transnational corporations to improve the exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe
pharmaceutical products, with a view to formulating appropriate recommendations;
3. Requests once again the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the United Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, to submit a report to the
General Assembly, at its thirty-sixth session, on the
experience of Member States and the United Nations
organs, organizations and bodies concerned;
4. Appeals to the United Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, especially the World Health
Organization, to provide any assistance, expertise and
co-operation required for the preparation of the abovementioned report.
96th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/187.

203

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Refugee and displaced children

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the increasing gravity of the
problems of refugees in various parts of the world,
Stressing that, among the problems posed by the
plight of these populations, the problem of children is
especially anguishing,
Considering the disturbing situation of millions of
refugee and displaced children, particularly children
who have not yet been settled,
Considering that many of them have lost all the members of their immediate families,

Reaffirming the pre-eminently humanitarian character of the activities of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the benefit of refugees,
I. Expresses its gratitude to the Unite~ Nati<?ns
High Commissioner for Refugees for the act10n which
he has already taken to assist refugee and displaced
children, and requests him to intensify his effor~s in that
respect, endeavouring to ensure as far as possible that
the cultural and family identity of the minors settled is
preserved;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to associate all
the specialized agencies in the action undertaken.
96th plenary meeting
15 December I 980

35/188.

Protection of human rights in Chile

The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Noting that Governments have an obligation to
protect and promote human rights and to carry out responsibilities they have undertaken under various international instruments,
Recalling its resolutions 31/124 of 16 December 1976,
32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of 20 December
I 978 and 34 / 179 of 17 December 1979 on the protection of human rights in Chile, and 33 / 173 of 20 December 1978 on disappeared persons,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 11 (XXXV) of 6 March 1979 111 on violations of human rights in Chile, in which the Commission, inter a/ia,
decided to appoint a Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Chile,
Deploring that the Chilean authorities have consistently refused to co-operate with the Special Rapporteur
appointed by the Commission on Human Rights,
Expressing its regret that, according to the report of
the Special Rapporteur, 112 there has not been an improvement in the human rights situation in Chile, and
that in certain respects it has, on the contrary, deteriorated,
Considering that the lack of popular participation in
the preparation of the draft constitution and the existing
restrictions, under the state of emergency, on the freedoms of assembly, association, expression and information do not enable the result of the recent plebiscite to be
regarded as an authentic expression of the will of the
Chilean people,
Noting with increasing concern that the Chilean
authorities continue to ignore the repeated appeal of the
international community reflected in the various resolutions of the General Assembly and other international organs and have failed to take urgent and effective
measures to investigate and clarify the fate of persons
who have disappeared,
Expressing deep concern that the whereabouts of the
numerous persons who have disappeared are still unknown and that this has caused grief and often hardship to their relatives.
111
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV, sect. A.
"' See A/35/522.
