United Nations

A/RES/57/13

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 167

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.7)]

57/13. South American zone of peace and cooperation
The General Assembly,
Convinced that peace, security and cooperation should be grounded in
commitments that reinforce mutual trust and promote development and the overall
well-being of peoples to the benefit of all humanity and, in particular, the peoples of
South America,
Bearing in mind the initiatives of various Governments and regional groups in
South America, such as the Andean Agreement on Peace, Security and Cooperation,
contained in the Galapagos Declaration of 18 December 1989; 1 the Declaration of
MERCOSUR, Bolivia and Chile as a Zone of Peace, signed in Ushuaia, Argentina,
in July 1999; and the Lima Commitment and Andean Charter for Peace and
Security, signed on 17 June 2002, 2
Recalling the commitment undertaken in the Brasilia Communiqué issued on
1 September 2000 3 to create a South American zone of peace,
Recognizing that the bases and actions for a project on the creation of a South
American zone of peace and cooperation, formulated at the first meeting of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Andean Community, MERCOSUR and Chile,
held in La Paz on 17 July 2001, constitute an appropriate set of guidelines for
building the zone of peace and cooperation on firm foundations, supported by the
consensus of the whole region and based, among various other measures, on the
fostering of trust, cooperation and ongoing consultation in the areas of security and
defence, coordinated action in the relevant international forums, and transparency
and a gradual limitation of arms purchases under the system established in the InterAmerican Convention on Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions, 4 the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and other arrangements established
in the regional and international conventions related to this important topic,

_______________
1

See CD/1011.
See CD/1678; see also A/C.1/57/4, annex.
3
A/55/375, annex I.
4
See CD/1591.
2

02 53867

A/RES/57/13

Also recognizing the firm intent of the States of South America to adopt
measures contributing to an effective and gradual limitation of defence expenditures
in the region with the aim of having more resources available for the economic and
social development of their peoples, in particular in order to devote the resources
released from military budgets to combating poverty by moving forward with health
and education programmes and other social benefits for inhabitants, taking into
account each country’s security needs and current levels of expenditure,
Recalling the principles and norms of international law enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization of American
States, especially those related to international peace and security,
Also recalling the important contribution of the United Nations in the sphere
of international peace and security and, in that regard, the valuable input of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean with headquarters in Lima,
Convinced that the establishment of a zone of peace and cooperation in South
America will help to strengthen international peace and security and promote the
purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1.
Welcomes the Declaration of the Presidents of South America, adopted at
their second meeting, in Guayaquil, Ecuador, on 27 July 2002, in which they
declared South America a zone of peace and cooperation; 5
2.
Commends the decision of the States of South America to ban the use or
threat of use of force among themselves, in keeping with the principles and relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of the Organization
of American States;
3.
Also commends the decision of the States of South America to ban the
siting, development, manufacture, possession, deployment, testing and use of any
type of weapon of mass destruction, including nuclear, chemical, biological and
toxic weapons, and their transport through the countries of the South American
region, in accordance with the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) 6 and other international
conventions on the matter;
4.
Notes with satisfaction the commitment of the States of South America to
establishing a gradual system that will lead, in the shortest time possible, to the
complete eradication of anti-personnel mines in accordance with the provisions of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer
of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction 7 and to implementing the
recommendations of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects; 8
5.
Welcomes the desire of the States of South America to promote
transparency and a gradual limitation of arms purchases under the system
established in the Inter-American Convention on Transparency in Conventional
Weapons Acquisitions, 4 the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and
_______________
5

See CD/1684.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
7
See CD/1478.
8
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), para. 24.
6

2

A/RES/57/13

other arrangements established in the regional and international conventions related
to this important topic;
6.
Urges all States of the other regions, particularly weapons-producing
States, to cooperate decisively in combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons throughout the region of South America;
7.
Calls upon the States of the other regions to contribute to and cooperate
with the objectives set forth in the Declaration regarding a South American zone of
peace and cooperation.
50th plenary meeting
14 November 2002

3
