General Auembly-Twenly-ninth Seasion

142

to facilitating recourse to it for the judicial settlement
of disputes, inter alia by simplifying the procedure, re-

ducing the likelihood of undue delays and costs and
allowing for greater influence of parties on the composition of ad hoc chambers,
Recatling the increasing development and codifica·
tio!l of international law in conventions open for universal participation and the consequent need for their
uniform interpretation and application,
Rec,ognizing that the development of international
law may be reflected, ínter afia, by declarations and
resolutions of the General Assembly which may to that
extent be taken into consideration by the International
Court of Justice,
Recalting further the opportunities afforded .,by the
power of the International Court of Justice, under
Article 38, paragraph 2, of its Statute, to decide a case
ex aequo et bono if the parties agree thereto,
1. Recognizes the desirability that States study the
possibility of accepting, with as few reservations as
possible, the compulsory jurisdiction of the lnternational Court of Justice in accordance with Article 36
of its Sta tute;
2. Draws the attention of States to the advantage
of inserting in treaties, in cases considered possible
and appropriate, clauses providing for the submission
to the International Court of Justice of disputes which
may arise from the interpretation or application of such
treaties;
3. Ca/Is upon States to keep under review the possibility of identifying cases in which use can be made of
the lnternational Court of Justice;
4. Draws the attention of States to the possibility
of making use of chambers as provided in Articles 26
and 29 of the Statute of the Jnternational Court of
Justice and in the Rules of Court, including those which
would deal with particular categories of cases;
5. Recommends that United Nations organs and the
specialized agencies should, from time to time, review
legal questions within the competence of the International Court of Justice that have arisen or will arise
during their activities and should study the advisability
of referring them to the Court for an advisory opinion,
provided that they are duly authorized to do so;
6. Reafjirms that recourse to judicial settlement of
legal disputes, particularly referral to the lnternational
Court of Justice, should not be considered an unfriendly act between States.

2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974

3233 (XXIX). Participation in the Convention on
Special Missions, its Optional Protocol concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and the Vienna Convention on the Law
oí Treaties

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 2530 (XXIV) of
8 December I 969, it adopted and opened for signature
and ratification or for accession the Convention on
Special Missions and its Optional Protocol conceming
the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and resolved
to consider at a later session the question of issuing

- - - - - - - - -

---------------~

invitations in order to ensure the widest possible participation therein,
Noting the Declaration on Universal Participation
in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Law
of Treaties,~ in which the General Assembly was invited to give consideration to the matter of issuing
invitations in order to ensure the widest possible participation in that Convention,
Decides to invite ali States to become parties to the
Convention on Special Missions, its Optional Protocol
concerning the Compulsory Settlement of Disputes and
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. 5
2280th plenary meeting
12 November 1974

3247 (XXIX), Participation in the United Nations
Coníerence on the Representation of States
in Their Relations with lnternational Organi•
zations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by its resolution 3072 (XXVIII) of
30 November 1973 it decided that the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their
Relations with International Organizations would be
held early in 1975 at Vienna,
1. Decides to invite ali States to participate in the
United Nations Conference on the Representation of
States in Their Relations with International Organizations and requests the Secretary-General to take ali
necessary steps to give effect to resolution 3072
(XXVIII) and the present resolution;
2. Decides to invite also the national liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity and/or by the League of Arab States in their
respective regions to participate in the Conference as
observers, in accordance with the practice of the United
Nations.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974

3314 (XXIX). Definition oí Aggreuion
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Com·
mittee on the Question of Defining Aggression, established pursuant to its resolution 2330 (XXII)· of
18 December 1967, covering the work of its seventh
session held from 11 March to 12 April 1974, including the draft Definition of Aggression adopted by the
Special Committee by consensus and recommended for
adoption by the General Assembly, 6
Deeply convinced that the adoption of the Definition
of Aggression would contribute to the strengthening
of international peace and security,
l. Approves the Definition of Aggression, the text
of which is annexed to the present resolution;
4 O/ficial Records o/ the United Nations Con/erence on the
Law o/ Treaties, Documents o/ the Co11/erence (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.70.V.5), documcnt A/CONF.39/26.
p. 285.
~ /bid., docurnent A/CONF.39/27, p. 287.
6 O/ficial Records o/ the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/9619 and Corr.l).

Re1olution1 adopted on the reporte of the Sixth Committre

2. E:cpresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression for its
work which resulted in the elaboration of the Definition of Aggression;
3. Calls upon ali States to refrain from ali acts of
aggression and other uses of force contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on
Principies of lntemational Law conceming Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations;7
4. Ca/Is the attention of the Security Council to
the Definition of Aggression, as set out below, and
recommends that it should, as appropriate, take account
of that Definition as guidance in determining, in accordance with the Charter, the existence of an act of
aggression.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
ANNEX
Definition of A1rgression

The General Assemb/y,
Basing itself on the fact that one of the fundamental purposes of the United Nations is to maintain international peace
and security and to take elfective collective measures for the
prevention arid removal of threats to the péace, and for the
suppressión of acts of aggression or other breaches of the
peace,
Recalling that the Security Council, in accordance with
Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations, shall determine the existence of any thrcat to the peace, breach of the
peace or act of aggression and shall make recommendations,
or decide what measures shall be taken in accordance with
Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace
and security,
Recal/ing a/so the duty of States under the Charter to settle
their intemational disputes by peaceful means in order not to
endanger international peace, security and justice,
Bearing in mind that nothing in this Definition shall be
interpreted as in any way affecting the scope of the provisions
of the Charter with respect to the functions and powers of the
organs of the United Nations,
Considering a/so that, since aggression is the most serious
and dangerous form of the illegal use of force, being fraught,
in the conditions created by the existence of ali types of
weapons of mass destruction, with the possible threat of a
world conftict and ali its catastrophic consequences, aggression should be defined at the present stage,
Reaflirming lhe duty of States not to use armed force to
deprive peoples of their right to self-determination, freedom
and independence, or to disrupt territorial integrity,
Reaflirming afso that the territory of a State shall not be
violated by being the object, even temporarily, of military
occupation or of other measures of force taken by another
State in contravention of the Charter, and that it shal-1 not
be the object of acquisition by another State resulting from
such measures or the threat thereof,
Realfirming afso the provisions of the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,
Convinced that the adoption of a definition of aggression
ought to have the effect of deterring a potential aggressor,
would simplify the determination of acts of aggression and
the implementation of measures to suppress them and would
also facilitate the protection of the rights and lawful interests
of, and the rendering of assistance to, the victim,
Believing that, although the question whether an act of
aggression has been committed must be considered in the
T Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

143

light of ali the circumstances of each part_icular case, it is
nevertheless desirable to formulate basic principies as guidance
for such determination,
Adopts the following Definition of Aggression:•
A rticfe I
Aggression is the use of armed force by a State against the
sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of
another State, or in any other manner inconsistent with thc
Charter of the United Nations, as set out in this Definition.
Explanatory note: In this Definition the lerm "State":
(a) Is used without prejudice to questions of recognition
or to whether a State is a member of the United Nations;
(h) lncludes the concept of a ..group of States" where
appropriate.
Article 2
The first use of armed force by a State in contravention of
the Charter shall constitute prima facie evide::ice of an act of
aggression although the Security Council may, in conformity
with !he Charter, conclude that a determination that an act
of aggression has been committed would not be justified in
the light of other relevan! circumstances, including the fact
that the acts concerned or their consequences are nol of aufficient gravity.
Article J
Any of the following acts, regardless of a declaration of
war, shall, subject to and in accordance with thc provisions of
article 2, qualify as an act of aggression:
(a) The invasion or attack by the armed forces of a State
of the territory of another State, or any military occupation,
however temporary, resulting from such invasion or attact.
or any annexation by the use of force of the territory of another State or part thereof;
( b) Bombardment by the armed forces of a State against
the territory of anolher State or the use of any weapons by a
State against the territory of another State;
(e) The hlockade of the ports or coasts of a State by thc
armed forces of another State;
(d) An attack by the armed forces of a State on thc lancl.
sea or air forces, or marine and air fteets of another State;
(e) The use of armed forces of one State which are within
the territory of another State with the agreement of the receiving State, in contravention of thc conditions provided for in
the agreement or any extension of their presence in such
territory beyond the termination of the agreement;
(/) The action of a State in allowing its territory, which
it has placed at the disposal of another State, to be used by
that other State for perpetrating an act of aggression against
a third State;
(g) The sending by or on behalf of a State of armed bands,
groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry out acts of
armed force against another State of such gravity as to amount
to the acts listed above, or its substantial involvement thcrein.
Article 4
The acts enumerated above are not exhaustive and the
Security Council may determine that other acts comtitute
auression under the provisions of the Charter.
Article 5

t. No consideration of whatever nature, whether political,
economic, military or otherwise, may serve as a justification
for aggression.
s Explanatory notes on articles 3 and S are to be found in
paragraph 20 of the report of the Special -Committee on the
Question of Defining Aggression (O/ficial Records of tlu General Assembly, Twenty-nint/r Session, Supplement No. 19 (Al
9619 and Corr.l). Statements on the Defi-nition are contained
in paragraphs 9 and I O of the report of the Sixth Committee
(A/9890).

144

General A•1embly-Twen1y-nln1h Se1alon

2. A war of aggression is a crime against int~r~tional
peace. Aggression gives rise to international respons1b1hty.
3. No territorial acquisition or special advantage resulting
from aggression is or shall be recognized as lawful.

of international law and its codification, in accordance
with the aims of Article 13, subparagraph 1 (a) of
the Charter, contribute to the fostering of friendly relations among nations,

Article 6
Nothing in this Definition shall be construed as in _any ~ay
enlarging or diminishing the scope of the Chaner, mcludmg
its provisions concerning cases in which the use of force is
lawful.

I

Article 7
Nothing in this Definition, and in particular_ art_icle 3, could
in any way prejudice the right to self-determmallon, freedom
and independence, as derived from the Char~er, of people\
fordbly deprived of that right _and referred to m _the ~claration on Principies of lnternallonal Law concermng Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly peoples under
colonial and racist régimes or other forms of alien domination;
nor the right of these peoples to struggle to that end and to
seek and receive support, in accordance with the principies of
the Charter and in conformity with the above-mentioned
Declaralion.

Article 8
In their interpretation and application the above provisions
are interrelated and each provision should be construed in the
context of tbe other provisions.

3315 (XXIX). Report of the lnternational Law
Commi11aion•

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the lntemational
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-sixth session, 10
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of intemational law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective meaos of implementing the
purposes and principies set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the DecJaration on Principies of Intemational ·1..aw conceming
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 11
and to give increased importance to its role in relations
among States,
Noting with appre<;iation that, at its twenty-sixth
session, the lntemational Law Commission, in the light
of comments received from Member States, completed
the second reading of the draft articles on succession
of States in respect of treaties, as recommended by the
General Assembly in resolution 3071 (XXVIII) of
30 November 1973,
Taking note of the draft articles prepared at tbe same
session by the Intemational Law Commission on State
responsibility and on treaties concluded between States
and intemational organizations or between intemational
organizations.
Welcoming the fact that the Intemational Law Commission commenced its work on the law of non-navigational uses of intemational watercourses by adopting
the required preliminary measures,
Bearing in mind that the outstanding achievements
of the Intemational Law Commission during its twentysix sessions in the field of the progressive development
t See also p. 149, item 87.
10 01/icial

Records of the General Auembly, Twenty-ninth

Seuion, Supplement No. 10 (A/9610/Rev.l).
11 llaolutiaG 262S (XXV), annex.

l. Takes note of the repo~ of the Int~mationa_l Law
Commission on the work of 1ts twenty-s1xth sess1on;
2. Expresses its appreciatio'! to the ~ntemational
Law Commission for the work 1t accomphshed at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1975; •
4. Recommends that the Intemational Law Com·mission should:
. (a) Continue on a high priority basis ~t. i_ts twen_tyseventh session. its work on State respons1b~hty, taking
into account General Assembly resolutions 1765
(XVH) of 20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of
18 November 1963, 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December
1968 2926 (XXVII) of 28 November 1972 and 3071
(XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, ~ith a view to t~e
preparation of a first set of draft art1cles on respons1bility of States for internationally wrongful acts at the
earliest possible time and t? tak~ up, as_ soon _as .~Ppropriate, the separate top1c_ <?f _mtemat1onal hab1hty
for injurious ·consequences ansmg out of acts not prohibited by intemational law;
( b) Proceed with the prep~ration, on ~ priority
basis of draft articles on success1on of States m respect
of 0-:atters other than treaties;
(e) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause;
(d) Proceed with the preparation of ~raft a~icles
on treaties concluded between States and mtemat1onal
organizations or between international organizations;
(e) Continue its study of the law of the non:-na~gational uses of intemational watercourses, takmg mto
account General Assembly resolutions 2669 (XXV) of
8 December 1970 and 3071 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973 and other resolutions conceming the work of
the International Law Commission on the topic, and
comments received from Member States on the questions referred to in the annex to chapter V of the
Commission's report;
5. Approves, in the light of the impo~nce of its
existing work programme, a tw~lve-week penod f~r_the
annual sessions of the Intemational Law Comm1ss1on,
subject to review by the General Assembly whenever
necessary;
6. Recognizes the efficacy of the methods and conditions of work by which the International Law Commission has carried out its tasks and expresses confidence that the Commission will continue to adopt
methods of work well suited to the realization of the
tasks entrusted to it;
7. Express~s its appreciation to the Secretary-General for having completed the supplementary report on
the legal problems relating to the non-navigational uses
of intemational watercourses, 12 requested by the General Assembly in resolution 2669 (XXV);
8. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with fÍlture
sessions of the Intemational Law Commission, further
seminars might be organized, wbich should continue to
11 A/9732 (vola. 1 and 11).
