VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

14. Urges the Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies and organizations to
undertake or expedite the measures already under way to
improve employment opportunities for disabled persons
within these bodies at all levels and to improve access to
their building and facilities and to their information sources;
15. Invites Member States to promote close and effec
tive co-operation between developed and developing countries through a transfer of technology and of the results of
research and exchanges of information on the prevention
of disability and the rehabilitation of disabled persons;
16. Also calls upon the Secretary-General and the heads
of the specialized agencies to take all necessary measures
to strengthen and expand technical co-operation activities
in developing countries relating to the disabled, especially
in the areas of prevention of disability, rehabilitation and
integration of disabled in their societies. with particular
emphasis on the need to develop and strengthen indigenous
capacities and capabilities;
17. Stresses the importance of strengthening support
services for the exchange of technical information and transfer of technology and know-how, as well as other activities
for the development of technical co-operation in the fields
of prevention, rehabilitation and equalization of opportunities in developing countries, and notes with appreciation
the offer of the Government of Yugoslavia to contribute in
this direction, 80
18. - Invites, as a matter of priority. Member States. organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, as
well as the governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned and the mass media, to continue to undertake public information programmes, including the
continuation of the present information activities of the
Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs
of the Secretariat for the national committees, with a view
to making all sections of the population increasingly aware
of issues relating to the disabled;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "World Programme
of Action concerning Disabled Persons" and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at that
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
89th plenarv meetint.:
8 Decemher 198/

36/124.

International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/42 of 25 November 1980 re
lating to the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva on 9 and IO April 1981 .
Taking note of resolution CM/Res. 868 (XXXVII) regarding the Conference and its follow-up, adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session. held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981, 81
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the Conference 82 and the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his Office.' 1

0
•
A/36/711 .
" See A/361534, annex I
82
A/36/316.

83 Official Records of" the G,·neml A.1·.,,·m/,/1-, l11irtr-1·i.rth Ses•w11.

plement No. 12 (1\/.lh/12)

·'"I'

177

Grm·elv concerned at the growing number of refugees on
the Afric-an continent, who now constitute over half the
population of refugees in the world.
Regretting that. in spite of the efforts made, the assistance
provided to the growing number of African refugees is still
very inadequate.
A ware of the economic and social burden imposed on
African countries of asylum by the growing influx of refugees and its consequences for their de~elopm~nt _an? of the
heavy sacrifices made by them, despite their hm1ted resources. to alleviate the plight of those refugees.
Recognizing, therefore. the need of the cou~tries ~)f asylum for adequate human. technical and financial assistance
to enable them properly to shoulder their increased responsibilities and assume the additional burden which the presence of refugees represents for their economies.
Recot.:nizing further the need to assist similarly the countries of origin in the voluntary repatriation and resettlement_
of returnees, as set out in the procedures of the Office ot
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Convinced that the attendance of high-ranking officials
and representatives of ninety-nine count~ies _and over one
hundred twenty non-governmental orgamzat10ns at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa
hears evidence to the fact that the Conference drew international public attention to the situation and needs of African
refugees,
I. Commends the initiative taken by the three sponsors
of the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa-the Organization of African Unity. the United
Nations and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees---to maintain their close co-operation properly to define the follow-~p actions that will be
called for, and invites them to contrnue and develop their
tripartite consultations and co-operation at all appropriate
levels. so that the Conference funds are channelled to pnority projects and put to the best use;
2. Reiterates its congratulations to the Secretary-Genend of the United Nations for his efforts towards the preparation of the International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa in close consultation with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as for
his personal concern for African refugee problems and for
the very able manner in which he presided over the Conference. thus bringing it to a successful end;
3. Erpresses its appreciation and gratitude to all donor
countries and to the international community at large for
their very positive response to the appeal for assistance to
African refugees and for their contribution to the assistance
to refugees in Africa;
4. Urges the international community to continue to
support the annual programmes of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of other
United Nations agencies co-operating with that Office on
behalf of refugees in Africa:
5
Calls upon the pertinent development-oriented organizations and agencies of the United Nations system to
envisage, at the stages of conception and implementation,
all concerted efforts and co-ordinated actions aimed at harmonizing assistance programmes in the countries of asylum
as well as in the countries of origin during the repatriation
process. and current or future development programmes,
,o that the potentialities of refugees or returnees may constitute an advantage rather than a burden on national
development;
o. R1·quests the Secretary-General. in close co-operation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of Africa" f lpitv ;ind the l 1nitcd Nations High Commissioner for

178

General Assembly

Refugees, to keep the African refug_ee situation unde~ close
and constant scrutiny and to submit to the_ Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular sess10n of I 98;_, a
report containing up-to-date information on the cond1_t1on
of refugees in the countries concerned m ~rder _to facilitate
consideration by the General Assen:ibiy, a~ its th1~y-seventh
session, of the necessity of convenmg an mte~atl~nal conference in 1983 to review the status of contnbut10ns and
commitments made at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, and to assess the needs and
measures for further assistance for refugees and returnees
in implementation of programmes for their relief. rehabilitation and resettlement;
7. Invites governmental bodies of specialize~ ag~ncies,
intergovernmental and non-governmental orgam~at10ns to
consider, within their sphere of compete_nce, vanous ways
and means to increase substantially assistance to Afncan
refugees and returnees;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in close co-operation ~ith the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African U~uty, to ke_ep under constant
review the situation of refugees m Afnca m order to ensure
maximum international assistance on a global basis;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to _report to th~ General Assembly at its thirty-seventh sess10n on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
/4 December /98/

36/125.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his Office, 84
as well as the report of the Executive Committee of t~e
Programme of the High Commi~sioner on the w_ork of its
thirty-second session, 85 and havmg heard the High Commissioner's statement, 86
Recalling its resolutions 35/41 A and B and 35/42 of 25
November 1980,
Expressing deep concern at the persistence and gravity
of the problems of refugees and displaced_ perSOf!S in t~e
world, particularly in different parts of Afnca, Asia, Latm
America and Europe,
Noting with great appreciation the positive responses of
Governments to the problems of refugees and displaced
persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner
through offers of asylum, vol~ntary r~pat~iation, resettlement, rehabilitation and financial contnbut10ns, as well as
the generous support given to the Office of the High Commissioner in its humanitarian task,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian and non-politi_cal
character of the activity of the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Extending its congratulations to the Office of the Hi_gh
Commissioner for the award of the 1981 Nobel Peace Pnze
in recognition of its work for refugees,
Considering the continuing and urgent need for _a substantial international effort to promote durable solutions to
the problems of refugees and displaced persons of concern
to the Office of the High Commissioner through voluntary
.. Ibid.
"'Ibid., Supplement No. 12 A (A/36/12/Add. I).
86
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Third Committee. 50th meeting. paras.
2-20.

Thirty-sixth Session

repatriation or return and resettlement, drawin!f particular
attention to women and children refugees. and disabled and
elderly refugees,
Noting with satisfaction that a growing number of States
have acceded to the 1951 Convention87 and the 1967 Protocol88 relating to the Status of Refugees,
Noting with great concern ~ha~, despit~ an in~reasingly
broad understanding of the pnnc1p~es of. mtern~t10~al protection, refugees still encounter senous d1fficult1es m many
parts of the world in obtaining asylum_ and that t~ey are
exposed to the threat of refoulement, arbitrary detention and
physical violence,
Deploring, in particular, the insta~ces of military attacks
on refugee camps in southern Afnca and elsewhere and
physical attacks on asylum seekers at sea,
Drawing attention to the problem of r~fu!fees rescue~ at
sea and the difficulties encountered for their disembarkation,
involving threats of refoulement,
Welcoming the success achieved by the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva
on 9 and IO April 1981 , as a first step_ in ar<;msing worldwide interest and support for refugees m Afnca,
I. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for ~e manne~ !I"! _which they
have continued to discharge their respons1b1ht1es for protecting and assisting refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office;
2. Takes due note of the proposals made by the H!gh
Commissioner89 and generally endorsed by the ~x~cut1":i
Committee of the Programme of the High Comm1ss1oner
to strengthen the management of his Office on the basis of
the principles and guidelines of the Gen~ral Assembly, and
welcomes his intention to seek the assistance of the Administrative Management Service of the Secret~at in undertaking expeditiously a review of the managenal methods
and organizational structure of his Offi~e_, as ~ecommended
by the Advisory Committee on Admm1strat1ve and Budgetary Questions; 91
3. Calls upon the international community to share the
burden of assisting refugees and displac~d persons the wor\d
over, taking into account the economic and demographic
absorptive capacity of the countries concerned;
4. Reaffirms the fundamental nature of the High _Commissioner's function to provide international protection to
refugees and the importance. of promoting durab!e and
speedy solutions, in consultat10n and agree~~nt with the
countries concerned, through voluntary repatnat1on or return
and subsequent assistance in rehabilitation and, whenever
appropriate, integration in countries of as~lum or resettlement in other countries of refugees and displaced persons
of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner;
S. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
activities which the High Commissioner is carrying out in
accordance with his mandate and relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
especially by:
(a) Facilitating the High Commissioner's efforts in the
field of international protection, in particular by scrupulously observing the principle of asylum and non-refoulement and by protecting asyium seekers !n situations of largescale influx, as endorsed by th,· Executive Committee of the
'' United Nations, Trem,,Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
"Ibid., vol. 606. No. 8791. p. 267.
''' See A1AC.96/5941Add.l and Corr.I.
"'' Official Records o( the General Assembly, Thim·-sixth Session. Supplement No. 12 A (A/36112/Add. I). para. 64.
'" A/AC.961597.
