S/2021/336

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 8 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Mr.
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, as well as the
statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland,
Mexico, the Niger — on behalf of the A3+1, namely, Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia,
as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — Norway, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in
Mali” convened on Tuesday, 6 April 2021. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of Mali.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372) by the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Council, which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus pandemic, this briefing and
these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mr. Dinh Quy Dang
President of the Security Council

21-04706 (E) 150421 290421

*2104706*

S/2021/336

Annex I
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix
[Original: English and French]
It is an honour to take the floor in the Security Council on the latest report
(S/2021/299) of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali and to brief you on
recent developments in the country.
As we meet here today, the latest major attack against our peacekeepers, which
took place this past Friday, serves to remind us of the challenges facing Mali and the
Sahel subregion alike. Nevertheless, this tragedy is an illustration of the bravery and
determination of our peacekeepers in supporting the people of Mali.
At about 6.15 p.m. local time on Friday, 2 April, a group of heavily armed
terrorists attacked the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) camp at Aguelhok, located in the Kidal region of
northern Mali. Although 26 of our brave Blue Helmets from Chad were injured and
four were killed in the attack, their determined and heroic defence of the camp made
it possible to inflict a very serious setback on the assailants.
Allow me to express my most sincere condolences to the families of the
soldiers of peace who perished and to the people of Chad, as well as to wish the
injured a speedy recovery. I echo the words of the Secretary-General in his statement
following the attack: it will not cause us to waver in our determination.
This latest attack took place against the backdrop of a deteriorating security
situation in central and northern Mali. Since the beginning of this year, MINUSMA
forces and Malian defence and security forces have suffered repeated attacks and
significant losses, while several large cities are living under constant threat from
armed groups.
As we mourn the deaths of our peacekeepers, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s
call to the stakeholders concerned to scale up and strengthen the international
community’s response to the issue of terrorism and violent extremism in the Sahel
region, including by ensuring the swift implementation of the recommendations of
the 2020 Pau and 2021 N’Djamena summits.
In addition to the threat posed by terrorist groups, I remain concerned about
ongoing destabilizing activities by militias operating along ethnic lines in central
Mali. Despite the encouraging improvements in the security situation in some areas
across the region as a result of local peace agreements supported by MINUSMA,
I call on the transitional Government of Mali to devise a comprehensive approach
to improve the security situation in parallel with efforts to protect civilians and
restore State authority and basic social services. This approach would also include
sustainable solutions to ensure militias and armed groups lay down their arms
and join the dialogue process. This approach should also include a robust effort to
ensure accountability and tackle impunity for actors accused of having committed
violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Any sustainable improvement in the security situation in Mali is, in no small
measure, predicated on the success of the current political transition. And while
the transition remains fragile, over the past three months encouraging signs have
been recorded.
As outlined in the report under consideration, seven months into a political
transition scheduled to last 18 months, transition authorities have kick-started the
2/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

functioning of the main institutions of the transition. In February, the Government
issued its agenda for the period ahead, and the transitional Parliament swiftly voted
to approve it during its first session.
I am encouraged by the steps taken since then by the transitional authorities
to implement their agenda of reforms. I call on all stakeholders concerned in Mali to
join these efforts. It is crucial that the pace of these reforms be urgently accelerated,
while ensuring that the largest number of actors join the process. In the weeks and
months ahead, the success of the transition will depend on the commitment of the
Malian stakeholders to ensure that the transition and the key reform processes
underpinning it remain inclusive, transparent and credible. MINUSMA, including
through the good offices of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, will
continue to support Malian stakeholders.
Among the Government’s pressing priorities is the completion of a series of
crucial political and institutional reforms. These include the territorial redistricting,
the electoral reforms and the reform of the Constitution. I welcome the issuance six
days ago, on 31 March, by President Bah N’Daou of a decree establishing the Comité
d’orientation stratégique, in charge of political and institutional reforms. Under
the authority of the Prime Minister, this committee of 50 members representing
all major stakeholders in Mali — from political parties to civil society groups and
traditional leaders — is tasked with defining the scope of the reforms to be enacted
in the remaining months of the transition.
I remain convinced that, working together and building on the conclusions of
previous discussions, such as the Inclusive National Dialogue held in 2019, Malian
women and men can and must seize this opportunity to find common ground and
practical solutions to be implemented in the shortest time frame possible.
With regard to preparations for elections at the end of the transition period,
discussions over the past few weeks among transition authorities, political actors and
civil society groups have yet to result in an agreement over which reforms should be
enacted, including on the important issue of the management of the polls. As a result,
an official electoral calendar has not been issued. It is expected that the outcome of
the work of the Comité d’orientation stratétique will include a draft reform of the
electoral code and an electoral calendar.
At this critical juncture, I encourage Malian political actors to work in a spirit
of compromise and enact reforms aimed at creating an environment conducive to
peaceful, inclusive, transparent and credible elections. These elections represent the
litmus test for the current transition and a necessary step towards Mali’s return to
constitutional rule. Increasing participation, including among women and youth, and
boosting the credibility of the polls will be key in avoiding that this landmark of the
democratic process once again becomes the trigger of further political instability
in Mali.
While the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali has remained slow, positive momentum and a new sense of trust among
the Malian parties have emerged in recent weeks, and efforts to improve Malian’s
ownership of the Agreement have been undertaken. A meeting of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee took place in Kayes, southern Mali, on 31 March, less than
a month after the previous meeting had taken place in Kidal, northern Mali. This
was the second such meeting to take place outside Bamako since the signing of
the Agreement in 2015. Both gatherings are of major symbolic significance and are
seen as positive and essential steps in improving the Agreement’s ownership among
Malian stakeholders, a key factor in its implementation.
I urge Malian parties to build on the momentum generated in recent weeks
to accelerate the redeployment and effective use of the reconstituted units of the
21-047063/31

S/2021/336

army in the north, the operationalization of the Northern Development Zone and
the establishment of the territorial police. Six months after representatives of the
signatory movements joined a Malian Government, a first in the years since the
signing of the Agreement, now is the time to translate the commitments made into
concrete progress on the ground.
As Mali continues to face a host of political, security, human rights and
humanitarian challenges, the support of the international community and of the
Council remains of the utmost importance to ensure that national stakeholders live
up to their commitments. In the words of the outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, when he addressed you last October,
“The success of the political transition in Mali is within reach. The ball
remains in the court of Malian women and men. (S/PV.8765, p. 3)
“The United Nations must also seize this opportunity to continue
supporting and assisting throughout this important phase for a way out of the
crisis in Mali”. (ibid.)

4/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We are confident that, under your leadership, the Security
Council will successfully complete all its agenda items. I also wish to congratulate
the United States delegation for the successful completion of its presidency in
the month of March. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.
At present, the overall situation in Mali is improving. The Malian Government
has made positive progress in the transitional process in establishing transitional
institutions, implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
preparing for the elections. At the same time, however, Mali still faces multiple
challenges, such as terrorism, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and a humanitarian crisis. The international community should continue to
focus on Mali and provide the necessary support. To that end, I wish to make the
following observations.
First, the good momentum in the political process must be maintained. The
Malian Government has formulated a transitional action plan, and its implementation
is the main task for the next stage. As the Malian Government works to coordinate
and advance preparations for the elections, positive efforts are also needed to promote
development and improve people’s livelihoods in a way that can bring more benefits
to its people. The Agreement Monitoring Committee has met for the first time in
northern Mali, which is of great significance. The signatories must consolidate the
existing results, continue to develop mutual trust, achieve more results on issues
such as the deployment of armed forces and the Northern Development Zone,
properly handle the issue of reopening negotiations on the relevant provisions of the
peace agreement and firmly advance the implementation of the agreement. China
supports the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States in
continuing their positive and constructive role in the political process of Mali.
Secondly, comprehensive policies must be implemented in order to improve
the security situation. Terrorist activities are rampant in central and northern Mali.
With frequent attacks that have led to continued deterioration of the security situation
on the ground, a comprehensive military, political, economic, judicial and social
response must be adopted in accordance with the recommendations in the report
(S/2021/299) of the Secretary-General. Actions to combat terrorist organizations
must be accompanied by efforts to eliminate the root causes of terrorism and
extremism in order to remove both the symptoms and root causes. There must be
support to the Malian Government so that it can continue to actively participate
in the counter-terrorism operations of the Group of Five for the Sahel. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
must focus on its core mandate and honestly follow the Malian-led and Malianowned principle as it strengthens coordination and cooperation with regional
organizations. MINUSMA must develop its road map based on the actual situation
on the ground and make sure that its implementation is coordinated and consistent.
Foreign counter-terrorism operations in Mali need to respect Mali’s sovereignty,
abide by international humanitarian law and protect the safety of Malian people.
Thirdly, it is imperative to organize an effective response to challenges such
as COVID-19. The pandemic has started to rebound in Mali, which has caused
21-047065/31

S/2021/336

concerns. The international community should provide Mali with support to fight
the disease, including ensuring timely and fair access to COVID-19 vaccines for
those in need to contain the spread of the pandemic. With Mali’s economic decline,
about 800,000 people slipped back into poverty last year, with 3 million people in
urgent need of emergency food assistance and a large number of people displaced.
The international community must increase assistance to ease the difficulties of the
Malian people.
Fourthly, the safety of peacekeepers must be effectively maintained.
MINUSMA has suffered multiple attacks this year, during which 10 peacekeepers —
from countries including Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Togo and Chad — were killed.
More than 240 peacekeepers have sacrificed their lives since the founding of
MINUSMA. China extends its highest respect to the countries concerned and to all
the peacekeepers who have laid down their lives and expresses condolences to the
families of all the victims. The safety of peacekeepers is an extremely urgent issue,
and it is a responsibility of all parties. These attacks must be investigated, and the
perpetrators must be brought to justice. It is necessary to analyse the causes of the
incidents and identify the weakest areas, so that practical and effective measures
can be adopted to implement resolution 2518 (2020) and ensure the safety of
all peacekeepers.
Finally, China wishes to thank Special Representative Annadif for his
contributions to the peace and stability of Mali over the past five years. We welcome
Mr. Wane’s appointment as Special Representative and look forward to a greater role
being played by MINUSMA in maintaining peace and stability in Mali.

6/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. We welcome the
appointment of Mr. El-Ghassim Wane to the position of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Mali and offer our full support to him and to the
work of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
Estonia is following very carefully the developments in the political transition
in Mali. We take note of the latest progress, such as the adoption of the Government’s
action plan and road map for the transition period, as well as the creation of the
strategic committee on political and institutional reforms. At the same time, we
encourage the Malian authorities to fully honour the commitments that they have
made for themselves and for the Malian people. We recognize that the reform
agenda for the transition period is ambitious, and we call on the Malian authorities
to identify and implement its most pressing priorities. It is of the utmost importance
to take concrete, transparent and credible steps beginning now to make the elections
in March 2022 a reality.
In the preparations for the holding of elections, we urge the Malian authorities
to focus on working out a detailed and operational electoral calendar. I would like
to stress the need for inclusivity in the electoral process. Full, equal and meaningful
participation by women — as candidates, community organizers and voters — is of
key importance. We call on all parties to comply with the 2015 gender quota law.
Women as well as youth need to be given an opportunity and a safe space to make
their voices heard and their ideas taken onboard. More attention needs to be given to
building trust and consensus in society.
I would like to recognize the positive role and engagement of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African States in supporting the
political transition in Mali. Regional organizations can have an important role and
offer their support in the transition process.
The security situation in Mali remains extremely concerning. All attacks
against the national and international security presence, such as last week’s heinous
attack against a MINUSMA camp in Kidal, must be condemned in the strongest
terms. The deliberate targeting of civilians by terrorists and armed groups is simply
unacceptable, and every effort needs to be made to alleviate the suffering of the
people. Estonia will continue contributing to the fight against terrorism in Mali by
participating in the international operations and training missions that are there to
support the Malian authorities.
However, a military approach alone will not suffice. A long-term solution
to the Malian conflict can come about only through political will and inclusive
dialogue, as well as full ownership and commitment by all the parties. In this regard,
the Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali will continue to be an
essential framework and basis for such a dialogue. We are encouraged by the show of
goodwill during the two meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee that took
place outside of the capital in February and March. It is positive that progress was
made on increasing women’s participation during those meetings. At the same time,
we urge the parties to focus on achieving tangible progress in the implementation
of the Agreement. More needs to be done for the redeployment and effective use of
reconstituted army units, as well as in the area of re-establishing State presence and
services in the north of Mali.
21-047067/31

S/2021/336

We remain very concerned about the continued negative trends in the
human rights and the humanitarian situation. The recent steps taken by the Malian
authorities to fight impunity for violations and abuses of international human rights
law in central Mali are a step in the right direction. We urge the authorities to follow
through with the relevant investigations and legal proceedings. Breaking the cycle
of impunity and ensuring that all perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses,
as well as violators of international humanitarian law, are brought to justice must be
political and judicial priorities. The only way forward in achieving lasting peace is
to focus on reconciliation and rebuilding trust in society.
The humanitarian situation in Mali continues to be a source of concern. The
adverse effects of climate change as well as the spreading insecurity in Central Mali
and the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic continue to exacerbate the suffering
of civilians, especially the most vulnerable groups in society. In this regard, we call
on all the relevant parties to allow access to humanitarian aid and relief efforts.

8/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
briefing. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Mali, Mr.
Issa Konfourou.
The Security Council condemned the terrorist attack on 2 April at Aguelhok
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), which claimed the lives of four Chadian peacekeepers. I salute
the bravery shown by the Chadian contingent in repelling this attack.
We are one year away from the elections, which should mark the end of the
transition in Mali. As time progresses, it is essential that all Malian actors seize
the opportunity that this period represents. First of all, I would like to reaffirm the
political objectives of the coming months.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali remains imperative. The holding of two sessions of the Agreement Followup Committee in Kidal and Kayes are positive steps. But commitments must
now be translated into action. In particular, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process must be accelerated to allow the integration of combatants
from the signatory groups into the national forces and the redeployment of the
reconstituted army throughout the country. It is also a question of making progress
on decentralization and development in the north of the country and of setting up the
territorial police, as well as ensuring greater participation by women in the process.
These specific objectives are achievable in the coming months.
Furthermore, we encourage the transitional authorities to accelerate
preparations for the March 2022 elections. It is essential that the process be
accompanied by an open and thorough dialogue with the entire political class and
representatives of civil society. Strong participation by women and youth will
be necessary.
It also seems important to us that the political reforms be carried out before
the elections, while of course setting priorities to be achieved in this relatively short
period of time. I am thinking in particular of the overhaul of the bodies in charge of
elections and of progress on constitutional reform.
Beyond these political objectives, the N’Djamena summit of 15 and 16
February drew up a global road map for the coming months in the Sahel.
First of all, we must continue the fight against terrorism and support the
countries of the Sahel so that they can manage this threat independently. France
salutes all partners, in particular the European Union and its member States, who
are contributing to supporting the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force. At the N’Djamena summit, the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, the African Union
and the European Union and its member States called for increased and sustained
United Nations support for the Joint Force to enable it to continue to gain operational
strength. The support provided by MINUSMA via the tripartite mechanism is
still necessary for the operations of the Joint Force. And today I am making an
urgent appeal to the United Nations and the European Union to speed up the use of
contractors. We regret that this provision has not yet been implemented, even though
the Council called for its launch 10 months ago.
To be effective, those security efforts must also be accompanied by a genuine
civilian surge, as agreed at the N’Djamena summit. This consists of a strong political
21-047069/31

S/2021/336

commitment by the Malian authorities to deploy public services in the remote
areas of Mali. We hope that MINUSMA will fully play its role and accompany
the redeployment of the defence forces, the security forces and all Government
services. We also encourage close coordination between the Malian armed forces
and MINUSMA.
Respect for the rule of law is also essential. France welcomes the measures
that have already been implemented by the Malian authorities to put an end to human
rights violations and violations of international humanitarian law. We call on them to
go even further in order to put an end to impunity.
Beyond these actions in terms of security and governance, we all know that
stabilizing the region requires a substantial effort in terms of humanitarian aid and
development. France welcomes the appointment of the United Nations Coordinator
for Development in the Sahel, Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye. We hope that his work will
enable more effective implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. The French Development Agency has accelerated the implementation of
its projects, with €350 million disbursed in 2020 in the G-5 Sahel countries. We also
welcome Mark Lowcock’s decision to set up a regional fund for Central and West
Africa, which will focus in particular on the Sahel. France’s contribution to that fund
will amount to €1 million. This will come in addition to France’s funding for United
Nations humanitarian agencies in the Sahel, which amounted to almost €5 million
in 2021.

10/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations.
I would like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his briefing on the political and security situation in Mali and on the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA). I would like to take this opportunity to also thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Head of
MINUMSA, for his outstanding leadership over the past five years. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Ambassador Issa Konfourou of Mali in our midst.
At the outset, allow me to express our deepest condolences to the families of
the deceased in the attack on the MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok, in the Kidal region,
on 2 April. While strongly condemning the attack, we express our solidarity with the
Government and the people of Chad, whose four peacekeepers lost their lives. We
also wish a speedy recovery to those injured.
The security situation in Mali, particularly in central and northern Mali, remains
a matter of concern. In the last three months, MINUSMA has lost 10 peacekeepers
to attacks by terrorist groups in Mali. The latest attack, on the MINUSMA camp,
reflects the gravity of the situation. But for the valiant efforts of the peacekeepers,
the casualties could have been much greater. The Malian security forces have also
lost several soldiers in the recent months to targeted attacks by militants in central
and northern Mali. We strongly condemn attacks against peacekeepers and Malian
security forces and express our solidarity with the Government of Mali and those
troop-contributing countries that lost peacekeepers in these attacks.
The upsurge in violence by terrorist groups in Mali is of serious concern.
Terrorist groups such as Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and the Islamic State
in the Greater Sahara are growing in strength, as evident from the increasing number
of attacks. Given the spread of terrorist groups in the Sahel region, we reiterate the
need for more robust support from the Security Council and from the international
community to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
The Council also needs to be cognizant of the fact that MINUSMA has been
seriously affected by attacks involving improvised explosive devices (IEDs) in recent
years. Since 2018, MINUSMA has lost more than 20 peacekeepers to IED attacks.
We hope that the Department of Peace Operations will continue taking measures
to mitigate IED threats faced by the Mission by providing dedicated resources and
upgrading the security infrastructure of camps. India has always advocated for more
proactive measures to protect the protectors.
MINUSMA is playing an important role in stabilizing the security situation
in Mali through its political and military support to the peace process, along with its
confidence-building measures. We applaud the efforts of MINUSMA peacekeepers,
who are functioning under complex and challenging circumstances.
There is an urgent need for a comprehensive approach to address the
security challenges arising out of these increasing asymmetrical attacks. While the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains
fundamental to peace and participatory governance in the northern region, the
transitional authorities in Mali need to take urgent measures to redeploy and expand
State administration, police and social services in both central and northern parts of
the country.
In that context, we welcome the fifth meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, held in Kidal on 11 February, and compliment the Malian Government
and other stakeholders for this initiative of significant value to the peace process.
21-0470611/31

S/2021/336

The attack on MINUSMA should not deter stakeholders from continuing their
engagement. We hope the signatory parties will continue to work closely to advance
the peace process. The operationalization of the reconstituted battalion of the army
deployed in Kidal and the transformation of the joint security commission into
territorial police needs to be expedited. There has been positive progress in the
redeployment of former combatants into the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
These measures need to be continued in the coming months.
The political transition in Mali has witnessed forward movement. The
Transitional National Council has approved the action plan. The six priority areas
outlined in the action plan need legislative and institutional measures, particularly
a uniform electoral code and an independent electoral body and the creation of a
senate. We also take note of steps being taken towards holding a constitutional
referendum and convening local and general elections. With less than one year left
in the transition, it is important that efforts be oriented towards reforms that will
facilitate timely elections and pave the way for an elected Government that can deal
with long-term reforms.
The transitional Government must continue engaging the political parties
on the transition process to ensure that the process is inclusive, particularly the
full participation of women and youth. The dialogue with labour unions is another
important step that will help address socioeconomic issues. We hope these measures
will contribute positively to the process of redeploying State institutions in central
and northern Mali.
We support the mediation role of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union (AU) towards the restoration of
constitutional order. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General should
continue to work closely with ECOWAS and the AU in extending all possible
assistance to the transitional Government during the transition period.
We have taken note of Secretary-General’s road map on MINUSMA’s
mandate implementation and a phased transition plan. We welcome the evaluation
of MINUSMA formed police units. We look forward to the implementation of the
Integrated Performance Policy Framework to systematically assess all Mission
components equally, not just formed police units.
What Mali needs today is the continuing support of the international
community to overcome the multifaceted crisis. While India has been supporting
Mali through development cooperation, more recently we facilitated the supply of
396,000 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility to help Mali fight the COVID19 pandemic.
I would like to reiterate India’s commitment to supporting Mali to overcome
the present political and security crisis.

12/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the United
Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
[Original: English and French]
First of all, I would like to thank the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his leadership during the past
five years, as well as to congratulate the new Special Representative, Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane. Likewise, I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his very relevant briefing. I also
warmly welcome the Permanent Representative of Mali, Mr. Issa Konfourou.
I express my sincerest condolences with regard to the Blue Helmets of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) who lost their lives in the recent attack. Ireland condemns any
attack against peacekeepers in the strongest terms. I would also like to express my
condolences for the members of the Malian armed forces killed recently, as well as
all those who have lost their lives in Mali.
The transitional authorities showed great ambition by adopting the
Government’s action plan in February. That illustrates the political will to bring
about change — a change that is desired and expected by the Malian people. In order
to meet those expectations, political will and practicality will have to work together.
The first priority remains the return to constitutional order led by a democratic
Government. There is less than a year of the transition period left. The holding of
free, fair and open elections during that period remains key.
We encourage the Malian authorities to ensure that the political and
institutional reform processes are fully transparent and inclusive. We call on the
transitional Government to confirm the timeline for elections and to urgently
establish an electoral body that is representative, inclusive and independent.
The representation of women on that body is crucial and will be a first step
towards removing barriers to women’s participation in the electoral process. Every
effort should be made to facilitate the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women, as provided for in the Transition Charter. Women should be encouraged
to vote, and they should be supported as candidates and elected representatives of
their communities.
We welcome the renewed commitment of the Malian parties to the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
decentralization of meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee is welcome
and laudable, as is the agreement to increase the number of women representatives in
the Committee and subcommittees. We echo the urgent call by the women members
of the Committee to address education as a prerequisite for lasting peace in Mali.
Critical priorities for the coming months include progress on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the deployment of the reconstituted army units,
the establishment of the territorial police and the implementation of projects for
the Northern Development Zone. We welcome the continued support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in
advancing those important tasks.
As we have heard from many speakers this morning, ending impunity is integral
to breaking the cycle of conflict and strengthening the essential social contract
between the Malian people and the State. Impunity for human rights violations and
abuses perpetrated by numerous actors, including the national security forces, must
21-0470613/31

S/2021/336

end. Those responsible for such violations must be brought to justice without delay,
and we welcome the progress made by the Malian authorities, including through the
issuing of prosecution orders against alleged perpetrators of human rights violations.
We urge the transitional authorities, with the support of MINUSMA, to
act on the report of the International Commission of Inquiry for Mali, beginning
with the establishment of a mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
Commission’s recommendations.
We believe that it is important to recognize the essential role of MINUSMA
in promoting and protecting human rights by monitoring, documenting and
reporting on allegations of violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law. We see MINUSMA’s work on human rights
as critical to supporting efforts to promote accountability in Mali, including the
work of the Human Rights and Protection Division of MINUSMA, which deserves
our attention.
We know that the coronavirus disease, insecurity and the effects of climate
change continue to exacerbate the suffering of Malians. We are deeply concerned
about the increase in attacks against civilians, which underlines the necessity for
the continued prioritization of the protection of civilians in MINUSMA’s mandate.
Attacks against humanitarian personnel and the deliberate targeting of United
Nations peacekeepers are also of grave concern. We express our sincere condolences
to the families of those who lost their lives, and we emphasize the need for the
transitional Government to support MINUSMA in creating a secure environment for
its own people and for humanitarian workers.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s long-term road map on Mali is welcome. We
support the phased approach. We recognize that the long-term aim of achieving a
sustainable and peaceful transition, over which the people of Mali have ownership,
should be met in a gradual manner, in line with the security conditions on the
ground. Our focus must now be on ensuring that MINUSMA has the resources and
the capacity to implement its mandate in this crucial phase.
Mali continues to face many challenges, but we know the political will to
make deep and lasting changes exists. Ireland stands committed to supporting Mali
throughout that process.

14/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I reiterate my delegation’s support, Sir, for your successful presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his report
on the situation in Mali. On behalf of my country, I express our sincere condolences
for the personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who lost their lives in the course of their duties in
the first few months, including in the recent attack in Kidal. I also welcome the
representative of Mali to this meeting.
Mexico welcomes the adoption in February of the action plan submitted
by Prime Minister Moctar Ouane, which, together with the road map for the
implementation of the peace agreement, can lay the foundations for progress towards
a democratic transition. Mexico believes that the Security Council should provide
the necessary support for the implementation of the commitments made by the
transitional Government. At the same time, we call on the Malian authorities to
create the necessary spaces for the various political forces to actively participate
in implementing that plan. Efforts to achieve a successful transition should be an
opportunity for reconciliation.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s report on MINUSMA’s exit strategy
(S/2021/300, annex), namely, that the success of the transition depends on the holding
of free, fair and peaceful elections throughout the national territory within the
established time frame. We therefore believe it essential that the Malian authorities
and the National Transition Council give priority to adopting the legal framework
and creating the institutions to organize the electoral processes in 2021 and 2022. It
is clearly at this stage that the necessary legislative measures must be taken to ensure
that progress is made towards the full, meaningful and equal participation of women
and young people in the local and national elections.
Mexico views with great concern the further deterioration of the security
situation in Mali, which has a direct impact on civilians, who are the main victims
of the conflict. We therefore condemn all attacks against the civilian population and
reiterate our call for such acts to be investigated and punished, regardless of who
committed them.
We urge all parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. According to data from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, almost 6 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance, and we urge that unrestricted access to such aid be guaranteed.
In addition, Mexico calls on the Government of Mali to redouble its efforts to
implement its national action plan to combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. Such weapons continue to fuel the conflict in Mali and the Sahel region,
causing an appalling number of victims. Greater cooperation with neighbouring
countries is therefore necessary to combat illicit trafficking and to strengthen
cooperation mechanisms.
My country welcomes the arrival in Mali, during the month of March, of
almost 400,000 doses of coronavirus disease vaccines, within the framework of
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility initiative. These vaccines, while
insufficient in quantity, will undoubtedly contribute to reducing the health risks
faced by the most vulnerable population.
21-0470615/31

S/2021/336

Given the unfortunate spread of violence towards the south of the country and
its intensification in the centre, we must insist on the importance of addressing the
socioeconomic causes that fuel the conflict.
By showing us the persistent fragility of the situation in Mali, almost eight
years after the deployment of MINUSMA, the reports of the Secretary-General and
the organizations active in that country lead us to continue to reflect on the need
for a renewed and comprehensive approach to achieving the stability to which the
population aspires, with a multidimensional vision that addresses the socioeconomic
roots of the conflicts in the Sahel region. In that regard, the outcomes of the summit
of the Group of Five for the Sahel held in N’Djamena are a step in the right direction.
In the case of Mali, the activation of the Northern Development Zone with
financing from the sustainable development fund is urgent. We believe that, in this
process, it would be useful to have the support of the Peacebuilding Commission to
achieve both the priorities and the objectives that the Malian actors have established.
Finally, we consider the support of regional and subregional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African States, essential to bringing the
efforts in Mali in line regional dynamics.

16/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister Counsellor of the Niger to the
United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: English and French]
At the outset of my remarks, I would like, on behalf of the African members of
the Security Council, namely, Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1), to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his presentation and to pay a vibrant tribute to Mr. Annadif Mahamat Saleh,
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his efforts in creating
the conditions for the return of peace in Mali, which, now 12 months from the end of
the transition period, is at the crossroads of its long-awaited stabilization.
We congratulate Mr. El-Ghassim Wane on his appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). To carry
out his new tasks successfully, Mr. Wane will need threefold support in the months
to come: support from the population, support from the Malian authorities and,
finally, support from the international community. With that in mind, allow me to
touch upon the following key points.
First, on the political front, the A3+1 welcomes the efforts and the willingness
shown by the transitional authorities to ease the political tension that preceded the
events of August 2020. The recent meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
remains an achievement to be consolidated, as is the fight against impunity in the
centre of the country.
With 12 months to go before the end of the transition, all Malian stakeholders
need to listen to each other and agree on the priorities of the moment, particularly in
terms of constitutional, institutional and electoral reforms, which are the foundations
of democracy. The participation of women and youth must be encouraged. In this
regard, we welcome the launch by the Government of consultations to identify
citizens’ expectations for the new constitution.
As for the international community and MINUSMA, we expect them to
continue to play a constructive role, providing valuable political, logistical and
financial support.
We call on the Government to continue to combat intercommunal violence
by strengthening its actions to restore peaceful relations among communities
and by effectively punishing those who interfere with the implementation of the
peace agreement.
Secondly, with regard to the economy, it is also important to note that peace
thrives on development. To this end, we call on Mali’s development partners to resume
the aid that has been suspended since the last coup d’état, to enable the country
to better cope with the multiple and multifaceted crises that risk exacerbating the
economic, social, health, humanitarian and security situation.
Mali is at crossroads, as I said earlier. The Peacebuilding Commission should
at this point play a more prominent role in its stabilization. The implementation of
direct impact and replicable projects at the local level will help consolidate the gains
of stabilization.
Thirdly, on the security front, we welcome the progress achieved so far and
encourage the effective return of the national armed forces and the Administration
throughout the country. To achieve this, the redeployment and effective use of the
21-0470617/31

S/2021/336

reconstituted army units in the north and the establishment of the territorial police
are equally essential.
The rise of terrorism and violent extremism, as well as the proliferation of
weapons, have a great impact on the security of Mali and the Sahel. In this regard,
we remain deeply concerned about the presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries
in Libya and look forward to discussing this issue further in the Security Council at
the informal interactive dialogue scheduled for 20 April.
We reiterate that any death is one too many. The recent loss of life among
MINUSMA personnel, civilians of the Niger, Mali and Burkina Faso and members
of national, regional and international armed forces is a reminder that the context
remains quite worrisome and that we are far from having reached the objectives that
would allow us to consider withdrawing or reducing the size of MINUSMA.
We condemn in the strongest terms the latest attack against MINUSMA, which
caused the death of four peacekeepers from the Chadian contingent and extend our
deepest condolences to their families and the Government of Chad.
The A3+1 reiterates the importance of MINUSMA having the necessary
capacities to fulfil its mandate and promote the safety and security of the United
Nations peacekeepers, pursuant to resolution 2531 (2020). MINUSMA should
be stronger and more robust, as the integrity of our territories continues to be
significantly threatened by terrorist acts of rare cruelty.
We welcome the strengthening of the operational capabilities of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel through the deployment of the eighth infantry
battalion of 1,200 additional Chadians in the central zone. In the long term, however,
the operationalization of this new battalion will require the active and sustained
mobilization of all partners present in the theatre, including the United Nations.
The A3+1 strongly reiterates that the next renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate
must have two major outcomes: first, the readjustment of MINUSMA’s mandate in
view of providing holistic support to the transition and, secondly, the withdrawal
of the tasks of supporting the Joint Force in order for it to better focus on its
strategic priorities.
To that effect, we have the intention, hopefully with the support of the entire
Security Council, to request the Secretary-General to indicate to us by the end
of May 2021, through a white note, the modalities and needs for the creation of a
support office dedicated to the Joint Force, which we firmly believe would be more
appropriate than the tripartite technical arrangement, which no longer corresponds to
the current context. On the basis of the white note and the high sense of responsibility
of all Council members, which we count on, we will introduce, in June, a consensual
draft resolution creating the aforementioned support office.
In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms the importance of respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law in the noble fight against the forces of evil that
we are waging as national, regional and international armed forces.

18/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. We appreciate
Mali’s consistent participation in these meetings. Let me also thank former Special
Representative Annadif for his relentless efforts for peace and security in Mali, and
we warmly welcome his successor, Mr. Wane.
I want to start by recognizing some of the good news since we last met on this
topic (see S/2021/47): the arrival of the first coronavirus disease vaccines in Mali
through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility initiative, the meetings of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee in Kidal and Kayes and, not least, the increasing
participation of women in that Committee.
Yet, at the same time, we have continued to witness horrific attacks against
civilians in and around Mali. And we have again seen loss of life among the brave
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and its partners. We repeat our sympathy and condolences to
Chad and all those affected by Friday’s unacceptable attacks.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation also calls for increased action
to ensure the protection of civilians as well as safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. Recent reports about sexual and gender-based violence and violence against
children, including recruitment to armed forces and groups, are deeply worrisome.
We urge all parties to the conflict in Mali to implement the conclusions adopted by
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in December.
Persistent security and governance challenges in Mali tell us at least
four things.
First, MINUSMA is still needed. This is why we agree that it was wise to keep
the road map focused on the transition for now. The useful description of a “phase 1
end state” will help the preparations for phase 2, to be done jointly with the United
Nations country team. However, decisions on an exit are best left for later.
Secondly, military force alone can never solve problems in the long term.
Lasting security depends on inclusive and sustainable development, good
governance and respect for the rights of all Malians. They deserve to see the Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali become a reality. This means the
return of a civilian State that protects its population against violence and injustices
and that provides basic services, such as education, along with full disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Thirdly, the fight against impunity must be stepped up in Mali. All perpetrators
must be held accountable for violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law. In this regard, we reiterate the call for follow-up on
the recommendations of the International Commission of Inquiry for Mali.
And fourthly, local mediation and dialogue should be supported to mitigate
and address conflicts and to reduce violence. Intercommunal mediation has
demonstrated some results recently when it comes to addressing competition over
natural resources, which is increasingly a cause of conflict owing to climate change.
These results give reason for optimism. MINUSMA also has a role to play in this
regard, alongside various actors on the ground. As we stated at the ministerial
meeting of the Coalition for the Sahel, Norway stands ready to expand its engagement
in peace and reconciliation work.
There is now less than a year left until peaceful and credible elections must be
held in Mali. For the Malian people, there should be no doubt that the transition will
21-0470619/31

S/2021/336

end democratically with political reforms and the restoration of constitutional order.
We commend the Economic Community of West African States, the African Union
and neighbouring countries for their continued engagement. We also commend the
Government’s action plan approved in February. But this must be followed by a
concrete timeline for the elections.
More than anything, the legacy of the transition Government will be
determined by its ability to ensure inclusive democracy in Mali — not least through
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.

20/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We would like to thank Under-Secretary General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
briefing on the work of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the situation in that country.
The situation in Mali remains tense. Extremists continue to terrorize the local
population, carrying out attacks on Malian troops, United Nations peacekeepers
and other contingents of international armed forces. The Malian Armed Forces
and MINUSMA’s Blue Helmets suffered heavy losses in March. Unfortunately,
intercommunal clashes in the centre of Mali continue unabated, despite all the
mediation efforts. The clashes are provoked, in no small part, by the activity of
the extremists. According to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/299), the
previously calm southern regions of Mali are now at risk of destabilization.
We are deeply concerned over the situation in the border region of Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso — the Liptako-Gourma triangle. Insurgent attacks have
been reported there recently on an almost daily basis. Several horrible terrorist
attacks have taken place in the Niger. Russia conveys its condolences to the peoples
and the Governments of the affected States whose citizens and peacekeepers are
being killed by terrorists in the region. We expect the authorities of Mali and the
neighbouring States to act even more resolutely to eradicate terrorism on their soil.
On the political front, we welcome the steps taken by the Government of Mali to
establish transitional institutions. The National Transitional Council has commenced
its work, and an action plan and a road map were adopted in order to restore the
constitutional order and hold elections. We hope that all those important measures
will be implemented in a timely manner within the 18-month transition period.
Much will depend on whether the authorities and all the stakeholders concerned,
including the Plateforme des mouvements du 14 juin 2014 and the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad, continue dialogue on these issues.
We appreciate the efforts of the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States to address the situation in Mali. We are steadfast in our
support for such steps.
The stabilization of the situation in the country is directly linked to the strict
implementation of the Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali by
the transitional Government and the other political forces. We hope that constructive
dialogue to that end with the signatory groups will continue. In that regard, we
welcome the outcomes of the meetings that the Agreement Monitoring Committee
held in February and March. The process of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants and the deployment of new units in the country’s
north need to accelerate. This should happen alongside the Government reform and
the creation of the conditions for socioeconomic recovery of the affected areas. The
interests of all peoples of Mali, especially of its northern territories, must be taken
into account.
The humanitarian situation in Mali is of great concern. The number of people
in need of food assistance has significantly increased. The number of internally
displaced persons has grown by more than half in the past year. These developments
require an appropriate response by humanitarian agencies.
The situation in Mali is a key factor in regional security. We expect the Malian
Armed Forces to continue to participate fully in operations of the Joint Force of
21-0470621/31

S/2021/336

the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and that the decisions taken by West
African countries in 2020 and 2021 to step up the fight against terrorism will be
implemented. The proposal of the African Union Commission to deploy an African
standby force in the Sahel merits thorough consideration.
Close cooperation and coordination between Bamako and MINUSMA remain
imperative. Peacekeepers must continue to strictly implement their mandate in
northern and central Mali. We welcome the assistance provided by MINUSMA to
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. In general, we agree with the proposed modalities for
the future work of the Blue Helmets in Mali set out in the Secretary-General’s road
map. The priorities are clearly to help restore constitutional order and implement
the peace agreement. Therefore, the presence of MINUSMA remains key for
further stabilization. At the same time, the main responsibility for protecting the
civilians, regaining control over the northern territories, and addressing the urgent
socioeconomic and other problems rests with the Malians themselves.
In conclusion, we would like to express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for his able leadership of
MINUSMA during these challenging years. We wish him every success in his new
role. We welcome the appointment of Mr. El-Ghassim Wane as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali. We reiterate our commitment to
close interaction aimed at stabilizing the situation in Mali and in the region at large.

22/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing,
and, although he is absent today, I would like to extend my thanks also to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
wider international community have benefited from his leadership and guidance. We
wish him luck in his next role and welcome the appointment of Mr. El-Ghassim Wane.
I would like to focus my remarks on two priorities for action.
First, the issue of impunity for human rights abuses and violations remains a
concern. The attack against the MINUSMA camp in Aguelhok, in the Kidal region,
last Friday, which killed four Chadian peacekeepers and injured another twentyfour, underlines the complex and challenging circumstances in which MINUSMA
operates. And, on behalf of the United Kingdom, I pay tribute to those peacekeepers
who have made the ultimate sacrifice and given their lives for peace and security in
Mali. I offer my deep condolences to their families and friends and to the Mission,
and I wish those injured a speedy recovery.
In the light of this attack and the other significant attacks against peacekeepers
earlier this year, I want also to reiterate what I said in January (see S/2021/47) — these
crimes should not go unpunished and those who perpetrate them should be aware that
they may constitute war crimes. While recent prosecution orders and investigations
are positive steps, we urge the Malian authorities to ensure transparency and
accountability for such acts. As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/299) points
out, justice is necessary in order to achieve sustainable peace and help build trust
between the State and its people.
Secondly, the need for an inclusive political process based on consultations
and dialogue will foster a sense of ownership among all parties to the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The recent meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee of Kidal, as well
as efforts by the transitional Government to initiate dialogue with political parties,
were encouraging developments. However, with less than a year to go until the end
of the transitional period, progress on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
has been limited. We hope to see accelerated progress and concrete achievements, in
line with the roadmap agreed in December.
Finally, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for sharing the roadmap
for MINUSMA’s transition. It contains some important guiding principles, including
the need for Government-led reform. As we prepare for MINUSMA’s mandate
renewal in June, we will draw on this roadmap and from the experience of our
own deployment to MINUSMA, to understand how the Mission can best support
the Malian Government to assume increasing responsibility for the security tasks
currently carried out by the Mission.
The United Kingdom remains committed to supporting MINUSMA’s
core objectives. We are contributing to stabilization efforts that will help reduce
violent conflict. We are supporting projects aimed at increasing the meaningful
participation of women, both in the peace process and in wider conflict-resolution
mechanisms. We are providing international humanitarian law training to Malian
forces and supporting engagement with communities by the Joint Force of the Group
21-0470623/31

S/2021/336

of Five for the Sahel. We are helping protect civilians through our humanitarian aid
and by working through the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
strengthen civilian military coordination. We will continue working closely with our
Malian and international partners to coordinate efforts.
By working together and integrating our defence, development and diplomatic
efforts, we stand the best chance of delivering our shared vision of long-term peace
and stability in Mali and the region.

24/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
Let me start by thanking you, Sir, for your kind words and to wish you the best
of luck during your month’s presidency of the Council.
Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today. And I
also want to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for his
service. We would also like to extend a warm welcome to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Wane. We look forward to his arrival at the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and we
wish him great success.
Today, I would like to discuss three aspects of MINUSMA and the situation
in Mali: violence against people and peacekeepers; violations and abuses of human
rights; and the need for free and fair elections on schedule.
First, the United States extends its deepest sympathies to the victims of
terrorism in Mali and their families, including the MINUSMA peacekeepers killed
and injured in recent attacks.
Each time we convene the Council to discuss the situation in Mali, it seems
that national or international security forces are reeling from a deadly attack. Just
as in January, today we meet after a brazen and devastating attack on a MINUSMA
base, in which gunmen killed four Chadian peacekeepers and injured dozens
more. On that very same day, gunmen attacked a Malian military base, killing and
injuring soldiers.
We condemn such violence in the strongest terms possible and commend the
bravery and dedication of our peacekeepers. The safety and security of peacekeepers
is a priority for the United States, and we will continue to take concrete action
to strengthen peacekeeper safety. That includes implementing the Action Plan to
Improve the Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, and providing training and
equipment, through the United States Global Peace Operations Initiative, to troopand police-contributing partners.
Secondly, Malian authorities and regional security actors must end human
rights violations and abuses. That especially includes ending all gender-based
violence. We are encouraged to see additional steps taken by Malian authorities to
prosecute those responsible for such crimes.
Thorough investigations and accountability for wrongdoing are necessary to
increase trust in Government. And that means looking into the allegations against
the Malian defence and security forces, Government-aligned armed groups, and
regional security actors such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Unjustifiable killings and other abuses by security forces will only further destabilize
the Sahel and exacerbate people’s mistrust of their Government.
Finally, we need to make sure free and fair elections happen on time.
We commend Mali’s National Transition Council’s adoption of the transitional
Government’s ambitious action plan. The dissolution of the military junta in January
was an important step toward a peaceful and democratic transition. Now the top
priority must be organizing and holding free and fair elections by the end of the
transition period. These must be administered by competent and impartial election
authorities using transparent processes. So, we strongly encourage Malian authorities
to issue a finalized timeline confirming dates for the electoral process and to fully
use MINUSMA’s election support capacities.
21-0470625/31

S/2021/336

The transitional Government must also make a renewed effort to make
tangible and significant progress in implementing the Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We echo the Secretary-General’s encouragement that the
signatory parties remain within the agreed framework. Reopening the accord would
impede implementation. Let me repeat that — reopening the accord would impede
implementation. February’s meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
which was held in northern Mali for the first time ever, is a symbol of increased
attention in advancing the implementation of the Algiers accord.
We are particularly heartened to see women’s increased participation in the
peace process, and we call for their full, effective and meaningful participation
going forward. Women should fill seats at every table and at every level. If solutions
are being discussed, and decisions are being made, women should be there.
As the largest humanitarian donor to the Sahel region, the United States
remains a steadfast partner to the Malian people. We recently announced more than
$80 million in humanitarian assistance to the region. This aid will provide shelter,
clean drinking water, emergency food assistance and hygiene services for refugees,
internally displaced people and vulnerable host communities.
But what is needed is peace and stability. We look forward to Mali moving
towards a stable transition and sustainable reform. It is a future the people of
Mali deserve.

26/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
As this is the first open meeting of the Council this month, we would like to
congratulate Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield and her team at the Permanent
Mission of the United States to the United Nations on the success of their presidency
of the Security Council in March 2021. Her able leadership in her very first month at
the United Nations and her team’s tireless efforts made significant contributions to
the work of the Security Council in March 2021.
I wish to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his dedicated contributions
to the work of MINUSMA, as well as to peace and security in Mali.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. El-Ghassim Wane and wish him every
success in his new position as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MINUSMA.
We also would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, for his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome Ambassador Issa Konfourou, the Permanent Representative of
Mali, to this meeting.
We take note of the efforts that the transitional Government and concerned
parties have made so far in Mali. With the Government’s recent release of the action
plan, it is expected that the elections will take place as planned. The outcome of the
ministerial meeting of the Monitoring Committee of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali contributed to the positive momentum for signatory parties to
move ahead in the peace process in Mali.
Although gains have been made, progress in the political process is still
modest. Greater effort is required in implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali.
In this context, we stress the need for the transitional Government and
concerned parties to enhance trust, resolve differences and work together in a spirit
of reconciliation. The international community should continue to provide assistance
to and support Mali in this matter. Moreover, the meaningful participation of women
in the political process should be further ensured and promoted.
For the past six months, the region and Mali itself have not witnessed any
significant security improvement. Terrorism, extremism, violence and intercommunal
conflicts have continued to constitute grave risks to peace and security in Mali.
Persistent attacks due to those factors, as mentioned above, have not decreased in the
northern and central regions.
We join other Member States in condemning the recent attacks against
civilians, security forces and United Nations peacekeepers. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call on authorities in Mali to spare no effort in identifying perpetrators of
the heinous attack against MINUSMA on 2 April, which left four peacekeepers dead
and 19 others injured. We also reiterate our call for the cessation of hostilities and
further efforts to help Mali overcome its challenges at this difficult time.
MINUSMA has been doing great work in Mali since 2015. We commend
MINUSMA’s unwavering efforts to promote peace and reconciliation in Mali. With
its support, the transitional Government has made certain progress in terms of
21-0470627/31

S/2021/336

securing its presence in the northern and central regions. MINUSMA has provided
significant logistical support to the fighting against terrorists by the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.
However, MINUSMA is deployed in a complex and dangerous environment.
The increasing attacks and the loss of peacekeepers’ lives in recent months have
required further measures to ensure the safety of peacekeepers. We must make sure
that MINUSMA has adequate equipment and resources to carry out its mandate
while defending itself.
We are concerned about the dire situation in the country. Sexual violence
and child recruitment and abuse have remained severe challenges. The coronavirusdisease pandemic, among other things, has added a layer of complexity to the
humanitarian situation in Mali. Those factors have not only made the protection of
civilians more difficult but also caused food insecurity and malnutrition to increase
and massive population movements to surge.
Against this backdrop, it is imperative that all parties fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international human rights law and protect
civilians, especially women and children. We also call for further support from the
international community to help Mali tackle its humanitarian challenges.
Before concluding, we would like to reiterate our support for the unity,
independence, self-reliance and territorial integrity of Mali. We commend the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and
the international community for assisting Mali in implementing the transition
roadmap and promoting peace and security.

28/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mali to the
United Nations, Issa Konfourou
[Original: French]
At the outset, I wish to express the warm congratulations of the delegation of
Mali to you, Sir, upon the accession of your country, Viet Nam, to the presidency of
the Security Council.
It is always a pleasurable duty for me to reiterate the profound gratitude of the
President of the Transition, the people and the Government of Mali to the Security
Council, Secretary-General António Guterres, troop-contributing countries to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) and all Mali’s partners for their immeasurable efforts towards peace
and stability in Mali and the Sahel.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/299) and thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his briefing. I paid close attention to his urgent observations as well
as his apt recommendations. I should like to assure him of the determination of the
transition and the other Malian parties when it comes to the diligent implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which emerged from the
Algiers process.
That determination on the part of the Malian authorities is reaffirmed in the
transitional Government’s action plan, adopted almost unanimously by the National
Transition Council. It notably includes stepping up political and institutional reforms.
In that regard, I am happy to inform you that the President of the Transition created,
by a decree of 31 March 2021, the strategic orientation committee on political
and institutional reforms, which is tasked with supporting the Prime Minister in
carrying out those reforms. The committee is made up of 50 personalities from the
political class, academia, civil society, the private sector, unions and traditional and
religious legitimacy.
The goal is also to expedite the review, ownership and implementation of
the agreement; accelerate the process of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of combatants in the northern and central parts of the country;
proceed with the effective dissolution of all self-defence militias; and redeploy the
defence and security forces nationwide.
We in Mali are aware that while the challenges to be met are certainly
numerous, the Government has chosen to carry out urgent reforms that are essential
to the holding of free and transparent elections, organized in an inclusive process.
In that context, it is important to note that the Prime Minister met with Malian
political leaders on 10 February in order to agree, within the framework of a formal
political dialogue, on the reform process to be carried out.
I can assure you that that positive dynamic will continue with the involvement
of all the active forces of the nation in order to reach a consensus around the timetable
for future electoral deadlines as well as the organization of referendum operations
and general elections, which will mark the end of the transition.
The holding of the fifth high-level meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee in Kidal on 11 February was also of major significance. Beyond the
symbolism represented by the Malian flag flying again in Kidal, that delocalized
meeting of the Committee is an additional sign of the gradual return of trust among
the Malian parties. The second delocalized session of the Committee was held in
Kayes on 29 March in order to ensure better national ownership of the Agreement.
21-0470629/31

S/2021/336

Those two delocalized Committee meetings allowed the Malian parties to
engage in order to initiate, in the short term, priority actions concerning, in particular,
the resumption of consultations at the decision-making level on defence and security
issues, which were begun in February; the completion and closure of an accelerated
DDR process, in particular the deployment of the third Operational Coordination
Mechanism company in Kidal and the operationalization of the reconstituted army
battalion already deployed in Kidal, Timbuktu, Gao and Ménaka, as well as the
consensual launch of new phases of the DDR process. In that context, the Malian
parties will continue to deploy the necessary efforts for the integration of the 1,687
remaining ex-combatants into the Malian Defence and Security Forces in order to
reach a total of 3,000 combatants.
Regarding the participation of women in the peace process, I am pleased to
indicate here that the Government and the other signatory parties are committed
to significantly increasing the number of women in the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which will go from 9 to 12 people. In the same vein, women’s
representatives will participate in the four subcommittees of the sustainable
development fund.
The parties also agreed to adopt the text on the establishment of the territorial
police; the return of basic social and administrative services; and the handling of
organizational issues in relation to the sustainable development fund, with a view to
launching the pilot projects that were identified.
The situation in the central part of the country remains a major concern of
the Government, which, with the support of MINUSMA, within the framework of
the implementation of the adaptation plan, in particular the protection of the civilian
population and the provision of humanitarian aid, continues to promote dialogue
between communities with the involvement of the relevant actors, including
traditional and religious leaders.
We are pleased to note today that that dynamic made it possible to lift, a
few days ago, the blockade that had imposed for several months on the town of
Farabougou, in the Ségou region.
On the issue of human rights, as mentioned in the report (S/2021/299), the
Malian Government will continue to take all measures necessary to ensure that all
documented cases of violations or abuses are investigated and brought to justice,
including those allegedly attributable to the Malian military.
I wish to indicate here that the hearings held by the Court of Appeals and the
military court of the Mopti region resulted in the convictions of people involved
in intercommunal violence and of Malian soldiers in connection with violations
committed in the context of counter-terrorism operations.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, which was made even more complex
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, it should be noted that the Government of Mali
has undertaken a number of efforts in crisis-affected areas. I would like to highlight
in particular the visits carried out by the Prime Minister and Ministers to camps for
displaced persons and the distribution of food to the populations affected.
With respect to the regional dimension, the recent terrorist attacks against the
Chadian Blue Helmets in Tessalit, civilian populations in the Niger and the Malian
Armed Forces in the tri-border area are reminders of the urgent need to strengthen
the coordination of our joint actions in the fight against terrorism.
In that vein, Mali welcomes the deployment of the Chadian unit in the triborder area, within the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. However, given the
immensity of the challenges on the ground, we reiterate our appeal to the Security
30/31

21-04706

S/2021/336

Council for a robust and adequate mandate, that is to say, a mandate under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations and the predictable and sustainable funding
of the Joint Force, including through the United Nations.
I wish to end by reiterating the gratitude of the people and the Government
of Mali to the United Nations and all our bilateral and multilateral partners for the
tremendous sacrifices made for the sake of a final and lasting settlement of the
Malian crisis. I pay tribute to the memory of all fallen civilian and military victims
in Mali, foreigners and Malians both. Here I commend in particular the brave
Chadian soldiers of MINUSMA for their courage and responsiveness during the
recent terrorist attack on their camp in Aguelhok. I commend also the outstanding
work done by the women and men of MINUSMA and the French Barkhane force in
the process of the stabilization of Mali and the Sahel.
Finally, allow me to congratulate Mr. El-Ghassim Wane on his appointment
to the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Mali and Head
of MINUSMA and to assure him of the full cooperation of my authorities. I also
reiterate the gratitude of the Government and the people of Mali to Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif for the outstanding work he did during his five years as Head of
MINUSMA. I wish them every success in their respective functions.

21-0470631/31
