A /69/PV.38

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

38th plenary meeting

Monday, 3 November 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Rambally
(Saint Lucia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 86 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/69/255)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.7)
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): My delegation
would like to thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for presenting the Agency’s report (see
reviewing the IAEA’s work over the past year A/69/255)
and outlining future priorities (see A/69/PV.37). With
nuclear power and applications of nuclear technology
expected to play a growing role in the coming decades,
we attach great importance to the central role of the
Agency in promoting safe, secure and peaceful uses of
nuclear energy. We are pleased with the report, which
summarizes well the wide range of the Agency’s work
carried out in line with the priorities set by its member
States.
Taking this opportunity, my delegation would like
to comment on the Agency’s activities and related
developments in the fields of nuclear safety, security
and safeguards.

First of all, the IAEA has made important
contributions to the global nuclear safety framework, in
terms of both improving the safety standards of nuclear
facilities and materials and increasing awareness of
safety-related issues among member States. We look
forward to the continued implementation of the IAEA
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety.
We also look forward to the publication of the
comprehensive report next year on the Fukushima
Daiichi nuclear accident. My delegation sincerely hopes
that the important lessons and recommendations that
can be drawn from that accident will be incorporated
into each member State’s nuclear safety infrastructure in
order to better prepare us to avoid such tragic accidents
and to minimize the impact from such accidents in the
future. In that regard, we hope that the commitment to
sharing information in a transparent and timely manner
continues.
We are pleased to note the IAEA’s many productive
activities in the field of nuclear security over the past year.
We look forward to the second International Conference
on Nuclear Security, to be held in December 2016, based
on the outcome of the first Conference, in 2013. The
work of the Nuclear Security Guidance Committee has
also been fruitful, contributing to greater transparency,
quality, coherence and consistency in publications on
nuclear security guidance. In addition, we appreciate
the Agency’s focused approach to bringing into force
the 2005 Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, which has resulted in
additional ratifications by member States, including
Korea in May.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-60259 (E)

*1460259*

A/69/PV.38

The Nuclear Security Summit process, which
began in Washington and continued in Seoul and The
Hague, and the IAEA’s efforts to support national and
international efforts to establish and maintain effective
nuclear security have been mutually reinforcing.
The Summits have served as a useful mechanism to
consolidate political commitment at the highest level
to promote nuclear security across the globe, while the
Agency has played an important role in translating that
enhanced political momentum into concrete actions. As
we prepare for the fourth Nuclear Security Summit in
2016, we look forward to exploring ways to maximize
the synergy between the IAEA and the Nuclear Security
Summit process.
Turning to safeguards-related issues, my
delegation appreciates the Agency’s efforts to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards
implementation. We welcome the fact that the IAEA
Board of Governers took note of the Supplementary
Document to the report on the State-level concept. We
are convinced that the State-level concept will allow
the Agency to make better use of its resources by
concentrating efforts on areas of greater significance
for safeguards and on improving responsiveness to
changing circumstances. We are also encouraged by
the increasing number of comprehensive safeguards
agreements, additional protocols and amended smallquantities protocols in force.

03/11/2014

firm by its principle that North Korea’s nuclear ambition
cannot be tolerated, the Republic of Korea will continue
its efforts with the international community to achieve
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of North Korea.
Turning to the Iranian nuclear issue, we commend
the Agency for its efforts to actively engage Iran under
the Joint Statement on a Framework for Cooperation, of
November 2013, with the aim of resolving all present
and past verification issues relating to the Iranian
nuclear programme. We also appreciate the Agency’s
role in verifying and monitoring Iran’s voluntary
measures under the Joint Plan of Action between the
permanent five plus one and Iran in November 2013.
We call upon Iran to work closely with the Agency in
order to resolve all outstanding issues, including those
relating to possible military dimensions, in a timely
manner.
In the light of our full support for the IAEA’s work to
achieve our common goal of harnessing nuclear energy
in the service of peace and development for humanity,
the Republic of Korea is pleased to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/69/L.7, on the report of the IAEA.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt): I make this statement
on behalf of Mr. Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations.

However, the cases of non-compliance on the
part of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Iran and Syria continue to pose grave challenges to
the international non-proliferation regime and the
IAEA safeguards system. Of particular concern to
my delegation is North Korea’s continuous pursuit
of its nuclear capability. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted three nuclear tests
and publicly threatened the international society
by the announcement of further nuclear tests. In
addition, North Korea continued its nuclear activities
in Yongbyon, including the operation of a 5-megawatt
graphite-moderated reactor. As the IAEA Director
General aptly highlighted in his latest report of
September 2014, such actions are clear violations of
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Egypt appreciates its ongoing cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
the Agency’s fields of expertise, serving economic,
social and human development. That cooperation
is especially important as Egypt is developing a
programme to construct nuclear power plants to
produce electrical energy and to desalinate water in
order to meet the growing demands of its citizens,
including those of the industrial sector. There is broad
cooperation between Egypt and the IAEA to enhance
Egyptian capabilities and human resources within that
programme. In addition, there are various technical
cooperation programmes between Egypt and the
IAEA in other fields of nuclear applications, including
scientific research, food security, the environment,
cancer treatment, industry, mineral wealth and water
resources, to name just a few.

We once again urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to come into full compliance with
its obligations under all relevant Security Council
resolutions and commitments under the 19 September
2005 Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks. Standing

Egypt also welcomes cooperation with the IAEA in
the field of nuclear security, the prime responsibility for
which rests with the State at the national level. Egypt
reaffirms the central role of the IAEA in enhancing
the peaceful uses by member States of nuclear energy,

2/11

14-60259

03/11/2014

in parallel with efforts to enhance nuclear security. I
would like to point out that Egypt, in cooperation with
the Agency, is nearing the completion of a regional
Nuclear Security Training and Support Centre. Egypt
also welcomes cooperation with the Agency in the field
of nuclear safety. That work is of special importance
in guaranteeing national capabilities to deal with
nuclear and radiological emergencies. Egypt benefits
substantially from cooperating with the IAEA to
enhance its capacities in that regard.
Egypt would also like to highlight the importance
of the support provided by the IAEA through regional
cooperation agreements in the fields of nuclear energy
and technology. We refer in particular to the African
Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research,
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science
and Technology, in which Egypt actively participates,
which benefits regional cooperation within the African
continent as well as with Arab States.
With regard to matters concerning nuclear
non-proliferation, Egypt reiterates the importance
of enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Agency’s comprehensive safeguards. We would like
to recall in that regard the adoption by the fifty-eighth
General Conference of the IAEA of Egypt’s annual
resolution regarding the application of IAEA safeguards
in the Middle East. The implementation of the resolution
would ensure that the remaining non-member State in
the region accedes to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a non-nuclear-weapon
State, and would affirm the urgent need for that State
to agree forthwith to the application of comprehensive
full-scope Agency safeguards to its nuclear facilities
as an important confidence-building measure and as a
step in enhancing peace and security in the context of
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East.
Egypt is keen to enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Agency’s safeguards. It is vital
that the mechanisms and measures aimed at achieving
that goal are clear and transparent and are undertaken
with the participation of all IAEA member States.
Only that can guarantee full respect for the inalienable
right of all States to development, research, production
and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with article IV of the NPT. In that context,
Egypt would also like to affirm that the development of
Agency safeguards should not lead to the imposition of

A/69/PV.38

additional obligations exceeding the current contractual
obligations of member States.
Mr. Benítez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the important work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and we welcome the
new member States: Comoros, Djibouti, Guyana and
Vanuatu.
Technical cooperation is one of the main pillars
of the IAEA and should be given priority attention.
In the 2012-2013 cycle, Cuba reached a high rate of
implementation in its technical cooperation programme
with the IAEA, a rate of 97.34 per cent. Latin America
for its part, was the region that achieved the highest
rate of project execution, 89.3 per cent. Our region can
and should obtain more resources from the IAEA for
technical cooperation.
Cuba has updated its national programming
framework for technical cooperation during the 20142018 period, which is based on our country’s efforts in
the early detection and treatment of cancer, the leading
cause of death in Cuba. We have given particular
priority to the IAEA Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy. That Programme should be provided the
financial resources necessary to broaden its scope and
its results.
The criminal policy of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the Government
of the United States against Cuba for more than
five decades is affecting the implementation of our
technical cooperation programme with the IAEA.
The embargo significantly increases our country’s
difficulties in acquiring the necessary equipment for
technical cooperation projects. That raises costs and
delays implementation unnecessarily.
The effective management of nuclear security
does not allow for any exclusions or selectivity. The
international norms that govern nuclear security
should be adopted within the framework of the IAEA,
based on multilateral negotiations that are transparent
and inclusive, with the participation of all States.
Cuba welcomes the holding of the upcoming IAEA
International Conference on Nuclear Security, which
will take place in December 2016 with participation at
the ministerial level.
The entry into force of the Amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, which Cuba ratified last year, will give

14-602593/11

A/69/PV.38

greater protection to nuclear installations and materials
and facilitate cooperation between States to prevent and
combat related crimes. We will continue to enhance our
excellent cooperation with the IAEA in implementing
projects for improved nuclear physical security and the
control of our borders and the installations that have in
Category 1 and Category 2 radioactive materials. In the
context of the IAEA safeguards, for seven consecutive
years, our country has obtained double certification
and satisfactory results from IAEA inspections.
We must preserve the credibility of the IAEA’s
activities in the area of safeguards, ensuring impartial
and professional updates in that area. Cuba supports
the efforts to improve the efficiency of the safeguards,
provided that that does not affect the legitimate rights
of States nor establish any discriminatory or selective
practices. The State-level concept of safeguards must
be cautiously analysed by according due respect to the
concerns of States in that regard.
We need greater efficiency and effectiveness in
adopting IAEA decisions. That will involve enhancing
the General Conference as the supreme legislative body,
in which all member States participate. We also need to
examine in depth the membership and functions of the
Board of Governors.
We welcome the progress made in ongoing
negotiations between the IAEA and the Islamic Republic
of Iran. We encourage further progress in that process.
We also reaffirm our firm support for establishing a
Middle East nuclear-weapons-free zone. We deeply
regret the fact that the conference on that issue, planned
for 2012, has still not been held. That jeopardizes the
credibility of the entire system established by the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Cuba encourages the holding of that conference without
any further delay.
The existence of over 16,000 nuclear weapons
continues to seriously threaten humanity with
annihilation. That is why nuclear disarmament cannot
be a goal that is continually postponed and made
conditional. The only way to avoid the use, or threat
of use, of such weapons is their total elimination and
prohibition under strict international verification. It is
up to the IAEA to play an important role in achieving
that goal.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the fact that
Cuba will remain steadfast in the battle to achieve a

4/11

03/11/2014

world free of nuclear weapons. That is our commitment
to future generations.
Ms. Babio (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to express its appreciation of and
support for the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and to thank the Agency for its annual report
for 2013 (see A/69/255). Argentina believes that
the IAEA has played a central role with regard to in
non-proliferation and international cooperation for
scientific and technological development in the nuclear
field.
Its effective monitoring of nuclear activities is
essential, for example, to meet nuclear security goals.
Our country has steadily maintained that the leadership
role in articulating the future design of the nuclear
security architecture should be the responsibility of
the IAEA. It is the relevant body in the United Nations
system in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
Argentina believes that one of the pillars of the
Agency’s work is nuclear and radiation security and the
safe transport and handling of radioactive waste ‑ areas
that my country thinks are very important ‑ as well as
international cooperation in that field. The IAEA plays
a key role in promoting nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes, and our country contributes significantly to
the work of the Agency with experts and services, and
is a regional reference point.
Since the establishment of the IAEA in 1957,
Argentina has actively participated in its technical
cooperation programme through its technical agencies.
Our active presence there has allowed us to finance
a large number of national and regional projects, as
has our participation as a donor to third countries
through the IAEA, including to programmes within the
Regional Cooperation Agreement for the Promotion of
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
As a point of interest with regard to the technical
cooperation programme for the biennium 2014-2015,
we are participating in 20 technical cooperation
projects at the national, regional and interregional
levels. Argentina is also up to date with its financial
obligations for technical cooperation and has made
advance payments for its voluntary contributions to the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Fund for 2015 and 2016.

14-60259

03/11/2014

In addition, our country has actively participated
in the work of expert groups in the areas of power
reactors, research reactors, nuclear fuel cycles and
the development of infrastructure. I will highlight
the current promotion of regional training with the
promotion of the online platform of our main training
reactor, the RA-6. We also play a key role in LANET,
the Latin American Network for Education in Nuclear
Technology. Argentina believes that we should join
forces so as to generate more solid, effective and
sustainable long-term nuclear infrastructure.
International guarantees constitute another pillar
of the Agency. Along with nuclear and radiological
safety, they are especially important for enhancing
nuclear development. Argentina would like to reiterate
in concluding that those guarantees must be anchored
in an atmosphere of cooperation dialogue between the
Agency and member States.
Mr. Al-Taie (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My Government
would like to express its gratitude to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to its Director
General, Mr. Yukiya Amano, and its Secretariat for
producing the Agency’s annual report for 2013 (see
A/69/255). We appreciate the work of the Agency
during the period covered by the report, particularly
its activities concerning safeguards, verification,and
nuclear safety and security, and in the areas of science
and technology and technological cooperation. That
work allows member States to enjoy progress and
growth.
My delegation reasserts the inalienable rights of the
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) to produce and use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes and to develop cooperative projects
and national programmes in that field, in particular
in developing countries, free from the imposition by
certain States of obstacles, monopolies or conditions
that could endanger the interests of developing States.
We reaffirm the importance of the principles of
balance and mutual assistance in the activities of the
Agency with respect to budgetary matters. Any attempt
to reduce the technical cooperation programme or its
budget will not be favourably received. We hope that
funding resources will be predictable, safe and exact,
and that there will be some increase in the regular
budget so as to reduce the gap between resources and
needs. We hope that the working group responsible for
the budget, which began its work earlier this year, will
be successful.

A/69/PV.38

The use of new technology, along with developments
in the area of food security, disease prevention and
biomedical management, should bring benefits to all
peoples of the planet. We would therefore like to thank
the IAEA and its technical cooperation programme for
their training and development programmes for Arab
countries and Asia. The implementation rate of those
programmes in Iraq is approaching 100 per cent.
With a view to reducing radioactive waste, we
have been working for seven years with experts from
the IAEA and friendly countries, including European
Union countries, to dismantle nuclear sites built by
the previous Iraqi nuclear programme. Despite the
difficulties we have experienced with respect to security
and the environment, considerable progress has been
made in that area, The installations at Tuwaitha have
been decommissioned, and we have an action plan
agreed with the Agency for the remaining installations.
Our Government is committed to improving security
measures to spare future generations the effects of
nuclear pollution from destroyed sites or the remnants
of the 1991 and 2003 wars. All of the measures
adopted have followed IAEA guidelines. We have also
established a national commission to develop an overall
strategy for managing nuclear waste, and we hope to be
able to dispose of all such waste in a safe way.
We are also working on the peaceful use of nuclear
energy with a view to harnessing it for medical,
agricultural, industrial and environmental projects,
and we call on the Agency to provide further assistance
to Iraq in those areas. We reiterate that Iraq requires
international support to decontaminate its environment.
Iraqi national institutions are also assessing the
dangers of terrorist groups acquiring access to nuclear
installations and material. That is being monitored by
our national centre, which is headed by the Cabinet of
Ministers.
Iraqi institutions are continuing their efforts to
ensure the security and safety of our nuclear activities
in accordance with our laws and executive powers.
On 7 July, Iraq became a party to the Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. We have
also ratified the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We have
prepared a draft law to ratify the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive
Waste Management, which will be submitted to the
Parliament. In discussions with the Agency, we have

14-602595/11

A/69/PV.38

developed our nuclear safety and security programme
with a view to better protecting the safety of our
nuclear installations and nuclear material, as well as to
gathering information and necessary data in that area.
We have also made much progress towards ensuring
that we have a national system for the management of
dual-use and sensitive material subject to international
conventions.
We reiterate the importance of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It is vital that
the parties to the Treaty submit their installations to
inspection by the Agency. We also stress the need to
implement Security Council resolution 487 (1981),
which calls on Israel to put all its nuclear installations
under the Agency’s safeguards system, along with
paragraph 14 of Council resolution 687 (1991), calling for
a nuclear-weapon-free zone and a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. We stress as
well the need to implement the Final Document of the
1995 NPT Review Conference and the decision taken in
2010 to implement the 1995 resolution on establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
Regarding nuclear security, we pay tribute to
the leading role being played by the IAEA and wish
it success in implementing the Nuclear Security Plan
2014-2017.
The past three months have revealed a great deal
about terrorist organizations and their activities.
That has led the international community to reassess
the threat to international peace and security that
such groups represent and to adopt Security Council
resolutions whose implementation requires coordinated
efforts at the international level to combat terrorism
and to limit the sources of funding of such groups
and to combat their access to resources and weapons.
We salute the efforts of the five permanent members
of the Security Council and the European Union to
establish an international alliance to combat terrorist
organizations.
Ms. Bila (Ukraine): Ukraine supports the activities
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in promoting the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We also take a positive view of the Agency’s
activities in all the main statutory areas: nuclear
safety and security; nuclear science, technology and
applications; and safeguards and nuclear verification.
The Agency makes a significant contribution to the
achievement of global development goals.

6/11

03/11/2014

We acknowledge the Agency’s central role in
strengthening the global nuclear safety framework,
particularly in the light of the accidents at the Chernobyl
and Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plants. Ukraine
considers it important to ensure that the development
and use of nuclear energy takes place under strict safety
and security conditions. We have a solid track record on
maintaining safety and security at our nuclear facilities.
All of our nuclear power plants are currently operating
in regular mode, and we are in full compliance with our
obligations under the Convention on Nuclear Safety, as
was recently confirmed at the Sixth Review Meeting of
the Contracting Parties to the Convention.
We reiterate our strong support for the Agency’s
technical cooperation programme. Ukraine values
the Programme’s in the responsible development of
peaceful applications of nuclear technology in the
areas of human health, food and agriculture, water
management and strengthening nuclear and radiation
safety. It serves as a powerful tool for the exchange
of nuclear knowledge and capacity-building among
member States.
The IAEA’s regional and national technical
cooperation projects have contributed significantly
to nuclear safety and to improving the overall
effectiveness of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
in Ukraine. In 2014 and 2015 Ukraine has continued
and will continue to work with the IAEA in areas such
as radioactive waste management and nuclear power
plant decommissioning; developing decontamination,
recultivation and reconstruction infrastructure for
existing uranium mines and former uranium production
facilities; defining safety goals and regulatory
strategies for nuclear power plants; and strengthening
our radiation therapy dosimetry laboratory.
Minimizing the consequences of the Chernobyl
accident, as well as the social and economic
rehabilitation of territories contaminated by it, is a
priority for the Government of Ukraine. Construction
of a new safe confinement over the destroyed unit 4 of
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant is currently under
way, with completion planned for 2015. It will enable us
to transform the object shelter into an environmentally
and ecologically safe system. We continue to back
ongoing regional projects for Europe within the IAEA’s
technical cooperation programme aimed at supporting a
return to normal radiological environmental conditions
for the areas affected by the Chernobyl accident as well

14-60259

03/11/2014

as decommissioning and waste management for the
Chernobyl and A1 nuclear power plants.
Nuclear security is an important and integral part
of the Agency’s activity. Ukraine commends it for its
work to assist States, at their request, in enhancing
their national nuclear and radioactive security regimes
and improving their physical protection of nuclear
materials. We would like to emphasize the IAEA’s
important role in fostering international cooperation in
that area. Ukraine welcomes the IAEA’s adoption of its
Nuclear Security Plan 2014-2017.
Proceeding from the understanding that the
responsibility for nuclear security rests with individual
States, Ukraine wishes to emphasize that all of its
nuclear facilities are operating in regular mode.
The relevant Ukrainian authorities have undertaken
additional effective measures to ensure their nuclear
security, including the reinforced physical protection of
15 power units in operation at four nuclear power plant
sites.
Ukraine is fully committed to participating in
effective multilateral action aimed at combating the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
considers the universalization of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to be of the
utmost importance. We stress the paramount importance
of the IAEA safeguards for providing effective control
over sensitive materials and activities. The Agency’s
system of safeguards is a fundamental component of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. We believe
that, taken together, the comprehensive safeguards
agreement and its additional protocol constitute the best
standard for verification and that universal adherence
to both instruments strengthens the global nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
Ukraine supports the Agency’s efforts to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of its safeguards
system. We have taken note of the Director General’s
report in the Supplementary Document to the Report on
the Conceptualization and Development of Safeguards
Implementation at the State Level, and we commend
the Agency’s work aimed at further supporting the
effective application of safeguards and expanding the
possibility of accomplishing new tasks related to the
development of nuclear technologies.
Ukraine does not recognize the illegitimately
proclaimed Republic of Crimea or its illegal annexation
as a constituent entity by the Russian Federation.

A/69/PV.38

Ukraine’s sovereignty, political independence, unity
and territorial integrity were emphasized in resolution
68/262, on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, adopted
on 27 March. The Russian Federation’s illegal actions
have violated the universally recognized principles and
norms of international law, Russia’s obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations, and the bilateral and
multilateral treaties guaranteeing Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and the inviolability of its
borders.
The Russian Federation has flagrantly violated the
security assurances that it, together with the United
States and the United Kingdom, provided to Ukraine in
the memorandum signed in connection with Ukraine’s
accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. The ongoing occupation of part
of Ukraine’s territory – the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, where Ukrainian
nuclear facilities and material are located — undermines
the non-proliferation regime established by the Treaty,
to which Ukraine acceded as a non-nuclear-weapon
State by accepting, pursuant to article III of the Treaty,
the safeguards defined in the safeguards agreement and
additional protocol between Ukraine and the IAEA.
In that connection, the Ukrainian side emphasizes,
first, that according to the Constitution of Ukraine and
Ukraine’s law on securing the rights and freedoms
of citizens and the legal regime in the temporarily
occupied territory of Ukraine, Ukraine’s sovereignty
extends throughout its entire territory, which is
indivisible and inviolable within its existing borders.
Secondly, Ukraine retains jurisdiction over all
nuclear facilities and materials ‑ including the DR100 research reactor and other nuclear facilities at the
Sevastopol National University for Nuclear Energy and
Industry — which are the property of Ukraine and are
located in the temporarily occupied territory. Thirdly,
the provisions of the safeguards agreement between
Ukraine and the IAEA in connection with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons remain
fully effective and apply to all of the nuclear facilities
and materials in Ukraine, including those located in
the temporarily occupied territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol. Ukraine
supports the IAEA’s principled position on continuing
to apply the safeguards to Ukrainian nuclear facilities
and materials, in accordance with the norms of
international law and the IAEA Statute and based on
the fact that the Autonomous Republic of Crimea is an
integral part of Ukraine.

14-602597/11

A/69/PV.38

I would like to emphasize that Ukraine prohibits
throughout its territory — including the temporarily
occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol — the deployment of nuclear weapons and
diversion of Ukrainian nuclear materials and facilities
for military purposes, including the DR-100 research
reactor and other nuclear facilities of the Sevastopol
National University for Nuclear Energy and Industry.
We therefore urge the Russian side to abstain from any
actions that might lead to violations of the nuclear-free
status of the part of Ukraine’s territory occupied by the
Russian Federation and might hamper the possibility of
extending to Ukraine’s nuclear facilities and materials
the 21 February 1985 agreement between the former
Soviet Union and the Agency and its additional protocol
of 22 March 2000, .
The Fukushima Daiichi accident in 2011 resulted in
widespread concern about the safety of nuclear power
plants worldwide and triggered discussions about
the feasibility of nuclear energy as a source of power
generation. We would like to reiterate that nuclear
power will continue to be an important component of
Ukraine’s energy strategy in the middle and long term
and will continue to serve as a basis for the sustainable
development of our national economy. Its growing
importance has been reflected in the updated energy
strategy of Ukraine for the period until 2030.
In conclusion, we would like to join other
delegations in welcoming the IAEA report to the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly (see A/69/255)
and to express our appreciation for the work done by
the Agency.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
expressing my delegation’s sincere thanks to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for presenting the Agency’s comprehensive
annual report (see A/69/255) and for his statement
(see A/69/PV.37), both of which contain important
information about the activities of the Agency during
2013 and 2014. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with Ambassador Amano and to strengthening
the established cooperation between Indonesia and
the IAEA.
The IAEA has a vital role to play in assisting
and promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear science
and technology, especially in developing countries,
including Indonesia. For Indonesia, nuclear technology
is a valuable tool for addressing many aspects of our

8/11

03/11/2014

national development programmes, particularly in the
areas of health, food and agriculture, water resources
management, environmental protection and industry.
Among the applications for ensuring food security
and improving people’s livelihoods, Indonesia has
been using radiation-induced mutation and other
nuclear and radioisotope techniques to increase crop
quality and productivity. We are also enhancing
irradiation technology applications for the sanitary and
phytosanitary treatment of agricultural products.
We continue to have great confidence in the
usefulness of nuclear technologies and the synergies
fostered by international cooperation in the nuclear
field, for which the work of the IAEA is critical.
Indonesia commends the Agency’s various activities in
the field of applying nuclear technology to the areas
of food security and agriculture, disease prevention
and control, water resources and environmental
management, and radioisotope and radiation technology.
We also commend the progress made by the Agency in
nuclear energy development and welcome the assistance
provided to member States interested in launching and
expanding nuclear power programmes.
Owing to the growth of the industrial sector in
Indonesia, there is increasing demand for energy. We
are determined to harness nuclear energy as part of
the national energy mix in order to secure our energy
supply, and we intend to introduce nuclear power plants
for that purpose. We are especially thankful to the
IAEA for providing Indonesia with technical assistance
in infrastructure development, which is one of the
important steps in the introduction of nuclear power
plants. Indeed, the IAEA Department of Technical
Cooperation plays an indispensable role as the Agency’s
main vehicle for delivering on the Agency’s mandate
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear technology,
especially in the developing regions of the world. There
is a need for all of us to continue supporting the IAEA’s
resources for technical cooperation.
Ensuring that nuclear science and technology are
used exclusively for peaceful purposes is a statutory
function of the Agency. We therefore appreciate
the IAEA’s activities to verify that States are fully
complying with their non-proliferation obligations
and to confirm that nuclear material is being used for
peaceful purposes. We are convinced that the Agency’s
safeguards have contributed to strengthening collective
security and have helped to create an environment
conducive to nuclear cooperation.

14-60259

03/11/2014

With respect to the IAEA’s function in the area
of nuclear safety, Indonesia welcomes its activities
undertaken to establish safety standards. We recognize
the Agency’s central role in promoting international
cooperation, coordinating international efforts to
strengthen global nuclear safety, and providing
expertise and advice in that field. We also welcome
the progress made on the implementation of the IAEA
Action Plan on Nuclear Safety. While the primary
responsibility for nuclear safety is in the hands of each
State, we believe that the IAEA’s role in assuring the
safety of all nuclear activities worldwide should be
enhanced and strengthened to the extent mandated by
its Statute.
Turning to the Agency’s activities in the area of
nuclear security, our view is that while the responsibility
of ensuring nuclear security within a State lies primarily
with its Government, international cooperation and
coordination to ensure nuclear security worldwide are
crucial, and the IAEA again has a central role to play
in that regard. We are pleased that the IAEA has helped
countries to reduce the risk of terrorists obtaining
nuclear or radioactive materials and to prevent sabotage
at nuclear facilities.
To conclude, we reiterate our appreciation of the
IAEA, as its activities have greatly contributed to a
more prosperous, secure and safe world. The IAEA
needs our continued and strong support for fulfilling
the mandate enshrined in its Statute, and Indonesia will
continue to play its role in that regard.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 86. We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/69/L.7.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. An Myong Hun (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to state its position on
draft resolution A/69/L.7, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”. This statement
will also constitute my delegation’s reply to irrelevant
and even hostile statements made by some delegations,
including those of Japan and South Korea, concerning
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. The
delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic of

A/69/PV.38

Korea rejects those statements and therefore also rejects
the draft resolution.
The possession of nuclear deterrence by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the result of
the hostility of the United States against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is why the solution
to the nuclear issue depends entirely on the withdrawal
of the United States’ hostile policy. Nevertheless, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) submits
every year to the General Assembly the same partial
and unjust resolution, in step with the hostile policy
of the United States, designed to disarm and destroy
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Since the
IAEA’s action is devoid of impartiality and objectivity,
it has lost its integrity.
It was the United States and the IAEA that created
suspicions about our peaceful nuclear facilities, and
it was also they who forced my country to take selfdefensive measures to withdraw from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We have never
recognized the resolutions of the Security Council and
the Board of Governors of the IAEA on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. As we have made clear, the
nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula is the product of
the United States’ hostile policy and its nuclear threats
against my country, and we were compelled to possess
nuclear deterrence in order to defend our sovereignty
and right to exist.
As long as the United States hostile policy persists,
peace and security on the Korean peninsula and in
its surrounding region cannot be expected, nor can a
solution to the nuclear issue. The hostile policy of the
United States, including the aggressive joint military
exercises against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, must be totally eliminated if the danger of
nuclear war is to be removed from the Korean peninsula.
If the United States continues to threaten and
blackmail the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
with nuclear weapons, we will continue to exercise
the right to self-defence by strengthening our nuclear
deterrence capabilities. If the IAEA wants to see a
proper solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula, it must take a fair stance by questioning the
move of the United States, which created the nuclear
issue on the Korean peninsula and continues to threaten
my country with nuclear weapons.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
delegation wishes to again put on record its

14-602599/11

A/69/PV.38

03/11/2014

opposition to draft resolution A/69/L.7 concerning the
IAEA report.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.7, entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/69/L.7: Colombia,
Iceland, Liechtenstein, the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation and San Marino.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.7?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 69/7).

A/69/L.7

was

adopted

The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who have requested to speak in
exercise the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Lithuania exercises
its right of reply with regard to the statement delivered
by the representative of Belarus (see A/69/PV.37).
Countries developing new nuclear energy projects are
expected to follow the principles of transparency and
responsibility. Each country has the right to develop
nuclear energy, provided that international obligations
on nuclear safety are not forgotten and national
decisions are taken in a broader context of possible
transboundary implications. That is why we express
our concern when nuclear energy installations in closed
neighbourhoods are being constructed without the
proper implementation of international conventions,
nuclear safety standards and dialogue with neighbours.
The lack of transparency and essential information,
especially on site selection, seismic evaluation and
emergency preparedness plans, are disturbing.

10/11

Confidence-building and maximum safety are crucial
for nuclear energy development. The implementation of
the safety standards of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), adherence to the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and cooperation with specialized IAEA
missions for the whole nuclear fuel cycle, including site
safety, should become inseparable from any nuclear
power programme. Therefore, acknowledging that it
is our common interest to ensure a maximum safety
level in nuclear power plants, we call on all countries
implementing nuclear energy projects to use the
instruments provided by the IAEA and international
conventions from the very beginning of the project in
order to guarantee a safe environment and the safe use
of nuclear energy.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Frankly, we are amazed that the Ukrainian delegation
has once again used any available opportunity presented
by the United Nations platform for its rhetoric and
insinuations and for raising issues that are not relevant
to the agenda item. I do not wish to enter into polemics,
but I need to make a few comments with regard to the
status of nuclear installations in Crimea.
The agreement of 21 February 1985 between the
Soviet Union and the International Atomic Energy
Agency and its additional protocol of 22 March 2000
have covered all the territory of the Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol as subjects of the Russian
Federation since 18 March. Russia, acting in a spirit
of openness and cooperation, has worked with the
Secretariat of the IAEA on the status of the nuclear
installations in the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol
and on establishing peaceful conditions in which IAEA
safeguards can be possible, in accordance with the
agreement between us and the IAEA. Therefore, the
situation is fully in line with international law.
Secondly, according to the voluntary decision of the
people of Crimea to unite with Russia, in the referendum
of 16 March, which was carried out in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and the agreement
of 18 March to absorb Crimea into the Russian
Federation, the territory of the Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol are under the jurisdiction
of the Russian Federation. Therefore, Russia has taken
full responsibility for nuclear installations in its new
territories. Furthermore, the Russian Federation is
ready to provide the Agency, if it so requests, with any
information on the nuclear material being used. That is

14-60259

03/11/2014

all provided for in the agreement between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the IAEA of 1985.
Regarding the suggestion that the actions of
the Russian Federation highlight the instability of
the whole concept of negative safety guarantees for
non-nuclear States and thereby destroy the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, it is worth noting that the
only common component of the Budapest Memorandum
and the concept of negative guarantees in the classical
meaning is the commitment not to use nuclear weapons
or threaten to use them against non-nuclear-weapon
States. The Russian Federation’s promise to Ukraine in
that regard has in no way been violated. The remaining
commitments under the Budapest Memorandum
represent the principles of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and have nothing to do
with the concept of negative safeguards in particular
or with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons in general. Therefore, claims that the actions

A/69/PV.38

of the Russian Federation undermine the nuclear
non-proliferation regime are inconsistent and not in
good faith.
Ms. Bila (Ukraine): I am not going to get into a
long speech to explain how what has just been said are
lies. I will briefly explain that the agreement between
Ukraine and the International Atomic Energy Agency is
the main document regulating and providing safeguards
relating to objects located on the occupied territory, and
that was determined by the territory. Therefore, it is not
for anyone in this Hall to speak about any documents
between Russia and the Agency concerning objects that
are on Ukrainian territory.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 86?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

14-6025911/11
