United Nations

A/RES/56/139

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 115

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/579)]

56/139. The girl child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 55/78 of 4 December 2000 and all relevant resolutions,
including the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women, in
particular those relevant to the girl child,
Recalling also all relevant United Nations conferences and the Declaration and
Agenda for Action adopted by the World Congress against Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children, held at Stockholm from 27 to 31 August 1996, 1 as well as
the outcome documents of the recent five-year reviews of the implementation of the
Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and
Development 2 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit for Social
Development, 3
Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and the violation
of the rights of the girl child, which often result in less access for girls to education,
nutrition and physical and mental health care and in girls enjoying fewer of the
rights, opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys and often
being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic
exploitation and to violence and harmful practices, such as female infanticide,
incest, early marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital mutilation,
Recognizing the need to achieve gender equality so as to ensure a just and
equitable world for girls,
Deeply concerned that, in situations of poverty, war and armed conflict, girl
children are among the victims most affected and that thus their potential for full
development is limited,
Concerned that the girl child has furthermore become a victim of sexually
transmitted diseases and the human immunodeficiency virus, which affect the
quality of her life and leave her open to further discrimination,

_______________
1

A/51/385, annex.
Resolution S-21/2, annex.
3
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
2

01 48476

A/RES/56/139

Reaffirming the equal rights of women and men as enshrined, inter alia, in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 5
Reaffirming also the political declaration 6 and further actions and initiatives to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 7 adopted by the General
Assembly at its twenty-third special session entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”,
Reaffirming further the Dakar Framework for Action adopted at the World
Education Forum, 8
Reaffirming the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS adopted by the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth special session, 9
1.
Stresses the need for full and urgent implementation of the rights of the
girl child as guaranteed to her under all human rights instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 4 as well as the need for universal
ratification of those instruments;
2.
Urges States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women; 10
3.
Welcomes the adoption of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict11 and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 12 and invites States to
consider signing and ratifying the Optional Protocols as a matter of priority with a
view to their entry into force as soon as possible;
4.
Welcomes also the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative launched
by the Secretary-General at the World Education Forum;
5.
Urges all Governments and the United Nations system to strengthen
efforts bilaterally and with international organizations and private sector donors in
order to achieve the goals of the World Education Forum, in particular that of
eliminating gender disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and to
implement the United Nations Girls’ Education Initiative as a means of reaching this
goal, and reaffirms the commitment contained in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration; 13

_______________
4

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
6
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
7
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
8
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
9
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
10
Resolution 54/4, annex.
11
Resolution 54/263, annex I.
12
Ibid., annex II.
13
See resolution 55/2.
5

2

A/RES/56/139

6.
Calls upon all States to take measures to address the obstacles that
continue to affect the achievement of the goals set forth in the Beijing Platform for
Action, 14 as contained in paragraph 33 of the further actions and initiatives to
implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,7 where appropriate,
including the strengthening of national mechanisms to implement policies and
programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, to enhance coordination among
responsible institutions for the realization of the human rights of girls, as indicated
in the further actions and initiatives;
7.
Urges all States to take all necessary measures and to institute legal
reforms to ensure the full and equal enjoyment by the girl child of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms, to take effective action against violations of those rights
and freedoms and to base programmes and policies for the girl child on the rights of
the child;
8.
Urges States to enact and enforce strictly laws to ensure that marriage is
entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses, to enact
and enforce strictly laws concerning the minimum legal age of consent and the
minimum age for marriage and to raise the minimum age for marriage where
necessary;
9.
Urges all States to fulfil their obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, as well as the commitment to implement the Beijing
Platform for Action;
10. Also urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from
all forms of violence, including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female
genital mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
child prostitution and child pornography, and to develop age-appropriate safe and
confidential programmes and medical, social and psychological support services to
assist girls who are subjected to violence;
11. Calls upon all States and international and non-governmental
organizations, individually and collectively, to implement further the Beijing
Platform for Action, in particular the strategic objectives relating to the girl child
and including the further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action;
12. Urges States to take special measures for the protection of war-affected
girls and in particular to protect them from sexually transmitted diseases, such as
human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS),
and gender-based violence, including rape and sexual abuse, torture, sexual
exploitation, abduction and forced labour, paying special attention to refugee and
displaced girls, and to take into account the special needs of the war-affected girl
child in the delivery of humanitarian assistance and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes;

_______________
14
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

3

A/RES/56/139

13. Urges all States and the international community to respect, protect and
promote the rights of the child, taking into account the particular vulnerabilities of
the girl child in pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations, and calls for
special initiatives designed to address all of the rights and needs of war-affected
girls;
14. Welcomes the holding of the International Conference on War-Affected
Children at Winnipeg, Canada, from 10 to 17 September 2000, and takes note with
appreciation of the Winnipeg Agenda for War-Affected Children; 15
15. Urges States to formulate comprehensive, multidisciplinary and
coordinated national plans, programmes or strategies to eliminate all forms of
violence against women and girls, which should be widely disseminated and should
provide targets and timetables for implementation, as well as effective domestic
enforcement procedures through the establishment of monitoring mechanisms
involving all parties concerned, including consultations with women’s
organizations, giving attention to the recommendations relating to the girl child of
the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on violence against
women, its causes and consequences;
16. Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media, and
non-governmental organizations to promote human rights education and the full
respect for and enjoyment of the human rights of the girl child, inter alia, through
the translation, production and dissemination of age-appropriate information
material on those rights to all sectors of society, in particular to children;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, 16 to ensure that all organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, individually and collectively, in particular
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Development Fund for Women, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, take into account the rights and
the particular needs of the girl child in the country programme of cooperation in
accordance with the national priorities, including through the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework; 17
18. Requests all human rights treaty bodies, special procedures and other
human rights mechanisms of the Commission on Human Rights and its
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights to adopt
regularly and systematically a gender perspective in the implementation of their
mandates and to include in their reports information on the qualitative analysis of
violations of the human rights of women and girls, and encourages the strengthening
of cooperation and coordination in that regard;

_______________
15

A/55/467-S/2000/973, annex.
Formerly known as the Administrative Committee on Coordination (see Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321
of 24 October 2001).
17
See A/53/226, paras. 72–77, and A/53/226/Add.1, paras. 88–98.
16

4

A/RES/56/139

19. Calls upon States and international and non-governmental organizations
to mobilize all necessary resources, support and efforts to realize the goals, strategic
objectives and actions set out in the Beijing Platform for Action and the further
actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action;
20. Stresses the importance of a substantive assessment of the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action with a life-cycle perspective so as
to identify gaps and obstacles in the implementation process and to develop further
actions for the achievement of the goals of the Platform;
21. Welcomes the convening of the Second World Congress against
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, at Yokohama, Japan, from 17 to
20 December 2001, and the regional consultative meetings for the preparation
thereof, which aim to review the progress made in implementing the Declaration
and Agenda for Action adopted by the first World Congress1 and to strengthen
actions to eradicate commercial sexual exploitation of children, and invites Member
States and observers to ensure their representation at the Second World Congress at
a high political level;
22. Encourages the regional commissions and other regional organizations to
carry out activities in support of the Second World Congress;
23. Stresses the importance of integrating a gender perspective and of
considering the needs and rights of the girl child in the work of the special session
of the General Assembly on children.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

5
