S/PV.7705

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7705th meeting

Monday, 6 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
European Union

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-15998 (E)
*1615998*

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
European Union
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mogherini.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like to thank the French presidency of the
Council for having organized this briefing. This year
marks the second time we have met under this agenda
item during a French presidency. That may not be a
coincidence, especially given France’s ability to build
the kind of global unity that brought us success in the
Climate Conference in Paris in December. I believe that
this is an excellent opportunity to exchange views on
a cooperation of truly strategic value to the European
Union and the United Nations.
I also wish to extend my best wishes to our Muslim
colleagues and friends for the onset of Ramadan, which
begins today.
(spoke in English)
When we last discussed cooperation between our
European Union and the United Nations a year ago (see
S/PV.7439), I had just taken office as the Union’s High
Representative and it was my first time in the Security
Council. Since then, I have came back to the Chamber
also to discuss migration and our fight against terrorism.
I cannot count all the exchanges, meetings and common
work I have done with United Nations agencies all
around the world, and with so many of those present
her in different multilateral formats.
I believe that this is the only way we have — as
Europeans andresponsible members of the international
2/28

06/06/2016

community — to face these difficult times in the history
of the world. The entire Middle East is in turmoil, with
so many forces trying to redefine the regional balance
of power and so many people calling for an end to their
suffering. Inequalities are on the rise in large parts of the
globe. Climate change is challenging the economy and
security of large parts of our world. An unprecedented
number of people is on the move. Tens of millions are
fleeing war, looking for a chance of survival or for a
better life. We often say that Europe is facing a refugee
crisis. Let us always remember that this is first and
foremost a crisis for the men, women and children who
are going through it as they flee their homes. And it
concerns the whole world, not just Europe.
But indeed our own continent faces a great deal
of challenges. Our cities have been hit by terrorist
attacks, just like so many other places in the world,
from Africa and Asia to America. Hatred and violence
are growing within our own societies. Together with
inequality and insecurity, xenophobia, Islamophobia
and anti-Semitism are also on the rise. In times like
these, we need each other. We need all nations to come
together, united. We need the United Nations, because
only together can we draw the way forward and make
sure that tomorrow will be better than today.
One year ago, I told the Security Council that our
European Union believes in multilateralism and in the
United Nations. Today 1 can add that multilateralism
will be one of the core principles and priorities of
our new global strategy for foreign and security
policy, which I will present in the coming weeks. But
what truly matters to all of us is that we are turning
this commitment to multilaterlism into practice on a
daily basis.
This has also been possible thanks to United Nations
leadership, starting with the Secretary General and
to the whole senior leadership of the United Nations.
Our cooperation in these months and years has been
truly excellent and makes such a difference in so many
places in the world.
Our European Union has put multilateralism at the
core of our common external action. We have learned
the hard way that unilateralism does not pay off. This is
no time for global policemen. This is no time for lonely
warriors. If we want to finally put an end to the many
crises we face — and most of all, to prevent new ones
before they explode — our only hope is to work as truly
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7705

united nations. The hardest the task, the stronger our
cooperation must be.

make the two-State solution impossible to achieve. We
would risk the collapse of all hope.

In a moment I will talk about Syria, Libya and other
crises that are constantly at the top of our common
agenda, and also of the news cycle. But let me start by
addressing a much older conflict that will soon enter
its eighth decade. Let us not wait for the next open
war between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Because
that is what will happen if they do not go back now to
meaningful negotiations. The proliferation of conflicts
and crises in the region is not a reason to forget about the
fate of the Israelis and the Palestinians. On the contrary,
the new security threats in the Middle East should push
everyone to renew our efforts towards ending this
conflict. This is first and foremost in the interests of
every single Israeli and every single Palestinian, and
the events in the rest of the region make it even more
urgent than in the past.

The Israeli and the Palestinian leaders have a
responsibility towards their people, the region and the
world. They can halt destructive policies and rhetoric,
reverse the trend, and finally rebuild the conditions for
meaningful negotiations. The future of the situation is
in the hands of the two peoples and of their leaders.
Right now, we all know that there is no peace process at
all and the international community cannot just sit and
wait for the next war.

A further escalation, especially around the holy
sites in Jerusalem, would have grave consequences
for the whole region. Contrarily, a peaceful solution
to the conflict, with bold leadership demonstrated by
both sides, could unlock genuine regional cooperation.
The Israelis would benefit from it, and the Palestinians
would benefit from it. The entire Middle East, Europe
and the world — we would all benefit from peace. It
would set a new paradigm of cooperation in the Middle
East. Peace in the holy places would send such a
powerful message to the whole world.
That is why I made the Middle East peace
process — if we can still refer to a “peace process” — a
top priority for our action at the very moment when
the prospect of two States is moving beyond reach.
The possibility of a secure State of Israel and a viable
State of Palestine living side by side is fading away.
And together with the prospect of two States, peace
would also move beyond reach. The trends could not
be more clear.
First, violence and incitement are not just inflicting
terrible human suffering; they amplify the mistrust
between the two communities. Secondly, Israel’s policy
of settlements systematically erodes the prospects for
a viable two-State solution. It also raises serious and
legitimate questions about the Israeli leadership’s true
ultimate goals. Thirdly, the lack of unity between the
Palestinian factions is still a major stumbling block.
Each of these trends — alone and/or combined — could

We in Europe keep believing that the entire world
has to do its part. Last year, our European Union
pushed to revitalize the Middle East Quartet. We have
had several meetings at the principals’ level to draw
together the way forward. Here in New York, we
invited Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the League of
Arab States to also join the discussion. The cooperation
among our envoys has proceeded for months, so let me
thank the United Nations, the United States and Russia
for all the common work we have done so far.
A few days ago in Paris, we discussed how the
international community can help and accompany this
work. As Council members know, the Quartet’s report
will be made public very soon. We will describe very
frankly the immediate obstacles to direct talks and
the policies that threaten the viability of a two-State
solution. We will also make clear recommendations on
the way forward with one main goal — to recreate some
confidence between the two sides and the conditions to
go back to meaningful negotiations. We are convinced
that the current stalemate is not sustainable for anyone.
There is no status quo, and we all know it. If the
situation does not improve, it will get worse. And that
is something no one — no one, first of all the Israelis
and the Palestinians — can afford.
We need to be as realistic as we can in analysing the
difficulties, risks and threats of the regiona and today’s
world, but we also have to recognize the signs of hope
when we see them or when we manage to build them.
This is a strong reminder that change — and change for
the better — is possible if the international community
is united and focused.
In July last year, the Council endorsed our deal on
Iran’s nuclear programme. The deal in itself was a major
success of patient multilateral diplomacy. Six months
later, the deal was implemented, and we keep monitoring
the full implementation of all its parts, counting also

16-159983/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

on the good cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency. In parallel, the European Union is
working to make sure that the benefits of the deal reach
the Iranian people and improve regional cooperation.
Because after the deal, we all knew that we had to
build on the positive momentum. In November we met
again in Vienna, where the deal was signed with the
new International Syria Support Group. For the first
time since the beginning of the war, all regional and
international actors were finally at the same table.
Since then, Staffan de Mistura has been doing a
truly amazing job, and much has been achieved. But
we all know that the process has come to a critical
point. It is now vital that humanitarian aid reaches a
greater number of areas. It is vital for the too many
people in need for help, but it is also vital for starting
real negotiations among the Syrian parties in Geneva.
We know how fragile the whole process is — and likely
will continue to be. So much blood has been shed, and
national reconciliation will not be easy at all. But there
is no other way to stop the carnage, give hope to Syrians
and defeat Da’esh.
Europe is doing its part. We reopened our
humanitarian office in Damascus. We are engaged
on the ground as the main donor to Syria and the
Syrian people. And we play our role in encouraging
and supporting the political track. Staffan de Mistura
knows he can always count on our full and active
support. I was personally in Geneva to meet with the
parties, at his request, during the last round of talks.
All international actors need to do whatever they can
to make the cessation of hostilities work, the delivery
of humanitarian aid continue and the negotiations start
so as to finally move towards a political transition for
Syria. Our divisions here in the Chamber and in the
international community will benefit only Da’esh and
serve chaos.
Having mentioned Da’esh, let me also say a word
about Iraq, which must also remain high on our agenda
as a centrepiece for stabilization in the broader region.
Good progress has been made in the military campaign.
The fight in Fallujah is ongoing as we speak. But there
are also concerns. The liberation of areas must be
followed by rapid stabilization and the restoration of
services. The European Union is doing its part in Iraq,
and will continue to contribute to both humanitarian
and stabilization needs.
4/28

06/06/2016

The campaign against Da’esh needs to be framed
by an adequate political settlement. We continue
to support Prime Minister Abadi’s efforts in that
respect. We hope that all political players will seek a
swift resolution to the current political impasse. As
the international community, we remain committed
to the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country.
The unity of the international community and of
the region is also central when it comes to Libya. I
know some had lost hope that the Presidency Council
would ever be formed, or arrive in Tripoli. But it has,
and that would not have been possible without the
Security Council’s unity and the excellent work of
Martin Kobler. I know he is briefing the Council in
a few hours, therefore I will limit my remarks to the
European Union’s work on Libya, in strong coordination
with him.
In Vienna last month, we all restated our support
for the Government of National Accord. The European
Union has started to mobilize a package of €100 million
to make Libya’s new start possible and help Libyans
to live their lives in safety and dignity, which is what
they deserve. Last month, the Libyan Government
invited the European Union to provide training to
the Libyan coast guard and navy. I spoke with Prime
Minister Serraj about the modalities just last Friday.
For us, it is key that anything we do be planned and
delivered according to Libya’s full ownership and
Libya’s priorities. Training the Libyan coast guard and
navy will be an opportunity to put Libyans in a position
to save lives at sea, dismantle the criminal economy
of human smugglers, control the country’s territorial
waters effectively and create a safe environment for
Libyan fishermen.
Let me say a few more words on how we are working
in the Mediterranean. Last spring, when we decided to
launch a naval operation — Operation Sophia — against
the traffickers’ networks, we asked for a Security
Council resolution to endorse our mission. Council
members were impressively united in doing so, and I
thank them for that. Since then, tens of thousands of
lives have been saved, over 100 hundred assets seized
and many traffickers brought to justice. On 23 May, we
decided to extend operation’s mandate by a year.
Now, once again, we are asking the Security
Council to adopt a draft resolution on authorizing
Operation Sophia to enforce the United Nations arms
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

embargo on the high seas and off the coast of Libya.
This is the course of action that the European Union has
chosen: constant coordination with the United Nations
to best serve our collective interests, that is, those of the
international community as a whole. This is the place
where international action should be discussed, decided
and authorized. I can only hope that the Council will
once again do the right thing and help us make the
Mediterranean a safer place for everyone, starting with
our Libyan friends.
With so many crises taking up the headlines,
Yemen risks not geting the attention it deserves. Yet
the need for a political solution and for addressing the
dire humanitarian situation is just as urgent there as it
is elsewhere in the region and the world. We support
the work of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. Progress was made during the peace talks
in Kuwait, which I would like to thank for hosting the
talks over the past five weeks. I encourage the parties
and players in the region to seriously engage with a
constructive attitude.
While we deal with Syria, Libya and Yemen and
keep our focus on the Middle East peace process we
cannot forget other crises, including at the eastern
borders of the European Union. Ending the conflict in
Ukraine remains a top priority for the European Union.
All parts of the Minsk agreements have to be fully
implemented by all parties if we want the situation in
eastern Ukraine to calm down. The United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
doing a very valuable job in mapping and organizing
humanitarian assistance there. The United Nations
reports on human rights in Ukraine that are financed by
the European Union are also of great help in monitoring
the situation.
The European Union will continue to stand for
Ukraine’s territorial integrity and does not recognize
the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. We
are working closely with Kyiv to help them achieve
the reforms that the country and the people so urgently
needs. In that connection, let me mention the important
constitutional amendments approved just days ago,
which will improve the efficiency and independence of
the judiciary. They really matter because they can also
build momentum for the adoption of the amendments
on decentralization and other reforms. It is an important
achievement. It is also an important opportunity to
move the country forward and to address the needs of
all the citizens of Ukraine.

S/PV.7705

Our cooperation with the United Nations goes well
beyond our immediate region. The more I travel the
world — which I am doing quite a lot — the more I
realize that many of our partners already consider the
European Union as a global security provider. Colombia
might sound like a far away place to many Europeans.
Yet we are following very closely the negotiations that
could put an end to one of the world’s oldest conflicts.
I was there just a few days ago to sign some important
agreements, thereby already lending our concrete
support to the peace process, and in particular to the
demining efforts. I confirmed to President Santos
Calderón our willingness to engage even more on the
implementation of the deal as soon as it was reached.
Our coordination with the planned United Nations
observer mission will be crucial.
Moving to the other side of the world, next
October we will host in Brussels a major international
conference on Afghanistan. After so many years, a
peaceful Afghanistan will be possible only if regional
Powers and the international community unite and
support the peace and reconciliation process and the
economic and social development of the country. On
that and on many other files, the unity of the Security
Council is one of the most powerful assets in our hands
for promoting peace and security. For instance, greater
involvement by the Council in monitoring the security
situation in Burundi would be most welcome, while
a United Nations police mission could deter further
threats to peace in the country. The European Union
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations to
that end.
Our common work can build on so much positive
experience. Take the Central African Republic, where
the European Union and the United joined forces
to restore the basic functioning of the police and
gendarmerie. Our efforts contributed to the political
transition and the instalment of new, democratically
elected authorities.
The European Union continues to support the
work of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of United Nations agencies. The current political
uncertainty risks evolving into a full-blown crisis, with
spillover effects in an already fragile region.
In fact, our common work cannot be limited to
crisis management, even if these difficult times require
much of it. We in the European Union remain convinced

16-159985/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

that the best way to address a crisis is to prevent it. This
is an area where the United Nations and the European
Union can do so much together.
When we discussed Agenda 2030 and the
Sustainable Development Goals, it was clear to
everyone that Europe and the United Nations shared the
very same approach to security and development. When
we invest in growth, we are also investing in security.
Our cooperation has started to yield results.
The Paris climate agreement and the Sustainable
Development Goals are opportunities to overturn a
narrow and short-term concept of security. I believe
that everyone knows how much our European Union
has worked for these deals to come true, for this
philosophy of a long-term, comprehensive approach to
be shared, and we are now working hard to ensure the
full implementation of the deals we achieved last year.
The same long-term, comprehensive approach
has now become an integral part of our response to
migration and the current refugee crisis. I have already
mentioned our Operation Sophia and the great job it
is doing together with Frontex, with the Italian vessels
and our partners, including NATO, to save lives and
chase human smugglers. But there is much, much more
than that.
We need to prevent those lives from being put in
danger, both at sea, where we see them, and in the
desert, where thousands die far from our eyes and our
television screens. This is a common responsibility that
we share.
That is why tomorrow I will be in Strasbourg to
present, together with my colleagues in the European
Commission, the plan for a new migration partnership
with our friends in our region and in Africa. Migration
and displacement are one of the great challenges of our
era. Our response is the measure of our very humanity.
There are some key factors that Europe cannot
overlook and that will be central to our new
partnerships. We too often forget that countries such
as Ethiopia or Kenya, let alone Lebanon and Jordan,
host huge numbers of refugees. Hospitality is never an
easy task; we experience this reality every single day.
The closure of the Dadaab camp in Kenya could have
dramatic humanitarian consequences; our European
Union is following the issue very closely, together
with the United Nations and all relevant agencies. For
these reasons we will further reinforce our trust funds,
6/28

06/06/2016

which are already providing health care and food to
those in need and are creating jobs for the refugees
and — let me underline this, because I believe that it
is very important to make hospitality sustainable — for
the host communities.
But we also know that public money alone will
never be enough. So a key component of our migration
partnerships will be to attract private investment on key
projects. Africa in particular has a huge potential for
growth, and we must manage to get the private sector
on board.
We must also offer opportunities: the best way to
dismantle the illegal business is to work on legal avenues
for human mobility. Europe needs to do its share, but
we also count on our partners here — in the United
Nations and in the Security Council in particular — to
do the same, to share responsibility. I look forward
to the summit in September, where migration will
be recognized for what it is: a global phenomenon
concerning all of us and requiring a global answer.
Strong partnerships are the building blocks of our
foreign policy in the European Union. All of today’s
challenges transcend borders and national sovereignties.
None of us alone can carry the weight of the world on
our shoulders. But we all have a role to play, together
with others, in a multilateral framework, in a spirit of
partnership and friendship. So our European Union
will seek increasingly to reinforce old ties and create
new ones. This is true in our bilateral relations, but it
is even more true at the regional and global levels. A
network of regional alliances can truly contribute to
global peace and security.
That is why we invest in regional networks and
organizations. For instance, as the Council is aware,
we have supported African-led peace efforts through
the Peace Facility for Africa since the very beginning,
with more than €1.6 billion euros in the last 10 years.
It is now time to make sure that Africa’s capacities are
provided in a more sustainable and efficient manner.
This is first of all in Africa’s interest, to strengthen the
continent and its regional structures against the many
challenges it faces.
Our cooperation with the African Union, the
Arab League, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations can only grow stronger. In some parts of
the world, we need to strengthen existing organizations.
In other cases, we need new and creative formats.
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Our recent experience with Libya and Syria shows
the effectiveness of ad hoc formats working in close
coordination with the United Nations envoys.
Despite all of the setbacks, despite all of the stops
and starts, multilateralism has shown its strength.
Formats can change and institutions must be reformed.
But in our conflictual world, where power is scattered
and diffuse, global peace and security stands a chance
only if our nations and our regions are united and work
in a united manner. Our European Union will always
come back to the United Nations, to the core of the
international multilateral system, to the stubbornly
held idea of a cooperative world order.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to extend
my heartfelt thanks to Ms. Mogherini for her presence
here today, for her commitment and for her briefing.
As she has most kindly underscored, this is the second
time she has met with the Security Council under the
presidency of France (see S/PV.7402). We are most
pleased with that and hope to continue this tradition.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish at the outset to welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the High
Representative of the European Union on Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini.
In the statement she made during the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, she underscored
that no one alone can carry the weight of the world on
their shoulders; today she elaborated on this idea. We
fully agree with this view and note the intention of the
European Union (EU) to strengthen multilateralism
under the United Nations.
Russia has consistently called for the development
and improvement of cooperation with the United
Nations and regional and subregional mechanisms on
the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, first and
foremost Chapter VIII. It is on that basis, as well as
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/276, of
May 2011, that interaction between the United Nations
and the European Union should take place.
The European Union objectively is an important
political and economic player in the international arena
and contributes to the resolution of many international
issues. That is the reason that in spite of the ongoing
crisis in Russian-European Union relations, in many

S/PV.7705

areas our cooperation with the EU is ongoing, including
in the context of the United Nations. Examples here
include combating such global threats as terrorism,
religious extremism, piracy, drug trafficking,
transborder organized crime and illegal migration.
Russia and the EU traditionally cooperate in
the framework of the Quartet for the settlement of
the Middle East crisis. We welcome the role of the
European Union in attaining agreement on the Iranian
nuclear issue. The Russian Federation and its diplomacy
worked hard here as well.
We expect that the States members of the European
Union will constructively participate in international
efforts to move forward on a political settlement for
Syria on the basis of agreed-upon parameters. These
should be implemented fully and without preconditions.
Putting an end to the conflict in the country
would be a major jumping-off point for de-escalating
tensions in the Middle East, which are spreading to
all neighbouring regions, including Europe. Some
members of the EU participate in the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG). We expect from them
impartial and honest work that will enrich our collective
efforts. We deem it important that the EU remain an
open channel for dialogue with the Syrian Government.
We welcomed the meeting of Ms. Mogherini with the
head negotiator of the Syrian Government, Mr. Ja’afari,
on the margins of the March round of talks in Geneva.
Such contacts are totally necessary.
At the same time, as demonstrated in discussions in
the Security Council and elsewhere, European partners
often allow themselves to move forward with destructive
unilateral approaches, manipulating decisions made
by the ISSG and engaging in propaganda instead of
doing patient and careful joint work. It must be clearly
understood that pressure on Damascus will not produce
the desired effect. On whom should continued pressure
be brought to bear? On those who continue to support
terrorists, including Al-Nusra. All sides should show
flexibility during the talks.
A major obstacle in that regard on the political
track is the position of the so-called High Negotiations
Committee. The representatives of the radical wing
of the Committee are not thinking about obtaining
compromise; they are focusing instead all of their
ideas and actions on toppling the Government.
Nevertheless, Brussels has drawn the conclusion that
those people are the only ones who express the views

16-159987/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

06/06/2016

of the Syrian opposition. That is at the very least an
exaggeration. It is of the utmost importance to ensure
the broad representative nature of the Syrian opposition,
including Kurds from the Democratic Union Party,
which Turkey has openly obstructed. We hope that our
European partners will use their influence to resolve
this and other pressing matters having to do with the
selfish and destructive policies of Ankara towards
Syria. There is also a need to take decisive steps to
make Turkey end its encroachment on the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria, to close the channels
for foreign terrorist fighters and finally close the
Syrian-Turkish border.

In due time, we have supported the decision
authorizing EU Operation Sophia in the Mediterranean
Sea to actively counter the flows of illegal migrants.
We value the work of the navies that have saved many
lives. However, according to solid statistics, so far in
2016 more people have drowned while trying to reach
Europe than during the same period last year. On the
one hand, that suggests that resolving the root causes
of the problem remain remote. On the other, it poses
a legitimate question: Is it advisable in this situation
to extend the mandate of Operation Sophia with
additional oversight functions to monitor the illegal
flows of weapons?

We note the detrimental effect of unilateral sanctions
against Damascus, including those imposed by the EU.
It is Syrian civilians who suffer from them. It has been a
real factor that significantly restricts Syrians’ access to
health services and medicines and serves as an obstacle
to United Nations active participation in infrastructure
projects to bring unified areas back to normal life.

The situation of the mass arrival in Europe of
refugees from the Middle East and North Africa
regions is necessarily a serious concern. We agree
with the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, that the migration problem is not unique to
the EU; other countries are hosting far more migrants,
while having less capacity than that of the EU. We
note that the recent agreements on the collective return
of migrants from the EU, without clear safeguards
to ensure the protection of their rights in accordance
with international law, has been a serious concern for
a number of specialized international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and public players.

We are carefully following our European partners’
steps to settle the crisis in Libya. We understand their
concern about security issues in the Mediterranean. We
welcome efforts for a swift restoration of the unity of
Libya and its State institutions, based on the Libyan
Political Agreement to form a Government of National
Accord, signed in Skhirat, Morocco. However, there
should be an understanding that there is no alternative to
a peaceful settlement, which must be exclusively Libyan
led. We expect that the composition of a Government of
National Accord will soon be approved by the House
of Representatives, as provided in the Agreement,
and that it will be supported by key influential forces
in the country, thereby becoming a truly functional
executive body.
We were therefore bewildered by the European
Union decision to include key Libyan players on the
EU sanctions list. We are worried that the attempts to
punish Libyan politicians will simply further deepen
the division. We are also concerned about the growing
threat of terrorism in Libya, especially the spillover of
activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant from
other States. However, that threat cannot be used as a
pretext for intervention in the domestic affairs of Libya.
While there is a need to help Libyans, it must be within
the framework of international law. One of the major
aims would be to unify Libya’s forces. More broadly,
the need for tighter coordination of international and
regional initiatives on Libya should be emphasized.
8/28

We call upon our European colleagues to take a
more conscientious approach towards their international
obligations in that area. We believe that, even in the
context of the extraordinary massive flows of people,
we cannot dilute the institution of asylum, which, in
line with the 1951 United Nations Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol, clearly
distinguishes refugees from illegal economic migrants,
the latter of whom have been simply using the situation
to their own ends.
As we consider the issue of cooperation with the
EU, we must necessarily think about the serious crisis
in the European region, in Ukraine. Unfortunately,
Brussels has played a very unseemly role, categorically
insisting on the signing of an agreement and, in so
doing, enabling those who have sought to forcibly
seize power. We hope that in Brussels and European
capitals the sad experience of the Ukrainian crisis will
not just be carefully and objectively studied, but will
lead to constructive steps. At the moment, the most
important task is to implement the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements; there
is no alternative. The unstinting, consistent and full
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7705

implementation of the provisions of that document
is the only way to resolve the conflict in the Donbas
region and to solve all related issues. We hope that the
European Union and European capitals will continue
their efforts to ensure that Kyiv will fulfil its obligations
under the Minsk package of measures in full.

disposal to encourage Israel to return to the negotiating
table. We hope that the international conference on the
Middle East peace process to be hosted by France and
the upcoming report of the Middle East Quartet will be
major factors in influencing the status and a return to
the negotiating table.

Furthermore, we call upon Brussels not to lose
sight of the difficult situation in Ukraine as a whole,
especially as it pertains to the rule of law. Much has
been said about it in the reports on Ukraine by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, including the most recent report issued
last week. There is no progress in the investigation of
such high-profile tragic events as the shooting of people
in the Maidan, the killing of civilians in Mariupol and
the fire in the trade union building in Odessa. The truth
must be told, and the perpetrators must be brought
to justice.

Secondly, Libya is going through a critical political
phase, which calls for coordinating international
efforts, represented by the Security Council, Special
Representative Martin Kobler and regional efforts,
to strengthen and bolster the establishment of the
Government of National Accord. However, that will not
be the end of the road. A major challenge is to build
State infrastructure such that the Government will be
able to respond to the major political and economic
challenges it faces. International and regional assistance
is needed to re-establish a unified Libyan army that
is able to protect Libya’s territory and citizens and
counter the danger brought by terrorism. We hope that
the European Union will be able to play an effective
role in this regard. Any delay in this area could increase
the possibility of failure of the Libyan political process
and strengthen the hand of terrorist groups, thereby
worsening the problems stemming from flows of
refugees and illegal migration.

The growing tension in the world and the emergence
of new threats and challenges are a compelling
argument to strengthen the coordination and interaction
of the international community. Russia is interested in
meaningful cooperation based on common strategic
goals shared with the EU, but that must be done on
equal footing, taking into account the interests and
concerns of one another.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Ms. Mogherini for her very
comprehensive briefing.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the European Union is among the most important
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The effective strategic partnership covers
a number of conflicts and crises that go beyond the
immediate geographic neighbourhood of the European
Union. I would like to touch on various problems.
First, the escalation of certain crises has led the
international community to put aside the Palestinian
question to a certain degree. That of course heightens
tensions in the region. Today more than ever, the
international community needs to exert greater efforts
to revive the peace process, based on a two-State
solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and international
resolutions. That cannot be done if the Israeli and
Palestinian sides refuse to respond to calls for
negotiation and the Israelis continue to illegally annex
Palestinian territory. The European Union has made
many efforts in that direction. It has many tools at its

Thirdly, the collapse of State structures in some
areas of the Middle East region have led to the growth
of terrorist groups as a non-traditional danger that
undermines the stability of States and international peace
and security. International and regional cooperation is
needed in this context to counter terrorist financing,
the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters and the use
of modern technology. International efforts should
not simply be confined to the security and political
dimensions of the fight against terrorism, but must also
send a message that counters the narrative of terrorist
organizations that operate under the guise of religion to
attract funds and attention. We applaud the European
Union’s steps to establish a public outreach centre to
counter extremism, and we hope that collaboration
with institutions of higher learning such as Al-Azhar
University in Egypt will be undertaken in support of
coexistence, tolerance and dialogue.
Fourthly, various crises have led to the worsening
of illegal immigration towards Europe. The European
Union is undertaking major operational efforts to
counter this phenomenon, in particular Operation
Sophia, but the human dimension must also be dealt
with. Focus must given to the security-related, political

16-159989/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and economic root causes of the illegal migration crisis
in order to find lasting solutions and put an end to a
human tragedy that is unfolding in the Mediterranean.
Fifthly, in recent years there has been effective
cooperation among the European Union, the African
Union and the United Nations in dealing with the
series of crises that have arisen in Africa. In Somalia,
a strong, clear message must be directed to all Somali
stakeholders so that they will continue to build on
the achievements of 2012. The Somalian presidency
recently adopted an electoral model that opens the way
to the holding of elections in accordance with the agreed
timeline. We must make the most of this opportunity. A
political message should be addressed to the European
Union requesting assistance for rebuilding State
structures, in particular the Somali army, as well as
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia and
for ongoing efforts to respond to piracy.
In the Sahel region, complex challenges include
a security vacuum, the expansion of terrorist groups,
obstacles to development, including economic
development, and the spread of organized crime.
We hope that European support for the Mali Peace
Agreement of June 2015 will be maintained in order
that the Agreement’s timeline can be implemented. A
lasting solution to the crisis continues to depend on
the rebuilding of State structures and institutions, the
extension of State authority throughout the territory of
the country, and the fight against terrorism.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
thanks the French presidency for organizing today’s
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, with special attention
on the European Union, after last month’s similar
exchange, which focused on the African Union (see
S/PV.7694). My delegation welcomes the presence
of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, whom I thank for her important statement.
The many conflicts and crises in the world today
require close cooperation among the United Nations and
its partners, in particular regional organizations, which
play a vital role in maintaining peace and international
security. Indeed, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations can contribute to improving collective
security in terms of maintaining international peace
10/28

06/06/2016

and security. On that basis, these organizations may
act with a mandate from the United Nations, which in
turn benefits from the organizations’ local expertise
and operational methods. Senegal, which welcomes
the opportunities offered by cooperation among
organizations, would like to reaffirm its commitment
to an effective multilateralism with the United Nations
at its centre, dedicated to the pursuit of lasting solutions
to critical issues of peace and security in the world.
This perspective is one of the basic guidelines of our
foreign policy as well as one of the main reasons for
Senegalese troops’ presence in the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
The European regional organization is a major
partner of the United Nations given its material, logistical
and financial capacities, which allow it to conduct
diverse activities. The European Union has developed
institutional mechanisms to finance Security Councilauthorized peacekeeping operations and is also working
to prevent crises. The European Union’s significant and
recognized commitment led to its being awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2012. Furthermore, as Council
members know, three important documents continue
to provide the cross-cutting strategic framework
for relations between the United Nations and the
European Union in the areas of peacekeeping and crisis
management: the Joint Statements on United NationsEuropean Union cooperation in Crisis Management
of 2003 and 2007 and the Plan of Action to enhance
European Union Common Security and Defence Policy
support to United Nations peacekeeping, adopted in
2012 by the Political and Security Committee. The latter
document identifies, for the purposes of cooperation in
peacekeeping, priority measures that have been jointly
implemented in recent years by both organizations,
in particular with regard to increasing the number
of uniformed personnel from States members of the
European Union, coordination in planning stages,
cooperation in general policy and guidelines, lessons
learned and training.
In addition, as rightly set forth in the report of
Secretary-General contained in document S/2015/229,
dated 1 April 2015, coordination and consultation
activities conducted at the strategic level between the
United Nations and the European Union in peacekeeping
and crisis management take on various forms. The
collaborative bridges between the two organizations
naturally include the biannual informal meeting of the
Security Council with representatives of the European
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Union Political and Security Committee, which
constitutes a framework for reviewing peacekeeping
operations and other issues of peace and security.
Furthermore, there are other high-level meetings on
the review of strategic issues, in particular the briefings
to the Security Council by representatives of the
European Union for foreign affairs and security policy
and the presentations made by high-level officials of the
United Nations to the Political and Security Committee
in Brussels. There is also the quarterly meeting of the
United Nations/European Union Steering Committee
on Crisis Management, which is co-chaired by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Deputy Secretary-General of the External
Action Service of the European Union.
The European Union’s comprehensive and
collective approach in maintaining international peace
and security should be commended. It involves the
presence of European troops and teams in almost all
peacekeeping operations across the globe. Just by way
of example, I note the European Union’s contribution
to the seeking of solutions to conflicts in the Balkans;
in Haiti, with the European Union training mission;
and in Somalia; as well as the European Union’s
presence in Mali and the Central African Republic; its
humanitarian assistance in Syria, and its contribution to
promoting security, good governance and development
in Afghanistan. In addition, the Security Council has
given European Union member States a mandate to
tackle the migrant phenomenon.
Sengegal supports counter-trafficking operations
and would like to call attention to the situation of
migrants who have become victims of their own
vulnerability. That is why an approach that pays more
attention to the dimension of sustainable development
must be adopted.
Beyond these contributions to international
peace and security, it is important to emphasize the
various activities of the European Union in the area of
prevention aimed at tackling the root causes of conflict.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is
a clear example and the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative-Sahel are part of that same logic.
The European Union provides a laudable
contribution to United Nations activities and cooperates
with all of the Organization’s bodies, agencies and
programmes and is part of the broad spectrum of
United Nations actions, development policy, reinstating

S/PV.7705

peace and assistance in the fields of humanitarian
matters, the environment, human rights and culture. It
also participates in measures carried out in all regions
of the world. The 28 States members of the European
Union are the main donors to the United Nations system
with regard to the regular budget of the Organization’s
peacekeeping operations, as well as to United Nations
funds and programmes.
In conclusion, I would be remiss were I not
to underscore the considerable contribution of the
European Union to peace and security on the African
continent. Along these lines, I would like to recall
the importance that our subregional organization,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), attaches to the ongoing nature of the
activities of its force in Guinea-Bissau, the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau. I hope further cooperation
with ECOWAS and the European Union can contribute
significantly to the re-establishment of political
stability in this country.
In that regard, I would also like to shed light
upon the crucial role played by the European Union in
promoting human rights, protecting civilians in armed
conflict and promoting justice and the rule of law. With
regard to the whole range of European Union activities,
the Security Council could benefit were it to strengthen
its cooperation with the EU through its institutional ties
and its strategic partnership, pursuant to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, and thanking her for her
very enriching and comprehensive presentation.
(spoke in English)
Japan and the European Union (EU) are
strategic partners based on common values, such as
democracy, freedom, human rights and the rule of
law. Our partnership is comprehensive in nature and
we cooperate in various fields, including peace and
security, the economy and global issues.
With regard to peace and security cooperation,
Japan and the EU recently conducted joint programmes
in Africa to improve our security situations. I would like
to take as an example our cooperation in Mali where the
security situation is very unstable. While the European
Union provided training for Malian gendarmerie,

16-1599811/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

police and national guard under the framework of the
European Union Capacity Building Mission Sahel
Mali, Japan provided assistance for the refurbishment
of existing facilities, the provision of equipment and the
capacity-building of trainers in the security sector in
Mali in order to contribute to the enhancement of the
training capabilities provided by the EU.
Another example is Somalia, which also faces
big security challenges. Japan and the EU have been
jointly providing the salaries of the Somali security
force officers. Another example is the Niger, which is
important in preventing the flow of insecurity in the
Sahel region. Japan provided radio equipment and
vehicles with such equipment to integral command
centres of the Niger, to which the EU provides capacitybuilding training. I hope that these cooperation
programmes between Japan and EU will contribute to
better security in the above-mentioned countries and
the entire region.
The Middle East is where both the United Nations
and the EU play in important role. Japan, along with
the EU, is determined to address the causes and
consequences of the ongoing instability in the Middle
East. We have been addressing not only the immediate
humanitarian needs for targeting the mass displacement
brought on by violent extremism, but have lead longterm efforts for the return and reintegration of refugees
and the building of the foundations for post-conflict
recovery. In this light, on the occasion of the Summit of
the Group of Seven, held in Ise-Shima just two weeks
ago, our Prime Minister announced the provision of
an assistance package of approximately $6 billion for
stability and human resource development in the Middle
East and North Africa region from 2016 to 2018.
Furthermore, Japan reiterates its position that
a political approach is what can enable a durable
solution to the crises of the region and that a military
approach alone is not sufficient. We therefore reiterate
our support for United Nations-led efforts in pursuing
political solutions aimed at the achievement of peace,
security and unity in Libya, Syria and Yemen and the
settlement of other crises in the region.
Finally, Japan values the cooperation between
the EU and the United Nations under the framework
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
I strongly hope that the EU will continue to play an
important role in the field of peace and security.
12/28

06/06/2016

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her briefing. Today’s
meeting provides another useful opportunity for the
Council to engage another significant regional partner,
following our meetings last month with the African
Union (see S/PV.7694) and the League of Arab States.
New Zealand is a strong supporter of close
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
and subregional bodies. Such bodies are essential
partners for the Council in delivering on its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. Indeed,
the effectiveness of the Council often rests in large
part on its cooperation with regional organizations.
It is in all our interests to ensure that the engagement
between the Council and the regional bodies is as
effective and productive as possible in preventing and
resolving conflict.
New Zealand has deep and long-standing ties with
the European Union (EU) and many of its member
States have contributed to our development and our
history. Those ties remain of deep importance and
continuing relevance to our country. The European
Union is an active and indispensable partner of the
United Nations on a wide range of security-related
challenges, including peacekeeping, humanitarian
assistance, non-proliferation and combating terrorism.
Naturally, the EU plays a particularly important role in
maintaining peace and security within its immediate
neighbourhood. For many years, it has played central
role in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s security
and stability through its leadership of the European
Union Force Althea stabilization force. The EU also
continues to play an essential role in facilitating
dialogue aimed at normalizing relations between the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina.
The crisis in neighbouring Ukraine has been a great
concern for the EU and its member States, as it has been
for New Zealand. We acknowledge the EU’s ongoing
role in supporting the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and the objective of a lasting resolution
of the crisis that is fully consistent with Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
As the High Representative has reminded us, in the
Middle East the prospects for the two-State solution are
diminishing. As a member of the Middle East Quartet,
the European Union has a key role to play in ensuring
that the peace process is revived through its support
to the Palestinian Authority and to the United Nations,
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and through the various contributions of its 28 member
States to encouraging the parties back to the negotiating
table. New Zealand supports any constructive attempt
to move the Middle East peace process forward. In
particular, we have advocated for the Council to live
up to its responsibilities and to take action to get the
parties back to the negotiating table. We look forward
to the release of the Quartet report, and are encouraged
by the High Representative’s assurance that it will be
made public soon. We also welcome the information
that it will contain specific recommendations on
rebuilding confidence and on encouraging the parties
back to meaningful negotiations.
Given the special relationship between the Quartet
and the Council, we look forward to the Council having
the opportunity to consider the Quartet’s report and
recommendations when released. We also welcome
France’s hosting of the ministerial meeting in Paris
last Friday and hope that it can contribute momentum
towards resuming negotiations between the parties.
As others have said, in Syria the peace process is
faltering and the humanitarian situation is disastrous
and deteriorating. We are in serious danger of letting
slip the best chance we have had in five years to end the
conflict. We must not let that happen. The international
community, collectively and in its constituent parts,
needs to do all it can to reduce the fighting, increase
aid and the get the parties back to negotiations on a
political transition. We encourage and welcome the
EU’s use of its influence to help make that happen.
We also acknowledge the significant humanitarian and
development assistance that the EU and its member
States have provided to mitigate the human cost of
the Syrian conflict and address its spillover effects
in the region. In addition to the more than 1 million
irregular migrants who entered the EU last year, many
more continue to make the perilous journey across
the Mediterranean. As we are all too aware, many are
perishing in the attempt. As the United Nations has
reported, the death toll in 2016 to date is higher than at
the same point last year.
New Zealand sponsored resolution 2240 (2015)
relating to the international efforts to intercept vessels
off the Libyan coast suspected of migrant smuggling.
We are ready to consider other contributions EU
countries could make, in partnership with the Council,
to support safety and stability in the Mediterranean as
part of a comprehensive approach to addressing the
challenges of irregular migration. We also welcome

S/PV.7705

the EU’s continued efforts to support the Government
and people of Libya in achieving peace and stability,
including through its support to the Libyan security
sector and much-needed humanitarian, reconstruction
and economic assistance.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the very important
role played by the EU’s regional partnerships,
particularly in Africa. For example, the EU continues
to play a significant role in Somalia through its
development assistance under the Somali New Deal
Compact, the European Union Military Training
Mission in Somalia, the European Union Naval Force
ATALANTA counter-piracy mission in Somalia and
its ongoing funding for stipends for the troops of
the African Union Mission to Somalia. The EU also
continues to play a vital role in support of stability
in Mali and the Central African Republic through its
military training missions to strengthen the capability
of local armed forces.
Those are just a few examples of the EU’s
investment of effort and resources towards our common
goals of maintaining international peace and security.
We look forward to further deepening cooperation in
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union in the years ahead.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
welcoming Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, back to the Council today. I thank her for her
informative briefing this morning.
As the High Representative and other have set out,
the European Union (EU) and regional organizations
as a whole are fundamental to how the United Nations
operates and how it delivers across the world. Both the
United Nations and the European Union were born of
the scourge of war, so it is unsurprising that we share
so many values, such as peace, human rights and
development, to name but three. Together, our shared
values underpin our collective ability to promote and
maintain international peace and security. Today, I
want to focus on three ways that we do so.
First, the EU and its individual member States play
an active role in peacekeeping by directly participating
in United Nations missions. The EU also provides
complementary support to United Nations missions and
the operations of other regional organizations through
its own Common Security and Defence Policy missions
and through the provision of training, mentoring and

16-1599813/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

financing. That cooperation is crucial to the success of
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security. We saw that cooperation first-hand during
our visit to Somalia last month. The EU plays a crucial
role there in supporting the African Union Mission
in Somalia, in training the Somali National Army
and in supporting projects to bring long-term peace
to Somalia.
Secondly, in addition to peacekeeping, the EU and
its member States play a significant role in creating the
conditions for peace through mediation and forging
new peace agreements. The EU, along with several of
its member States, is playing an important role in the
International Syria Support Group and the political
process, which is the only way of ending more than
five years of conflict. The EU and its member States
have also played a significant role in supporting Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons. Such support
comprised nearly two-thirds of the 2016 pledges made
at the Supporting Syria and the Region Conference held
in London this year.
The EU is also actively supporting peace in Libya.
The United Kingdom welcomes the close cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations in the Libyan
political dialogue process that led to the establishment
of the Government of National Accord. The EU support
and that of a number of EU member States, in close
coordination and cooperation with the United Nations,
is supporting the new Libyan Government. That is
crucial and contributes to the unity of the international
community behind the Government of National Accord.
The EU has already provided financial support to the
Stabilization Facility for Libya Project Board to fund
quick-impact projects that will make a difference on
the ground.
That leads me to my third point, namely, the
important role that the EU and its member States play
in providing practical support to address ongoing
crises. The tragic loss of life in the Mediterranean and
the refugee flows into Europe have highlighted the
need for stronger regional and global approaches to
migration and refugees. The United Kingdom and the
EU see a need for greater international burden-sharing
to address those issues. We are actively pursuing
that through the Khartoum process and the Compact
approach, highlighted at the London Syria Conference.
In addition to the EU work on tackling illegal
migration, the EU is building the capacity of the Libyan
14/28

06/06/2016

coast guard. The United Kingdom will play our part
in that effort. My Prime Minister announced in Japan,
at the Summit of the Group of Seven, that the United
Kingdom has increased our contribution to the EU
Operation Sophia. Once the relevant permissions are
in place and the Security Council draft resolution on
the issue is adopted, the next phase of this operation to
intercept naval vessels carrying illicit arms will begin,
and the United Kingdom will deploy a further ship to
the Mediterranean. Together, these developments will
continue to help tackle the migrant crisis and limit the
operational capabilities of Da’esh in Libya.
In conclusion, EU-United Nations cooperation
has proved to be invaluable on numerous
occasions — in peacekeeping, mediation and tackling
crises — and so has the EU cooperation with other
regional organizations. We look forward to continued
cooperation and partnership, which can only serve
to strengthen the principles and purposes of both the
Charter of the United Nations and the EU.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I am pleased once again to welcome the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy to this sixth round of
talks between the European Union and the United
Nations. I cannot but note the excellent degree of
cooperation based, as the United Kingdom Ambassador
so appropriately noted, on the fact that we share a
set of values and principles. That valuable common
denominator between our organizations allows me to
affirm that the relationship could not be any better.
I have a lengthy statement that I will not read out
in full, but I will simply touch on the most important
points, on the undestanding that the full version will be
posted on the website of the Mission of Spain. I shall
begin with the review processes, of which there are two
of particular importance to my delegation: the reviews
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1325 (2000).
With respect to the review of resolution 1540 (2004),
which will conclude under the Spanish presidency of
the Council in December, as we all know, I should like
to stress the major support and deep commitment of
the European Union to ensuring that non-State actors
truly have no access to weapons of mass destruction.
With regard to the review of resolution 1325 (2000), I
believe that it is perfectly obvious that the European
Union has been intimately involved in all processes
related to the women and peace and security agenda.
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

That was particularly evident in the adoption of
resolution 2242 (2015).
Turning to prevention, Spain attaches great
importance to the fact that the European Union shall
assign a major role to prevention in its global strategy.
In that regard, I draw the attention of Council members
and non-members listening in on this meeting today
to Spain’s organization of the first Conference on
Preventive Diplomacy in the Mediterranean, held a few
days ago in Alicante, in which high representatives of
the European Union participated. The conclusions of the
Alicante Conference will be circulated by the Mission
of Spain to the members of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
With respect to Iran, I stress the very important
role played by the European Union with regard to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that was agreed
with Iran in July 2015, and later endorsed by resolution
2231 (2015). As facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), I can bear witness to the major
role that the European Union continues to play in
that process.
Several comments have already been made today
concerning the Middle East, but I wish to reiterate
Spain’s full support for such initiatives as that being
undertaken by France, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, to convene the ministerial meeting
held in Paris on Friday. The role of the European Union,
as reflected in the work of the High Representative in
the context of the Quartet — to which the Ambassador
of New Zealand referred at length — clearly shows that
the Union’s resolve is firm. I endorse the statement of
the Ambassador of New Zealand to the effect that once
the report of the Quartet has been issued, the Security
Council should support this process in some way.
As to Syria, the High Representative noted that the
European Union is the greatest contributor to efforts to
resolve that situation, so I will not dwell on it. I will,
however, mention Libya, where the European Union has
decided, in full respect for international legality — as
several speakers have noted — to support the stability
of the country and fight the human traffickers working
along its coasts. One example of this is the European
Union Operation Sophia, dedicated exclusively to
saving lives in the Mediterranean. It has no other
purpose. Specifically, on 26 May the Spanish frigate
Reina Sofia rescued 206 people in just one day, 35 miles
off the coast of Libya. In its first year of operations,

S/PV.7705

Operation Sofia has saved over 15,000 lives. The next
challenge facing the Operation will be the fight against
arms trafficking. We hope to enjoy the support of all
Security Council members to that end.
The European Union has a very clear commitment
to Africa. I would define relations between the
European Union and the Security Council by the word
“complementarity”. I believe that complementarity is
especially evident in two operations: the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. I also note the commitment of the European
Union to assist in operationalizing the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crisis.
With regard to migration, we are all aware of the
tragedies taking place every day in the Mediterranean,
to which the European Union has actively responded
with all instruments at its disposal. We value the
onset of high-level dialogues to promote cooperation
with the countries of origin and transit of regular
migrants. Packages of comprehensive incentives
have been approved for 16 countries, highlighting the
effectiveness of our action in that area. Lastly, I point
to the migratory agreement reached with Turkey, which
is yielding positive results.
In conclusion, I should like to refer to the statement
made early by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Senegal, who very eloquently described the relationship
between the European Union and the United Nations,
especially the Security Council. I believe that his
statement can be summarized by asserting the
European Union’s comprehensive commitment to the
entire United Nations agenda. I say this as a member of
the European Union, of which I am very proud.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the French presidency of the Council for its initiative to
convene this meeting on cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union. I listened attentively to
the briefing of Her Excellency Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.
The United Nations is the most universal
and representative international intergovernmental
organization. In accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Cooperation between

16-1599815/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the United Nations and the Council with regional
and subregional organizations in political, security
and development areas is conducive to achieving the
objectives of maintaining world peace and promoting
common development.
The EU is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years, the EU participated actively
in settling the Iranian nuclear issue and on various hot
spots in the Middle East and other regions, and has made
a positive contribution to maintaining international
peace and security. The EU has provided support to
African Union (AU)-led peacekeeping operations,
extended assistance to AU regional organizations and
played a positive role in maintaining peace and stability
in Africa, while promoting the continent’s overall
development.
The EU is a major force on the world stage. China
encourages and supports the EU in continuing to play a
constructive role in United Nations affairs. We believe
that the cooperation between the EU and the United
Nations and the Security Council needs to adhere to the
following principles.
First, it must advocate the political settlement of
hot-spot issues through dialogue, abide by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of countries and not interfere in States’
internal affairs, and facilitate the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue, consultation, good offices,
mediation and other diplomatic means.
Secondly, it must adhere to a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable concept of
security. It must respect and ensure security for all. It
must adopt an integrated response to security in both
traditional and non-traditional areas. It must promote
security for all countries and regions through dialogue
and cooperation. It must strike a balance between
development and security in achieving lasting security.
Thirdly, it must respect the sovereign choice of
countries to determine their own social systems and
paths to development. It must abide by the principles
of equality and mutual respect. It must be objective in
its perspective of the historical, cultural and religious
backgrounds of different countries and regions. It
must be fair, objective and balanced in its evaluation
of countries’ human rights situations and facilitate
constructive dialogue and cooperation.
16/28

06/06/2016

Fourthly, it must generate synergy for the efforts
of the United Nations to promote economic and social
development. It must leverage the EU’s comparative
advantage and, in the light of the needs of developing
countries, strengthen North-South cooperation and
support developing countries in achieving the goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
China views and develops relations with the
EU from a strategic, long-term perspective. China
hopes that the EU will make a greater contribution
to the achievement of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. China is ready to
strengthen its interaction and cooperation with the
EU in the framework of the United Nations, while
continuously facilitating a greater role for the United
Nations in international affairs and making joint efforts
to forge new types of international relations with
win-win cooperation as its core for a human community
of common destiny.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I am very pleased
to welcome to the Security Council Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Union (EU) and
to thank her for the briefing. Ukraine commends the
significant contribution that the European Union makes
in support of the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We must admit today that living in turbulent times
demands quick decisions and even closer cooperation.
As the Secretary-General pointed out recently,
“The challenges are too complex for one
organization or one nation to meet alone. Hence
there is the need for partnerships and innovation.”
If history is any guide, we should once and for all learn
the lesson that a weak, slow or hesitant reaction by
the international community to challenging and tragic
events, in particular in Ukraine and Syria, dictates the
scale and pace of the consequences. Thus the lesson
here is to treat the disease, not the symptoms. In the
case of Ukraine, a strategic answer should be given
on the EU side to security challenges originating from
Russia to the eastern partnership. We hope that the new
EU global security strategy will properly reflect that.
The European Union has been the United Nations
most reliable partner in promoting the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
strengthening respect for the rule of law. The level of
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
was strengthened recently, and we are seeing tangible
results in the fulfilment of the provisions of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/4, on the institutional and
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the EU, which was adopted two years ago.
The High Representative addressed in detail many
crises that affect our world today and on which United
Nations-EU cooperation is much needed. I would like
to comment on some of them.
We fully acknowledge that fight against terrorism
requires close cooperation between the United Nations
and its international partners, including the EU. We
commend the broad engagement of the EU and its
member States in combating terrorism, including
their active participation in the International Coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and in
the work of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. The
recent EU joint framework on hybrid threats was an
important step to that end, and it envisaged intensified
cooperation with partners aimed at combating organized
crime, terrorism and trafficking. We are ready for such
cooperation and await concrete proposals, in particular
in the area of the fight against terrorism, which is of
particular importance for us.
Ukraine fully supports the work of the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) and its efforts aimed at
finding a long-lasting political solution to the crisis.
We believe that the implementation of the Vienna
statement conclusions issued by the ISSG on 17 May
can improve the humanitarian situation in Syria and
enhance efforts to achieve a political solution. We
welcome the United Nations and the EU’s readiness to
provide comprehensive humanitarian aid to the Syrian
people, which would contribute to improving their
living conditions.
Ukraine supports the key points on Syria stipulated
in the conclusions of the European Union Council on
the regional strategy for Syria, Iraq and the Da’esh
threat, which was published on 23 May. We believe
that, without strengthening the implementation and
monitoring of the cessation of hostilities, ensuring
country-wide humanitarian access and making progress
on the issue of detainees, we will have no grounds for a
credible resumption of the intra-Syrian talks.
Ukraine supports the efforts of the Government
of National Accord and the Presidency Council in
Libya aimed at organizing the national dialogue and

S/PV.7705

strengthening the security situation. We hope that
arrival of the Presidency Council in Tripoli and the
start of the hand-over of power will result in the gradual
stabilization of the country.
With regard to the conflicts on the African
continent, we welcome the reaffirmed commitment
between the EU and the African Union to peace
and security in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Cooperation between the EU
and the African Union based on the 2014-2017 road
map can contribute to achieving results in improving
the security situation, strengthening democracy,
good governance and human rights and countering
global and emerging issues. As current Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic, Ukraine highly values the strong engagement
of the European Union in that country, notably its
humanitarian assistance, financial contribution and the
establishment of a military training mission.
Ukraine reiterates its support for the historic
nuclear deal between Iran and E3/EU+3 — the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action — which was a milestone
in strengthening the non-proliferation regime as a
whole. Ukraine welcomes the choice of Iran in terms
of its commitment to ensure a peaceful nuclear policy.
We call upon all the sides to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action to ensure its diligent implementation, as
well as that of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015),
including nuclear-related restrictions.
Migration is another area for practical United
Nations-EU cooperation. To resolve this problem of a
global dimension, we should take a global approach
and work more closely to tackle the causes of illegal
migration, improve our efforts to fight the trafficking
of human beings, and provide people in real need of
international protection with all of the necessary help
and assistance.
We commend the EU’s efforts and dedication in
contributing to the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
protecting the universal principles of international law,
including those enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
For my country, this aspect is particularly pertinent,
given the attempted illegal annexation of Crimea and
the ongoing military Russian aggression in the east of
Ukraine. What has happened in Ukraine over the past
two years is the most serious crisis in Europe since the
Second World War. It is hybrid warfare that is already

16-1599817/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

being waged against all of us, and we can counter it
only with a bold and coherent strategy based on our
joint efforts, a clear understanding of the source of the
threat and a vision of how to tackle it.
We appreciate the EU’s uncompromising position
on the matter and its consistent policy of applying
the whole range of political-diplomatic tools, along
with the appropriate economic and trade measures, to
restore measures and right the wrongs committed by
the Russian Federation.
I urge the Russian Federation to comply with the
United Nations Charter; the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial
integrity of Ukraine”; as well as international treaties,
and to de-occupy Crimea. I also urge this State to fulfil
its obligations under the Minsk agreements, including
the withdrawal from Ukraine of Russian weapons and
its military forces and mercenaries.
I am glad that the Russian delegation has finally
started to pay attention to the reporting of the human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which was
mentioned in my Russian colleague’s statement. It even
mentioned some elements of the latest report, but time
and again it has failed to notice the “elephant in the
room” in the last and in all 13 previous reports. Russia
itself is the root cause of the situation in and around
Ukraine. Let me quote from the report:
“The conflict broke out in spring 2014 with the
influx of foreign fighters, including citizens of
the Russian Federation, ammunition and heavy
weaponry into east Ukraine from across the border
with the Russian Federation”.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that it is
only through enhanced and coordinated cooperation
between the United Nations and the EU that we will
be able effectively to counter the growing number
of common global challenges. Ukraine is ready to
contribute to this end and at the same time looks forward
to strengthened international support in countering
the external aggression against its own sovereignty
and independence.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by congratulating the French presidency for
having organized this briefing, and in particular I
would like to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
18/28

06/06/2016

Affairs and Security Policy, for her valuable statement
to the Council.
Uruguay attaches great importance to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Uruguay highly values the role played
by the European Union in upholding international
peace and security. The cooperation of the United
Nations with regional organizations such as the
European Union is essential to preventing, managing
and resolving conflicts.
Allow me to reiterate what I said last month during
the open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (see S/PV.7694). At
the time, we said that it is no accident that all recent
considerations of the United Nations peace and security
component have reached the same conclusion. The
challenges of the twenty-first century are too broad and
complex to be dealt with in the sphere of the United
Nations alone. It is essential to revitalize the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter to more effectively
guarantee international peace and security.
New challenges and the serious ongoing
humanitarian crises call more than ever before for
coordination among international and regional bodies,
so as to make it possible to more effectively respond
to existing threats. Such coordination must respect
the jurisdiction of each organization, boost synergies
and promote complementarity. Terrorism, violent
extremism, transnational crime, the current migratory
and refugee crisis and piracy are just a few of the
challenges that we must face together and that call for
such synergies and complementarities.
Allow me to touch briefly on one of those challenges.
Uruguay is closely following the development of the
migration issue in Europe. Uruguay belongs to a region
where the phenomenon of migration is and has been an
essential element. We received European immigrants
who, during the various wars that struck Europe,
decided to leave for the Americas in search of a better
life. Also, because of internal political issues, Uruguay
was the source of major political and economic migrant
flows that headed, inter alia, to Europe, where they
were able to integrate into and positively contribute to
the societies in which they settled.
The migratory phenomenon is very complex and
multidimensional, as it touches on aspects of security,
development and human rights. Respect for the human
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7705

rights of migrants and their families is a subject to
which Uruguay attaches the greatest importance.
Uruguay notes the new policies and regulatory
frameworks of the European Union to prevent and
combat terrorism, which without any doubt is one of
the major threats to international peace and security.
Besides destroying human lives, it poses a threat to
the rule of law, democracy and peaceful coexistence
among civilizations, as well as to economic and social
development.

Ms. Power (United States of America): Let me also
join others in thanking High Representative Mogherini
for making the journey to be with us today, for her
briefing and for her consistent leadership in addressing
so many of the challenges she described.

The global dimension of the terrorist threat in the
Sahel calls for a commensurate solution. In this vein,
the assistance provided by the European Union to
address the terrorist threat in Mali and the Sahel is a
clear example of its cooperation with the work of the
United Nations. This kind of complementarity is both
timely and necessary.

As we all know, the EU, like the United Nations, was
created in response to the horrors of the Second World
War, and built on the idea that a peaceful, united Europe
could provide an antidote to the nationalism that had
led to so much bloodshed in the region and around the
world. In the nearly six decades since the signing of
the Treaty of Rome, what began as a union predicated
mostly on establishing a common market and customs
union among six nations has grown into a union of more
than 500 million people in 28 countries, 19 of them
with a common currency, united by a range of shared
political and economic institutions. As it has expanded,
the EU has used the benefits of its membership to
broaden the base of the principles that its countries
hold most sacred: pluralism, human rights, diversity
and, of course, respect for the territorial integrity of its
members. Every member of the Union is a democracy
and, not unrelatedly, since the EU’s establishment no
EU country has raised arms against another. That is a
remarkable accomplishment.

In the area of health care, the European Union
provided important financial and logistical cooperation
in responding to the terrible Ebola epidemic affecting
a number of West African countries. The European
Union, as a member of the Quartet for the Middle East,
also has a very important role and responsibility in
the context of the peace process in order to achieve a
sustainable solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
as was pointed out by several of the members of the
Council who spoke before me.
I wish also to mention the contribution of the
European Union in the framework of the E3+3
negotiations with Iran, which led to the lifting of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council on Iran
because of its nuclear programme.

As President Obama has observed, the European
Union (EU)
“remains one of the greatest political and economic
achievements of modern times”.

The European Union also plays a major role in the
Balkans. I wish to highlight the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, under the auspices of the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
contribution made by the EU to the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
presence of the multinational EU Military Operation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR Althea) is an
important factor in ensuring the political and social
stability of the country.

We will never know how the countries of Europe
would have evolved over the past half century without
the creation of the EU. But, for all of the challenges the
region faces in present times, the EU has delivered. It
has delivered peace and prosperity of a kind the people
of Europe never before enjoyed in a sustained way.
That is a fact, and one too often obscured by the din
of political debates. Moreover, as the members of the
Security Council know, the benefits of Europe’s peace
and prosperity and the common principles the EU has
done so much to advance have extended far beyond
the continent, making it an invaluable partner to the
United States and to so many other States Members of
the United Nations.

To conclude, I would like to note that the process
of European integration, which began decades ago,
is a model that has contributed to peace among its
members and that, we believe, will continue to make a
contribution to international peace and security.

The EU continues to provide a model for how
regional organizations can work hand in hand with
the United Nations to advance shared goals, from
promoting sustainable development to seeking
diplomatic solutions to deadly conflicts, to preventing

16-1599819/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

mass atrocities. In my brief remarks today, I would like
to suggest three lessons we can draw from the EU about
how to make multilateral organizations, including this
one, more effective in advancing international peace
and security.
First, the EU has demonstrated the effective pressure
that regional organizations can exert to help address
serious threats to international peace and security. Take
Iran — the sanctions pressure exerted by the EU was
critical to bringing Iran to the negotiating table, where
the EU went on to play a key role in the negotiations to
seek a diplomatic solution. The combination of sustained
pressure and determined, relentless diplomacy made it
possible to agree on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, which, if fully implemented, will ensure that
Iran’s nuclear programme remains exclusively peaceful.
The EU is playing a central role in monitoring the
ongoing implementation of, and adherence to, the Plan
of Action as the coordinator of the joint commission,
where its ongoing vigilance will allow us to determine
whether or not Iran is upholding its commitments under
the deal.
Consider as well the diplomatic pressure the EU
has applied to seek a political solution to the conflict
in Ukraine, where Russia continues to occupy Crimea
and to arm, train and fight alongside separatists in the
eastern part of the country, in clear violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbour.
The EU has responded to that threat by working first
to help forge, and then to ensure compliance with, the
Minsk agreements, including through the maintenance
of sanctions on Russia. The United Nations human
rights report released last week, which documents the
widespread abuses to which the 2.7 million Ukrainians
living in the territory controlled by the separatists in
Donetsk and Luhansk are subjected, including arbitrary
arrests and torture, serves to underscore the urgency
of the task and the need for the Council and the EU to
keep the pressure on the parties to resolve the conflict,
including by maintaining sanctions on Russia until it
implements its Minsk commitments in full.
Secondly, the EU shows how a regional organization
can use multiple tools in its toolkit — technical,
financial, military and others — to target the root
causes of instability, thereby helping to prevent violence
before it arises. It has played an instrumental role, for
example, in promoting the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo, which is vital to ensuring
stability in the Balkans, thus incentivizing Belgrade
20/28

06/06/2016

and Pristina by linking their respective progress in the
dialogue to their respective paths to joining the EU.
The EU has also engaged much further afield,
as others have noted. In Africa, it is managing nine
civilian and military missions, with projects ranging
from reforming security forces in the Central African
Republic to helping train the Niger’s security forces
to combat terrorism, organized crime and smuggling
networks, to building military and security capacity in
Mali and Somalia. The EU missions have complemented
those of the United Nations and the African Union,
thereby contributing to coordinated interventions that
increase impact. At the same time, since 2003, the EU
has provided more than €1.6 billion through the Africa
partnership to support peace operations, capacitybuilding and institutional support on the continent.
In both diplomatic efforts and investments in
conflict prevention, the pooling of resources and
influence has enabled EU member States to have far
greater impact than if any one European country were
to act alone. For that arrangement to work, however,
member States must live up to their commitments and
remain true to the common values at the heart of the
Union. When that arrangement breaks down, when
individual members put their narrow shared interests
ahead of their shared goals, they jeopardize the
enterprise and the dividends it yields for the EU and the
whole world.
That is my third, and final, point. We see that risk
today in the responses of some EU member States to the
unprecedented number of migrants and asylum-seekers
who have sought sanctuary in Europe. The scale of the
challenges presented by the largest wave of displaced
people since the Second World War is enormous. Their
influx presents significant political challenges for
many leaders across the continent, as they face calls
to close their borders and abandon the principles at the
heart of their individual Constitutions and at the heart
of the EU. We understand here in the United States just
how powerful those voices, and the fear that drives
them, can be. We are hearing similar calls from some
in the United States, including the governors of many
states, who have said that they do not want to take in
refugees from places like Syria. Nevertheless, we need
to find ways to increase our generosity towards those
desperate civilians, so that the United States and all
nations do their share to meet needs not seen since
Europe’s darkest days in the Second World War.
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The answer to a challenge as monumental as this
displacement crisis cannot be to close our borders,
jettison our core ideals and revert to a misguided
and short-sighted sense of self-interest. A common
challenge requires a common response, in Europe, in
the United States and here at the United Nations. And
it requires redoubling our commitment to the principles
on which our common security and our common
humanity depend.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by commending you, Mr. President, for convening this
briefing on cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU). I very much welcome the
presence and participation of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
whom I thank for her comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council on the multifaceted cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.
In a very complex international environment, with
challenges of extreme magnitude, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is a crucial
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security and a strategic course of action in dealing with
international issues that are key in meeting the goals
of the United Nations and its Member States and their
peoples aspirations to peace and social development.
Regional challenges — whether security, social
or political in nature — require solutions for which
collective action is vital. That has already been referred
to today by different members of the Council. Collective
action enables multilateral approaches to addressing
traditional or emerging threats to regional arrangements,
as outlined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Such cooperation strengthens the United
Nations efforts to prevent conflicts, restore peace and
stability, and build and sustain peace in post-conflict
situations, while taking into account the comparative
strengths of regional organizations stemming from their
specific knowledge of regional and local issues and
their better understanding of the underlying causes of
conflict. In that regard, we acknowledge the significant
contribution of the European Union in supporting the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
ongoing commitment to international peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, humanitarian and financial assistance
and logistical support for peacekeeping undertakings.
The long-standing triangular cooperation between
the United Nations, the European Union and the African
Union is a key element in the search for stability on the

S/PV.7705

African continent. The institutional dialogue between
the Security Council and the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union is a fundamental
prerequisite for enhancing the EU-African partnership.
Angola welcomes the European Union’s commitment,
reaffirmed at the most recent EU-Africa Summit, to
Africa’s effort to manage its own security, as well as the
EU’s tangible support for African Union-led operations
through the Peace Facility for Africa, its support for
the African Peace and Security Architecture and its
practical assistance in enabling the implementation of
the Architecture.
The European Union’s participation has been
particularly relevant in three theatres of operation
in Africa under Security Council mandates: in the
Central African Republic, in Mali and in Somalia. In
the Central African Republic, the European Union-led
peacekeeping force made a meaningful contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
towards achieving important improvements to the
situation in the country, despite the continuing presence
of armed groups. In Mali, the EU remains committed
to supporting the stabilization process at the political,
security, humanitarian and development levels through
the implementation of the Sahel strategy framework
in response to the complex challenges in Mali and the
region as a whole. The EU role in combating piracy
off the coast of Somalia through Operation Atalanta
and the European Union Regional Maritime Capacity
Building for the Horn of Africa and the Western Indian
Ocean, its provision of resources for capacity-building
in Somalia and its direct and sustained efforts in
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia have
been instrumental in the fight against terrorism and in
bringing stability and, we hope, sustainable peace to
that country.
The Libyan crisis is a matter of great concern to the
Council and the international community. Its painful
consequences are being felt by the Libyan people and
by people to the South, with the Sahel and West and
Central Africa experiencing a dangerous and deadly
spree of terrorism. The impact is also being felt in the
Mediterranean Sea, which has indeed been transformed
into a cemetery, with the recurrent drownings that we
see happening there.
Terrorism is the main cause of forced migration
of millions of people in search of survival, peace and
a better future. The fight against terrorism is an issue

16-1599821/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

06/06/2016

that requires unity of action and the international
community’s determination to extirpate that senseless
expression of extremist violence, hatred and intolerance.
The world coalition and its unity of purpose against
terrorism must be strengthened.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President,
we congratulate you for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful for the statement made by
Ms. Federica Mogherini.

We very much appreciate the outcome of the Valletta
Summit on Migration, held on 11 and 12 November
last year, at which the European and African Heads of
State and Government discussed means to strengthen
cooperation in addressing the causes underlying
irregular migration and forced displacement, enhance
collaboration on legal migration and mobility, reinforce
protections for migrants and asylum-seekers, prevent
irregular migration, smuggling and trafficking in
human beings, and commit to focusing on social,
economic and political issues to revive hope, notably in
Africa and for African youth.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
of the positive role played by regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts as well as in the process of peacebuilding
through recovery, reconstruction and development of
societies emerging from conflicts.

We commend the declared intent to deepen
cooperation among the States members of the EU to
find political and operational solutions in order to
prevent the tragedies we have been witnessing daily
with illegal immigrants. This is an issue that has to
be addressed, within the perspective of international
assistance, crisis management, integration and social
inclusion. In this regard, we value the cooperation the
European Union is providing to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to the
International Organization for Migration in terms of
addressing the needs of refugees and asylum-seekers.
Angola looks forward to participating again in the
Migration Summit, which will be reconvened later this
year in order to address these issues.
Through a strong partnership, the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union can
strengthen the efforts of the wider international
community to face the challenges and build capacity
to address current threats in a comprehensive and longterm manner, based on the guiding principles of mutual
respect and respect for human rights and international
law as the key factors in sustaining peace and stability.
Finally, Angola highly values the European Union
as a global player of prime relevance whose influence
worldwide, in working with the United Nations and its
international and regional partners, is crucial to the
collective effort to find lasting solutions to the issues we
continue to face. This effort is a shared responsibility
and a moral duty. We must make our best effort to work
together for solidarity, peace and the well-being of all.
22/28

With regard to managing crises, we believe that the
European Union and its members must continue to act
in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The European Union’s contribution to the search for
peaceful and negotiated solutions to situations affecting
international peace and security is laudable. Particular
mention should be made of its efforts in the diplomatic
process of the P5+1 to achieve a comprehensive, longterm and appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear
issue, which culminated with the adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. That represented a
significant achievement in promoting and maintaining
the international non-proliferation regime. This
important diplomatic agreement highlighted once again
that dialogue and negotiation are the only possible
ways to achieve peaceful solutions to disputes affecting
international peace and security. We also reiterate the
need for the European Union to continue working to
promote the denuclearization of other regions of the
world, in particular the Middle East, in accordance
with relevant international treaties on the subject.
The situation of instability in the Middle East, which
is the result of the stalemate in the peace process and the
terrorist violence affecting the countries of the region,
calls on the Security Council, with the support of the
European Union, to play a prominent role in promoting
a definitive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
based on the two-State solution, including putting an
end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories and
the establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State along internationally secured pre-1967
borders. In this regard, we recognize that the European
Union, as a member of the Quartet, must continue to
support efforts to reactivate negotiations between the
parties in order to reach peaceful solutions leading to
a firm and lasting peace. We welcome the holding of
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the ministerial meeting, which took place in Paris last
Friday, 3 June, and which we hope will pave the way for
the convening of an international peace conference on
the Middle East.
The armed conflict in Libya looms large on the
agenda of the European Union, as demonstrated by
its actions to address this problem. In this regard, we
call on that regional organization to redouble its efforts
to support dialogue and reduce tensions in order to
strengthen the Government of National Accord and
re-establish the political institutions in that country,
which was affected by the military intervention of
2011. We also call on it to coordinate its actions with
the African Union.
The conflict situations in other countries in the
Middle East and Africa have led to waves of migrants
fleeing wars, which have been exploited by criminal
organizations to carry out criminal activities related
to human trafficking with deplorable consequences.
The International Organization for Migration indicates
that, by May this year, the number of migrants and
asylum seekers who have reached Europe via different
routes across the Mediterranean had exceeded 200,
000 people, of which more than 2,400 were killed or
disappeared in their attempt to reach European soil.
Despite resolution 2240 (2015), we note that lost
lives are reported every day as a result of the sinking
of vessels used by organized crime. We would like
to reiterate that, in Venezuela’s opinion, neither
making migration more secure nor criminalizing it
are appropriate approaches to this issue, which is
essentially a human rights issue. In this regard, we
reiterate our call for the actions and policies adopted
to work on this issue stay away from visions that run
counter to applicable international human rights law.
The discourse and actions must therefore lead to the
decriminalization of migration, respect for diversity and
tolerance. We welcome the initiative of some countries
of the European Union to welcome a considerable
number of refugees and migrants from these regions
in conflict.
In order to avoid or reduce the flows of migrants, a
greater effort must be made to seek peaceful solutions
to the ongoing conflicts rather than supporting policies
of regime change and investing more in improving
the living conditions of the populations in regions
suffering from deep economic and social inequalities.
We reiterate that any policy aimed at addressing this

S/PV.7705

phenomenon, must be in strict compliance with the
regulatory framework developed by the international
community for refugees and human rights.
Finally, we hope that these channels of cooperation
and communication between the United Nations and
the European Union will be strengthened and will
effectively contribute to the promotion of international
peace and security.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important briefing.
I too welcome Her Excellency Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, back to the
Council and thank her for her statement.
Malaysia reaffirms its full support for strengthening
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. As an established regional organization that
shares the values and principles of the United Nations,
we highly value the role played by the European Union
(EU) in promoting peace, stability and development in
its region and beyond.
We listened careful to Her Excellency Mogherini’s
update on the role played by the EU in the Middle East
Quartet, including its participation in the international
conference in Paris last week. Malaysia welcomes the
constructive and objective role played by the EU as a
member of the Quartet. We would like to see a more
active role played by the EU in this regard, including as
an honest broker, in view of the absence of leadership
and political will in the Council on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict.
As one of the most important and influential
regional organizations, we believe the EU we could
pave the way in the Israel-Palestinian conflict by using
the tools at its disposal to end decades impunity and
ensure adherence to international law, freedom and
respect for human rights, which are core values of the
EU. In view of the deteriorating situation on the ground
and the slow death of the two-State solution, we need to
move away from the previous practice of managing the
conflict it to addressing its root causes. We need to end
the repressive Israeli occupation.
Meanwhile, in facing other complex challenges in
the Middle East region, such as Syria and Libya, we
commend the strong support provided by the EU on the
United Nations-led political dialogue in both countries.

16-1599823/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The massive humanitarian crisis arising from the
influx of migrants and refugees from Syria and Libya
prove too challenging for any one organization or
country to handle alone. We therefore applaud the
critical role played by the EU in supporting Syrian
refugees whether within the EU’s territories or in the
host countries in the Middle East through its migration
policy and humanitarian aid.
The most recent pledge by the EU amounting to over
$3 billion at the London donors’ conference in February
is yet another example of the EU’s commitment to
address the migration crisis in the Mediterranean. On
this note, Malaysia looks up to the EU’s vast experience
and expertise in dealing with my migratnts and refugees
to address the related problems of human trafficking
and people smuggling in the South-East Asian region.
Since the Council last convened to discuss
cooperation with the EU (see S/PV.7439), we have
witnessed shocking terrorist attacks in Europe by
Da’esh. Our heartfelt condolences go to the families and
loved ones of the terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels.
No one is truly saved from terror attacks, regardless of
one’s race, nationality, religion or beliefs. It is therefore
our responsibility to strengthen our joint resolve
in combating this menace. In this regard, Malaysia
welcomes the comprehensive strategy adopted by the
EU to counter the global threat of terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalization. The strategy seeks to
address not just the symptoms of terrorism, but also
its root causes. It also recognizes that military action
alone is not sufficient to defeat Da’esh, as it addresses
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, cuts off
terrorist financing, promotes political stability, and
engages in strategic countermessaging.
As part of a comprehensive strategy to counter
violent extremism and radicalization, we also need
to address the increasing sentiment of Islamophobia,
which has given rise to the marginalization and
alienation of and discrimination against Muslims in
Europe on the basis of their religion. Muslim minorities
in Europe should not be pressured to be less Muslim
in order to more European. They should not become
the twofold victims, first, of terror attacks, and then of
policy responses to these attacks. We acknowledge the
EU attempts to deal with the problem of Islamophobia
as part of its broader response to xenophobia in the
region. We believe that policies based on more dialogue,
social and economic inclusion, non-discrimination and
support for minority groups would complement the EU
24/28

06/06/2016

counter-terrorism strategy and bring long-term benefits
to Europe’s pluralistic societies.
In the Western Balkans region, we highly appreciate
the stabilizing role played by the EU, particularly in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. We commend
the active participation of the High Representative in
facilitating the ongoing dialogue to normalize relations
between Pristina and Belgrade. We also fully support
the continuing role of the EU in further strengthening
democratic institutions, the rule of law and the process
of reconciliation, as well as in creating a functioning
market economy in the Western Balkans.
In Malaysia’s view, if there is a single most
important lesson to be learned from post-Second
World War Europe for the Western Balkans, it is the
need to acknowledge and address the past. We strongly
believe that this would be the best way to move forward
towards peace, stability and prosperity in the Western
Balkans. It may be difficult to swallow, but unless and
until we acknowledge the atrocities committed in the
past, uphold accountability and learn from the mistakes
made, we will find ourselves unable to find closure,
foster reconciliation and make progress in the region.
Even worse, we may be condemned to repeat the past.
On Africa, we commend the role and contributions
of the EU, in close partnership with the United Nations
and the African Union, particularly in the Sahel region,
the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa. Over the
years, the EU has provided a stabilizing presence in
those regions, ranging from conflict prevention to
conflict management, post-conflict transition and
sustainable development.
Closer to home, Malaysia welcomes the recent
intensification of the EU engagement with Myanmar
in support of the country’s democratic transition
and sustainable development. This includes EUMyanmar bilateral development cooperation under
the Multi-annual Indicative Programme 2014-2020,
and the EU support for the Myanmar Peace Centre
in providing technical support in implementing
the ceasefire and promoting political dialogue,
reconciliation and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Malaysia welcomes the reaffirmation
by the High Representative that the EU will continue its
close cooperation with the Organization in upholding
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations. As we have heard today, the EU has
a lot to offer through its specific expertise, wide
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

experience and pooled resources to complement and
support the role of the United Nations in facing various
global challenges. I take this opportunity to reiterate
Malaysia’s commitment to playing a constructive
role in further engaging with regional organizations,
including the EU, in maintaining international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I welcome today’s briefing on cooperation between
the United Nations and the European Union, in the
presence of its High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy. I once again salute her presence
among us.
The general tone of the statements around the
table shows, I believe, the extent to which cooperation
between the two organizations is both natural and
essential, as their shared values and joint fields of
action are many and growing. The European Union is
indeed a major player in the maintenance of peace and
a partner of the United Nations at the highest level level
in this area. Like other regional organizations, its role
is becoming increasingly central in the implementation
of peacekeeping operations, be it in funding, military
contributions or political support. More broadly, the
European Union intervenes in favour of peace and
security by using all its instruments in the context of a
comprehensive approach.
Thus, the many missions deployed by the
European Union, both military and civilian, under its
Common Security and Defence Policy, contribute to
the implementation of or support for the decisions of
the Council in various regions of the world. That is
particularly the case on the European continent, where
the Union contributes, for example, to the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the strengthening of
the rule of law in Kosovo; in Africa, including Mali,
the Niger, the Central African Republic and Somalia,
where the Union supports the structural reinforcement
of African capacities to respond to crises and provides
vital funding to African peacekeeping operations; or in
response to transnational threats through the action of
the Union in the fight against the smuggling of migrants
in the Mediterranean or against maritime piracy off the
Somali coast.
We should also recall the contribution of European
countries to various peacekeeping operations both
financially — with its funding of nearly one-third

S/PV.7705

of the general peacekeeping budget — and in human
terms, as for example in Mali, where more than 1,000
peacekeepers are engaged in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, with unprecedented resources. The European
Union is also a strategic partner of the Security Council
in the search for lasting solutions to the major crises on
its agenda.
That is the case first and foremost with the peace
process in the Middle East, where the European Union
recalls tirelessly that a just and lasting solution can
be achieved only through respect for the law and that
our common priority must be to preserve the viability
of the two-State solution. The Union fully supported
the French initiative for peace in the Middle East.
The 3 June meeting in Paris brought together many
actors, including of course the European Union, with
the aim of laying the foundations for a new momentum
for peace that enjoys the active support of the entire
international community, with the ambition of holding
an international conference by the end of the year.
That is also the case on the Syrian track, where
the European Union has added its voice to those who
rightloy stress the urgent need to resume inter-Syrian
negotiations for the establishment of a political
transition in line with the provisions of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/523, annex), endorsed by the
Council, while stressing that it can reasonably occur
only in a context of a lasting cessation of hostilities
and the open, continuous and unhindered access of
humanitarian aid to all in the need.
It is also true in Libya, where the European Union
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya are
engaged in a massive effort to empower the Government
of National Accord to fight the threat posed by the
growing presence of terrorist groups in its territory.
The European Union has particularly expressed its
willingness to contribute, through its naval mission
Operation Sophia, deployed in international waters off
the Libyan coast, to strengthening the implementation
of the arms embargo on Libya without prejudice to
possible exemptions for the benefit of the Government
of National Accord. To that end, we are working with our
European partners on the Council on a draft resolution
that would strengthen deep-sea intervention procedures
against ships carrying weapons or associated equipment
in violation of the arms embargo.

16-1599825/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is also the case with regard to the crisis in
Ukraine, where the European Union is conducting
a policy that combines dialogue and firmness. The
sanctions are meant not to punish but to encourage the
stakeholders to implement the provisions endorsed by
the Security Council to resolve the crisis, including
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
The European Union is also a leading player in the
response to the global migrant crisis. Let us see the
situation for what it is. Faced with what amounts to the
largest crisis of displaced persons and refugees since
the end of the Second World War, in respect of which
the entire international community shares an equal
need for solidarity and responsibility, the determined
action of the European Union is too often undervalued
or misunderstood. It remains by far the largest purveyor
of aid to refugees in the world. Its member States hosted
more than 1 million refugees in 2015 alone.
Operations headed by the European Union, first
and foremost Operation Sophia of the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean, have saved thousands of people
drowning in the waters of the Mediterranean and
helped to combat migrant-trafficking networks in the
region. The European Union is also addressing the root
causes of this phenomenon, as demonstrated by the fact
that it is the primary donor globally of financing for
development, in the framework of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as well as by the substantive
financing it provides to countries of origin and of
transit. While the EU cannot resolve the migrant crisis
alone, it is shouldering fully its responsibility on the
political, security and financial fronts, as well as the
moral and humanitarian fronts, so as to provide an
effective response.
Today we are marking the anniversary of the
Normandy landing, one of the key events that opened
the way for the liberation of Europe and for the eventual
creation of the EU.
I should like to conclude by once again highlighting
a key point of convergence between the EU and the
United Nations. The two organizations are strategic
partners to each other, united by a shared vision of the
world in which right must prevail over might, and by a
common vision of multilateralism. This is what makes
the European Union, beyond its role as a regional
26/28

06/06/2016

organization, one of the central pillars of the current
international system.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor once again to Ms. Mogherini to
respond to the comments made.
Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): My role at
this stage is facilitated by the fact that collectively
the members of the Council have emphasized better
than I could have the areas in which United NationsEuropean Union cooperation is positive, fundamental
and strategic. My concluding remarks will therefore be
easier to make and briefer.
(spoke in English)
I would refer to the words that President Obama spoke
in Europe, as quoted by the American representative,
which reminded us of how much the European Union
has delivered, first of all to the Europeans; this is
sometimes seen much more from the outside than from
the inside of the Union. I think that this is something
that we have a responsibility as Europeans to bring
back home, and too see with a certain lucidity what we
have achieved. The anniversary of D-Day reminds us
of how much Europe has done for Europe itself, for the
neighbourhood and for peace and stability in the world,
compared to how much war, instability and bloodshed
Europeans had brought to the world in the previous
centuries and decades.
Speakers also highlighted how crucial and strategic
the EU-United Nations partnership is. I would quote the
Spanish Permanent Representative, who said,
(spoke in Spanish)
“[t]he relationship could not be any better”.
(spoke in English)
I think that this encapsulates the general outcome
of our exchanges today.
Speakers also stressed the added value of our
role as the European Union and our cooperation
with the United Nations on the many different issues
that I mentioned in my introductory remarks; I will
not go back to this. It also added to the already long
and good list some new elements, integrating my
introduction and mentioning key areas for the European
Union and for our cooperation. These included the
Balkans, in particular Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, but in general terms, the
16-15998

06/06/2016

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

work that the European Union is doing with every single
partner in the Western Balkans and with the region
as a whole. It included also the work we are doing in
faraway places, such as Myanmar, where we cherish our
support and our cooperation, and also in general terms
with our friends in South-East Asia, in the Far East
and with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
particular on the issues of non-proliferation and, as we
were reminded by our friends from New Zealand, on
counter-terrorism.
Here I would underline the words of the Egyptian
representative on the importance of building a counternarrative radicalization discourse, especially building
on the European experience in valuing diversity
and respect, which is the most powerful message we
can put in place all together to counter the terrorist
narrative. Also key is the work we do together on
post-conflict issues, on crisis prevention, on the link
between development and security that is at the core
of the European Union’s external action, and the work
we do on human rights, democracy and the rule of
law, on the fight against xenophobia, Islamophobia
and anti-Semitism, which is a key component of our
internal and external policies.
I would cite also our ongoing work, together
with the United Nations, on respect for international
law and its principles, starting with sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Here I would like to acknowledge
the words of the Ukrainian representative, and I
thank him for recognizing the constant and consistent
support that we are giving and will continue to give to
Ukraine, especially with regard to its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
I should like to react on only one issue, migration,
because participants highlighted the work that we are
trying to do and that we are doing. Operation Sophia
has already saved tens of thousands of people directly,
but it has also allowed us to save more than 100,000
people at sea. We would like to see no one die, either in
the Mediterranean or in the desert.
Here I would stress your words, Mr. President,
when you say that this is a collective responsibility. We
are doing our part; it is sometimes not easy politically
inside Europe to do this, but we believe that this is our
human duty and our political responsibility. We need the
rest of the world to join us in this effort, because while
the people who are dying in the desert are less visible,
they are still a tragic loss that we cannot afford. So my

S/PV.7705

plea to all present and to the international community
as a whole and the United Nations system in particular
is this: let us join forces to ensure that no one loses his
or her life in desperate journeys, at sea, in the desert or
on land. We need others here to support and contribute
to this effort.
One speaker mentioned the fact that the European
Union is working to counter migration. No; we are
trying to work to manage together a phenomenon that
we know very well is here, is going to stay, is huge and
does not relate only to Europe, because we know very
well that the major flows are within Africa and within
Asia, and in some cases they have been from Europe
to Latin America. I myself come from a country that
has experience in this respect, so we know very well
that this is not a problem that we need to stop but a
phenomenon that we need to manage together in a sense
of partnership. This is the approach that we are taking
in a spirit of common challenge, common responsibility
and common solidarity, knowing also that migration
can open up opportunities of different kinds for our
societies if it is managed and addressed with a sense
of partnership.
That is exactly the meaning of our Valletta summit,
which our Angolan friend was mentioning as a good
common point. This is exactly the spirit in which
tomorrow in Strasburg I will present the new migration
package andr partnerships that the European Union will
put in place, exactly in this spirit of working together,
first of all for the sake of people’s lives and rights.
I thank the members of the Council for this excellent
exchange. Many speakers mentioned the role of the
European Union and its member States. We see that
in most respects we are the primary donor everywhere
in the world, and the primary economic partner and
economic investor in many different parts of the world.
We are a major security provider with our 17 missions
and operations in the region and many other places,
mainly but not only in Africa. Together with our member
States, we are a major diplomatic and political actor,
especially on mediation. We would like all of this to
be at the service of our common principles and values,
knowing that the key elements of the European Union
foreign and security policy are and shall remain those
of dialogue, diplomacy and multilateralism. That is the
European way. That is the United Nations way. And we
look forward to strengthening our cooperation even
more for the sake of peace and security in the world.

16-1599827/28

S/PV.7705

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

(spoke in French):
I thank you very much, Sir, for this exchange, which

28/28

06/06/2016

I found to be very useful and constructive.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

16-15998
