Resolution 822 (1993)

''Letter dated 2 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/25525);4

or JO April 1993

The Security Council,

''Letter dated 5 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/25526);4

Recalling the statements of the President of the Security Council of
29 January' and of6 April 5 1993 concerning the Nagorny Karabakh
conflict,

"Letter dated 5 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/25527);4

Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 14 April 1993,6
Expressing its serious concern at the deterioration of the relations
between the Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic,

"Identical letters dated 5 April 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed respectively to the Secreta7-General and the President of the Security
Council (S/25528)".

Noting with alarm the escalation in armed hostilities and, in
particular, the latest invasion of the Kelbadjar district of Azerbaijan by
local Armenian forces,

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier among
members of the Security Council, the President made the following
statement on behalf of the Council: 5

Concerned that this situation endangers peace and security in the
region,
Expressing grave concern at the displacement of a large number of
civilians and the humanitarian emergency in the region, in particular in
the Kelbadjar district,

"The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the
deterioration of relations between the Republic of Armenia and the
Azerbaijani Republic, and at the escalation of hostile acts in the
Nagomy Karabakh conflict, especially the invasion of the Kelbadjar
district of Azerbaijan by local Armenian forces. The Council
demands the immediate cessation of all such hostilities, which
endanger peace and security of the region, and the withdrawal of
these forces.

Reaffirming the respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States in the region,
Reaffirming also the inviolability of international borders and the
inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of territory,

"In this context the Council, reaffirming the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States of the region and the inviolability of
their borders, expresses its support for the peace process of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). It
expresses the hope that the recent preliminary agreement reached by
the Minsk Group will be expeditiously followed by agreements on a
cease-fire, a timetable for the deployment of the monitors, a draft
political declaration and the convening, as soon as possible, of the
Minsk Conference.

Expressing its support for the peace process being pursued within
the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and deeply concerned at the disruptive effect that the escalation
in armed hostilities can have on that process,
I . Demands the immediate cessation of all hostilities and hostile acts
with a view to establishing a durable cease-fire, as well as immediate
withdrawal of all occupying forces from the Kelbadjar district and other
recently occupied areas of Azerbaijan;

"The Council urges the parties involved to take all necessary steps
to advance the CSCE peace process and refrain from any action that
will obstruct a peaceful solution to the problem.

2. Urges the parties concerned immediately to resume negotiations
for the resolution of the conflict within the framework of the peace
process of the Minsk Group of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and to refrain from any action that will obstruct
a peaceful solution of the problem;

"The Council also calls for unin'lpeded access to international
humanitarian relief efforts in the region and in particular in all areas
affected by the conflict in order to alleviate the suffering of the
civilian population.

3. Calls for unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief
efforts in the region, in particular in all areas affected by the conflict in
order to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population, and reaffirms
that all parties are bound to comply with the principles and rules of
international humanitarian law;

"The Council requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with

the CSCE, to ascertain facts, as appropriate, and to submit urgently

a report to the Council containing an assessment of the situation on
the ground.

4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Chairman-in-Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe as well as the Chairman of the Minsk Group, to assess the
situation in the region, in particular in the Kelbadjar district of Azerbaijan, and to submit a further report to the Council;

"The Council will remain seized of the matter."

At its 3205th meeting, on 30 April 1993, the Council decided to
invite the representatives of Armenia and Azerbaijan to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled: "The situation
relating to Nagomy Karabakh: report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to the statement of the President of the Security Council in connection
with the situation relating to NagornY, Karabakh (S/25600)". 4

5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Adopted unanimously at the 3205th meeting.

6
Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-eighth
Year. Supplement/or April, May and June 1993, document S/25600.

S/25539.

70
