S/PV.7244

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7244th meeting

Tuesday, 19 August 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
World Humanitarian Day
Letter dated 5 August 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/571)

14-51036 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1451036*

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

seen shocking tragedies and terrorist acts against
United Nations personnel and premises in places such
as Algeria, Nigeria, Somalia and Afghanistan. Those
appalling incidents remain fresh in our minds.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
World Humanitarian Day
Letter dated 5 August 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/571)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Mr. Masood Karokhail, Director and
co-founder of The Liaison Office.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Maurer,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/571, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 August 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I now
give him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
thank the President of the Security Council for this
initiative to mark World Humanitarian Day with a
briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers.
The subject is critical to mobilizing awareness and
action and to improving our response to people caught
in conflicts and disaster.
World Humanitarian Day commemorates the
bombing of the United Nations premises at the Canal
Hotel in Baghdad on 19 August 2003. It is dedicated
to the memory of all staff members and partners who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty
for the humanitarian imperative. Since then, we have
2/22

19/08/2014

Humanitarian workers from the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations dedicate their lives to assisting millions
of women, children and men affected by conflicts and
natural disasters around the world. Working in some of
the most dangerous places, they take great risks to help
people in desperate need.
Yet all too frequently their safety is compromised
in the most despicable ways: by threats, by attacks and
by the use of illegal methods of warfare that endanger
lives or damage the infrastructure needed for the
delivery of assistance. Such acts are part of the picture
of brutalization that we see in the world today. Parties
to conflict very often ignore international humanitarian
law and target civilians for the sake of political and
military gains. They have used collective punishment.
They have incited ethnic violence. They have impeded
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. And they have
attacked humanitarian actors. What that represents is
nothing less than a deficit of humanity. Regretfully,
that trend is getting worse, rather than better.
Last year more humanitarian workers were
kidnapped, seriously injured or killed than ever
before: 155 were reportedly killed, 171 were wounded
and 134 kidnapped. That represents a 66 per cent per
cent increase in relation to 2012. Thus far in 2014,
79 humanitarian workers have been killed, 33 wounded
and 50 kidnapped, according to the preliminary figures
available at this stage. In Somalia alone, over a dozen
humanitarian staff were kidnapped or detained during
the first quarter of 2014. In recent weeks, several
humanitarian workers have been killed in South Sudan
and Gaza.
The consequences of those crimes are felt not only
by humanitarian workers and their families, but also
by the millions of people who cannot be reached when
assistance is sabotaged by violence. They are felt by the
children who do not get vaccinated. They are felt by
the sick and wounded who go untreated. And they are
felt by those forced from their homes and left without
shelter.
In recent years, the majority of incidents have taken
place in six countries, namely, Afghanistan, Pakistan,

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The overwhelming majority of victims are
national humanitarian staff working to save the lives of
their own people.
As we mourn those losses and recall the plight of
the many wounded or kidnapped, we must not accept
such outcomes as the necessary cost of operating in
risky environments. Our shared responsibility is to do
everything we can to provide humanitarians with the
safety and the space they need to do their life-saving
work.
It is essential not to politicize humanitarian action
and to make a clear distinction between humanitarian
actors and political or military actors. That distinction
is important, even when the military objective is the
protection of civilians. If those lines are blurred,
perceptions of humanitarian organizations can
change quickly and radically and further expose them
to violence. For that reason, political and military
actors must respect the need for humanitarian actors
to carry out their work in an impartial, neutral and
independent manner. Dialogue on how best to maintain
that distinction or strike that balance is an ongoing
endeavour.
To misuse humanitarian action for political,
military and security ends is dangerous. That
compromises the integrity of humanitarian operations
and can place the lives of humanitarian workers and
the people they assist in grave danger. Respect for the
humanitarian principles of impartiality, neutrality and
independence is crucial for building acceptance by
parties to conflict and affected communities. That must
include preserving the ability of humanitarian workers
to engage with all parties to conflict. Such engagement
serves humanitarian purposes. I want to stress that it
does not confer legal status or political legitimacy to
non-State groups. In that area, where humanitarian
action is urgently needed in conflict situations, the
Security Council has a clear role to play. That is why we
particularly appreciate the fact that you have organized
this briefing, Mr. President. I would suggest that four
actions are especially important.
First, the Council can routinely call on parties to
conflict to uphold their legal obligations and condemn
parties when they do not. Secondly, the Council
can ensure that measures to safeguard peace and
security, such as the negotiation of peace agreements
or the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, do not blur the lines between political,

S/PV.7244

military and humanitarian objectives. Humanitarian
efforts, essential as they are, are no substitute for
political action to resolve the causes of conflicts.
Thirdly, the Council can impose targeted measures
against parties to conflict who violate their obligations
to respect and protect humanitarian workers and the
civilian population. Fourthly, the Council can use all
the tools at its disposal to seek accountability for those
who perpetrate attacks against humanitarian workers
and assets. That means supporting investigations and
prosecutions at the national level, creating special
criminal tribunals or mixed arrangements, making use
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
and referring relevant situations to the International
Criminal Court. Let us remember that those who commit
such crimes take the civilian population hostage and
consciously spread fear and use intimidation to reach
their goals. They must never be allowed to succeed.
I would like to conclude by stressing that attacks
against humanitarian workers and facilities are part
of a deeply disturbing trend, as I mentioned earlier. I
am thinking here of the increase in unacceptable and
cowardly attacks against civilians in armed conflict
and the sadly growing lack of respect for international
humanitarian law. Let us not accept the growing deficit
of humanity; rather, let us stop it.
Today, on World Humanitarian Day, let us honour
the victims, let us protect the heroes on the front lines
of disaster and war, and let us do everything we can to
help them and to help us all to alleviate human suffering
in a difficult time of turmoil and violence in the world.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to address the Council during this crucial
discussion.
As President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), I represent 13,000 individuals,
many of whom are working in volatile and dangerous
environments. Their safety is a constant concern. As a
leader of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, I am particularly aware of the terrible risks
that hundreds of thousands of volunteers take to help
people in need. Sadly, violence and threats of violence
against humanitarian workers know no borders, colours
or religion. They are wildly indiscriminate and affect
us all, regardless of whether we work for the United

14-510363/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Nations, the Red Cross or a local non-governmental
organization.
Humanitarian work is by definition dependent on
those who do it: no workers, no aid. The equation is
simple, but that simplicity conceals the most complex
and difficult task facing humanitarian organizations
working in violence-prone environments today. That
task is to reach the people in need while guaranteeing
the safety of the personnel of those organizations.
No effective action is possible without allowing
humanitarian personnel to go about their work and
actively ensuring their safety.
Working in armed conflict environments has
always been dangerous, and always will be. Today,
however, some of the inherent dangers are being
exacerbated by the sheer number of high-risk combat
zones in which organizations like ours are active.
There have been dramatic changes, such as the security
constraints under which humanitarian workers have to
operate. While conflicts may not necessarily be more
violent than in the past, workers are more exposed. The
fragmentation of armed groups — many of which have
unclear command structures — the easy availability of
small arms, the intertwining of a variety of motives and
the outsourcing of security tasks to private military and
security companies are all realities that have changed
the environment in which we operate.
The resurgence of religious fundamentalism and
the spreading of terror and violence, fuelled or aided by
new and far-reaching social media, have brought new
figures to the fore, and they are redrafting the rules to
fit their shifting agendas.
As a result of such changes, what we euphemistically
call security incidents have been multiplying. Because
of the risks involved, the number of organizations able,
allowed or willing to work in conflict environments
has shrunk dramatically over the past decade. That
means that calls for humanitarian action are ever less
likely to be answered. The negative perception that
some individuals and groups have of humanitarian
action — and the deliberate attacks against humanitarian
workers that result — is a problem that the international
community must address head-on. Solutions do indeed
exist. Let me mention a few of the elementary points
that must be accepted and acted on if humanitarian
workers are to carry out their duties effectively and in
safety.
First and foremost, it is important to remind
ourselves that protecting humanitarian workers in
4/22

19/08/2014

armed-conflict environments is an obligation under
international humanitarian law. States and non-State
actors must respect and protect humanitarian personnel,
as well as objects used exclusively for humanitarian
operations. That obligation, applicable in both
international and non-international armed conflict,
is absolute. Not only is this the unavoidable duty of
the actual parties to the conflict, but all States have a
collective responsibility to uphold that rule, as they do
to ensure respect for humanitarian law as a whole.
Secondly, the blurring of the line between military,
political and humanitarian activities poses a real threat
to humanitarian action and humanitarian workers.
With their determination to work in close proximity
to the people they are striving to help, humanitarian
workers depend on being — and on being perceived
to be — neutral and impartial. Any attempt to exploit
humanitarian aid, or to mix together humanitarian
goals and political agendas, automatically increases the
risk of being perceived with hostility and of creating
dangers for humanitarian personnel on the ground.
Looking at the majority of the crises today, what is
missing is strong political will to protect humanitarian
workers and to respect the principles according to
which they operate, thus ensuring a separate scope
for humanitarian action. That is imperative, whatever
parallel efforts are under way to find political solutions
to a conflict. Humanitarian action must not serve as
a fig leaf for political inaction. That is a burden that
humanitarian workers cannot be expected to shoulder.
My third point is that security is intimately
linked to acceptance. Without those two things,
humanitarian workers find it extremely difficult to
safely reach people in need and provide impartial aid
and protection. Acceptance depends on the ability
of humanitarian organizations to engage with local
communities and others. That means speaking with
armed non-State actors about humanitarian law and
principles and obtaining unambiguous and adequate
security guarantees. Through extensive networking at
all levels and through constant dialogue with all parties
concerned, the International Committee of the Red
Cross aims to ensure a safer working environment for
its staff. That is our main strategy. We call it a threatreduction strategy, and we implement it by dealing
with local contacts who control the level of threat to
which our operations are exposed. Those entities
must understand our objectives and the exclusively
humanitarian purpose of our actions.

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

At a more basic level, it is important to mention
that security management requires humanitarian
organizations to adopt professional standards and
training in this area. Different organizations use
different models. Some, such as those of the United
Nations system, adopt a more centralized approach in
which headquarters plays a significant role. Others,
such as the ICRC, follow a more decentralized approach
in which decision-making is mainly delegated to the
field. No matter the model applied, what counts is a
willingness to seek the best combination for improving
the safety of humanitarian workers.
I would like to mention here the Health Care in
Danger initiative led by the ICRC over the past two and
a half years. It has generated compelling information
on the threats facing health-care workers, many of
whom are humanitarian volunteers and staff. After
studying some of the riskiest situations — such as
crossing checkpoints, emergency evacuations and the
deployment of troops next to health facilities — we have
made recommendations to armed entities, lawmakers,
health authorities, ambulance providers and many
more. The ICRC and the World Health Organization
will co-organize an event on health care and violence
during the General Assembly session this fall, and
we hope that many States, including the members of
the Security Council, will be present to discuss this
important subject.
Another ICRC initiative I would briefly like to
mention is what we call the Safer Access Framework.
This framework involved broad consultations with
over 50 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
on how best to identify and meet the challenges they
face in ensuring operational access and acceptance at
all times. The aim of this initiative is to increase the
ability of National Societies to deliver assistance while
at the same time reducing the risks facing staff and
volunteers.
Recent attacks on humanitarian organizations
by both non-State entities and Government forces
demonstrate that aid organizations are not always
targeted because of faulty perceptions of their roles
and responsibilities; sometimes such targeting is part
of a carefully plotted political and military strategy.
Those attacks are deliberate, and the perpetrators
will not be deterred by well-crafted explanations of
humanitarian mandates or by security procedures.
For an organization like the ICRC, finding a way to
respond to such manifestations of hostility can be an

S/PV.7244

insurmountable challenge, for they threaten its very
operational model and its ability to reach communities.
The States and other parties to conflict must rally in
great numbers to put an end to those practices.
The current political environment has sore
need of impartial organizations that conduct strictly
humanitarian activities. Members of the International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement are committed
to standing by people in need during armed conflict
and other situations of violence. We are determined to
live up to the following principle: the only side taken
by the Red Cross and Red Crescent is the side of the
victims.
Protecting the lives of humanitarian workers is
not the responsibility of any specific country; it is
the responsibility of all nations and communities,
stemming from a truly universal value. It deserves the
full attention that it is receiving in the Security Council
today.
The President: I thank Mr. Maurer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Karokhail.
Mr. Karokhail: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Security
Council about the situation in Afghanistan, especially
the impact of insecurity on local humanitarian
workers — a risk they share with the vulnerable
communities they assist.
As the Council knows, the conflict in
Afghanistan is growing more intense. The recent
spike in violence — such as a car bomb in southeastern Afghanistan that killed at least 89 civilians
in July — provides little confidence that the security
situation will improve any time soon. The year 2013
saw a 14 per cent increase in civilian casualties over
the previous year, the highest number of civilian deaths
and injuries since 2001. That presents a complex reality
for Afghan civilians, as they are increasingly targeted
directly or caught in the cross-fire. At risk too are
humanitarian and development workers, who stand on
the front line with the vulnerable communities they
assist. Afghanistan has been called the world’s most
dangerous place for aid workers.
In this briefing, I wish to highlight four key
points: the impact of violence on Afghan aid workers,
the transfer of risk to local staff from international
organizations, the need to better protect local staff, and
what can be done to improve the situation.

14-510365/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

First, Afghan humanitarian workers bear the
brunt of violence, regardless of whom they work for.
Afghanistan has seen the highest number of casualties
among humanitarian workers in the world, almost four
times more than neighbouring Pakistan. Since 2001,
895 aid workers have been attacked, including 325
killed, 253 wounded and 317 kidnapped. Last year was
the most violent year to date for humanitarian workers.
Those headline figures, however, say little about
who is affected. For the most part, Afghan nationals
have borne the brunt of insecurity. Afghan aid workers
account for 88 per cent of those killed, 89 per cent of
those wounded and 89 per cent of those kidnapped.
And that does not tell the whole story: many local
organizations do not report attacks on their staff, thus the
real numbers are likely to be much higher. For example,
in 2008 four of my organization’s staff were kidnapped
in Paktika province, in Afghanistan’s contested southeast, and another staff member was killed negotiating
their release. We did not make the incident public,
out of respect for the wishes of the families to keep
the incident private. Other local organizations have
confirmed similar practices. Statistics tell us only part
of the story about violence against local humanitarian
workers on the front line in Afghanistan.
Secondly, Afghan humanitarian workers suffer
heavy casualties in part because international
organizations are using local staff and local
organizations to reduce their own security risk. Attacks
on aid workers disproportionately affect national
staff. For example, 85 per cent of United Nations
staff involved in security incidents are Afghans; for
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
it is 76 per cent. That signals that there are different
values for local humanitarian workers in Afghanistan,
especially those working for the United Nations.
Furthermore, the security arrangements of
international NGOs and the United Nations often
make local humanitarian organizations less secure. As
security measures applied to protect international staff
are tightened and their mobility is restricted, the risk
to national staff is increased. Local staff take on more
responsibility for accessing dangerous areas while
international staff remain in compounds.
Communities and, by association, the insurgency
have great difficulty in distinguishing among different
organizations working on the ground. They associate
aid organizations with the international presence of
the International Security Assistance Force troops and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
6/22

19/08/2014

and view all of them as a legitimate target. The fact
that offices of many aid organizations, including the
United Nations, increasingly resemble military bunkers
with armed guards, and that usually Afghan police are
used for field escorts, adversely impacts the security of
local staff and organizations for which they work. The
perception of humanitarian organizations as neutral or
impartial in Afghanistan has greatly diminished both
for national and international organizations. That has
proven very costly in terms of Afghan lives.
Thirdly, the protection of Afghan humanitarian
staff is a complex issue that is not adequately addressed.
Afghans are expected to take greater risks than their
international counterparts in most organizations, simply
because their nationality is assumed to give them some
protection. That is no longer the case in Afghanistan.
Just because organizations are local does not mean
that they are not vulnerable. The responsibility for
humanitarian response continues to be pushed onto the
vulnerable communities we seek to assist.
Local humanitarian workers rarely receive the same
security arrangements as their international colleagues.
That inequality exploits the reliance of many Afghans
on employment opportunities within the humanitarian
sector, and many have been forced to accept dangerous
assignments simply to feed their families.
While the value of life is hard to measure, it is
difficult to be told by an international funder — as my
organization was in 2008 — that the possible death
of our staff is not budgeted for. That is especially the
case when international organizations subcontract to
local organizations to decrease the risk to their own
international staff. The implicit message that the lives
of Afghan staff are not only worth less but are also
expendable is difficult to stomach.
We all know that the future will hold more violence
in Afghanistan. The conflict is increasingly complex,
with aid workers having to deal with a patchwork of
insurgents, localized armed groups and criminal gangs.
International organizations and NGOs will continue to
see their operating space reduced, and the burden to
deliver assistance will continue to shift to Afghans.
I wish to conclude by suggesting what the United
Nations and the Security Council could do to improve
the protection of local humanitarian workers.
First, protection and equality start with monitoring
the risk, not just for international but also for local staff
and aid organizations.

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, there is a need to remove the artificial
hierarchy between international and local staff in
protracted situations such as that in Afghanistan.
Rather than using funds to create a bunkerization of
international aid agencies, the assistance community
could increase its partnership with national
organizations. That, however, should not mean
transferring all the risk or responsibility to local
organizations. It should also improve their protection.
Thirdly, access needs to be negotiated not on an ad
hoc basis, but collectively. The United Nations should
take the lead in that regard. The time has come to openly
speak to all parties in the conflict and negotiate clear
access principles. Despite several initiatives to discuss
access — including an NGO-led effort supported by the
Swiss Government, in which my organization is also
involved — actual negotiations are done individually
and on an ad hoc basis. There is an urgent need to develop
uniform principles for transparent and open access
negotiations, regardless whether the organizations are
local or international.
Fourthly, the Security Council must bring to
account the perpetrators who commit crimes against
aid workers.
Afghan organizations understand that they will
increasingly be asked to provide assistance where
international organizations no longer can. Many stand
ready to shoulder that burden. But the international
community must do more to protect them and enable
them to protect themselves. That includes capacitybuilding, empowering them to provide assistance to all
in need and providing adequate funding mechanisms
that allow them to mitigate the risks. We can no longer
maintain the status quo, where local aid workers put
their lives on the line in order to get the job done.
Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to share
the views of local organizations with the Council on
this very important matter.
The President: I thank Mr. Karokhail for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
In accordance with provisions of the note S/2010/507,
which encourages both members and non-members of
the Council to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less, it is our intention to use the flashing light on
the collar of the speaker’s microphone to indicate when

S/PV.7244

the five minutes have elapsed. I strongly encourage
members of the Council to conclude their remarks
promptly once the five minutes have elapsed.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for having organized this
briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the speakers
for their briefings. The situation they describe should
command our attention.
While the needs do not cease to grow, the
deployment of humanitarian actors is increasingly
hindered by the threats to their security. The figures
speak for themselves. The year 2013 represented a new
peak, with 251 attacks and 155 humanitarian workers
killed. That is the highest number of victims in the past
10 years. Unfortunately, initial information for 2014
does not indicate any improvement. While it is still
several months until the end of the year, the number
of humanitarian workers killed already exceeds, as the
Deputy Secretary-General just stated, the number of
violent deaths recorded in 2012.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
humanitarian workers falls on the host country. Yet
very often in conflict situations, the authorities have
neither the means nor the willingness to fulfil that role.
To that we have to add the proliferation of non-State
armed groups.
The partners of humanitarian actors must be
aware of that situation and provide them the resources
and flexibility required to adapt their planning to the
constraints imposed by the security conditions. It is also
important that those who have information on threats to
security share it as much as possible with the actors on
the ground, including non-governmental actors, since
they are often in the front lines facing those threats.
The United Nations initiative Saving Lives Together is
an example of good practice in that regard. In our view,
such initiatives should be continued and strengthened.
In 2003, following the attack on the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, the Security Council adopted
the seminal resolution 1502 (2003). Since then, in
many other Council decisions concerning country
situations or thematic issues, the imperative to protect
humanitarian workers has rightly been taken into
account. That mainstreaming effort must continue.
Given the evolution of the operational environment,
given the growth of insecurity, we believe it is time

14-510367/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to review resolution 1502 (2003), to try to reflect
developments since its adoption — their causes and
consequences — and to define the role of the Security
Council in that context. We believe such a discussion
should take into account the growing recognition that
international peacekeeping efforts must go hand in hand
with an improvement in the humanitarian situation of
civilian populations in zones of armed conflict and that
unmet humanitarian needs could contribute to further
destabilizing already fragile situations. However,
the need to break the vicious circle of violence and
deprivation should not have the perverse effect of
diverting humanitarian assistance from its main goal
and manipulating it for political purposes.
Humanitarian action can never replace political
action. The situation in Syria makes that only too clear.
At the same time, people under siege cannot wait for a
political solution to be found. They need humanitarian
assistance, to which they are entitled by virtue of
the most basic humanitarian principles codified in
international humanitarian law.
Adopted in the context of the Baghdad attack,
resolution 1502 (2003) clearly recalls, in its fifth
preambular paragraph, that
“there are existing prohibitions under international
law against attacks knowingly and intentionally
directed against personnel involved in a
humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission
undertaken in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations which in situations of armed
conflicts constitute war crimes”,
and recalls “the need for States to end impunity for
such criminal acts”.
Mention of the protection of humanitarian aid
workers leads inevitably to the matter of respect for
international humanitarian law, and the tools at our
disposal to combat impunity in that connection for
those found guilty of violating that law. We stand
with those who believe that the Security Council must
take full responsibility in that regard, by virtue of the
powers vested in it on that issue, whether that requires
commissions of inquiry, sanctions regimes or referral
to the International Criminal Court.
Today, on World Humanitarian Day, we honour the
memory of all those who have paid with their lives for
their commitment to the most vulnerable among us, We
pay homage to the thousands of humanitarian workers
who, day after day, prove their remarkable devotion and
8/22

19/08/2014

courage by bringing aid and assistance to populations in
need. We owe all possible assistance and protection to
those humanitarian heroes. Any initiative in that regard
can count on Luxembourg’s unconditional support.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
On World Humanitarian Day, I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this debate and for its
concept note (S/2014/571, annex). We also acknowledge
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and
Mr. Karokhail and thank them for their participation.
I would also like to honour all the humanitarian
workers of the United Nations, of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and of the many other
organizations that render service in areas of conflict
in order to assist the victims. I would like especially
to pay homage, with respect and admiration, to Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and with him to all the humanitarian
personnel who have lost their lives in this service.
For years, in his reports on this issue, the SecretaryGeneral has noted that the status of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict remains deplorable. At the
same time, deliberate attacks against humanitarian
personnel have become commonplace. Beginning with
the Baghdad attack in 2003, attacks on humanitarian
workers have continued in alarming numbers. Over
the past decades, there has been a troubling increase
in the number of abductions. Violations of the special
protection that humanitarian workers enjoy under
international humanitarian law have also become
commonplace, from South Sudan to Iraq, Afghanistan,
Syria and other situations that have come before the
Council.
International humanitarian law protects civilians
from the effects of armed conflicts through basic
institutions. One of those is the principle of distinction,
which is the basic norm of the obligation of combatants.
That principle also protects civilian installations such
as schools.
Another basic institution is the special protection
conferred on those who provide assistance to civilians
and the wounded. Therefore, the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their 1977 Protocols and customary
international humanitarian law include humanitarian
personnel among specially protected subjects.
International humanitarian law also protects the means
by which such assistance is provided, given that for the
protection of victims there must be adequate personnel
and means, including medical and other facilities and

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

means of transportation. All those are fundamental
to the survival of civilians, including the wounded.
Humanitarian personnel are also indirectly protected
as an integral part of the civilian population, which is
protected by virtue of the basic principle of distinction
between civilians and combatants.
Despite that protection, just as civilians in
situations of armed conflict are increasingly exposed
to deliberate armed attacks and other forms of
violence — such as violence against women, sexual
and gender-based violence, intimidation, kidnapping,
harassment and illegal detention — the participants
in humanitarian operations are also exposed to such
attacks. Acts of aggression against humanitarian
convoys and the destruction and looting of the goods
they are transporting have become common.
In the light of that, the United Nations, including
the Security Council, must continue its commitment to
the protection of civilians in areas of armed conflict and
to the protection of humanitarian personnel. With that
in mind, Argentina believes that a series of measures
deserves consideration.
First, there must be greater effort to promote
full respect for international law, particularly for
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
That was one of the issues emphasized during the open
debate organized by Argentina in August 2013 (see
S/PV.7019), and it continues to be a basic challenge of
protection.
Secondly, the Secretary-General should be
requested, pursuant to the spirit of resolution 1502
(2003), to inform Member States and the Security
Council of attacks against United Nations personnel and
to propose measures to improve their safety. He should
also be asked to invite the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations to
contribute information on such attacks.
Thirdly, the Council needs to continue to strengthen
its commitment to the investigation of facts and its
tireless fight against impunity for grave violations
of international humanitarian law, including against
humanitarian personnel, which constitute crimes under
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
To conclude, I would also like to stress that the
parties to a conflict should make all the necessary
efforts to guarantee effective and timely access
to humanitarian action, including shipments and

S/PV.7244

equipment. In some regions of the world, the only way
to assure humanitarian access is by includinig mandates
to protect civilians in peacekeeping operations. I
want to stress the basic norm that failure on the part
of one side to comply with the obligations imposed
by international humanitarian law does not justify
violations by the other. We need to learn to embody
and to reinvent that which is most human in the name
of a more just and less violent world. That which is a
self-evident responsibility for us is, for the victims, a
necessity.
Finally, on World Humanitarian Day, I would like
once again to express our solidarity with the victims of
armed conflict and to pay tribute to the humanitarian
personnel who daily express and embody the words of
the philosopher of modernity who said that good works
more effectively in the shadows than in broad daylight.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for organizing
this timely and relevant briefing. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross Peter
Maurer, and Director and co-founder of The Liaison
Office Masood Karokhail for their respective briefings.
I have expressed my concern to the Council on
several occasions, whether on thematic issues or
country-specific situations, that despite recent strides
in strengthening the ability of the United Nations
to protect civilians, conflicts around the world are
still characterized by a prevailing disrespect for the
core principles of international human rights and
humanitarian law, including the responsibility to
protect people from genocide and other mass atrocities,
as reaffirmed by resolution 2150 (2014). Combatants in
various theatres of conflict are behaving with disregard
for the rule of law, including the principles of distinction
and proportionality. The continued targeted attacks on
civilian areas and infrastructure, coupled with the use
of heavy weaponry, put civilian lives in danger.
It is unfortunate that, 11 years after the fateful
date of 19 August 2003, when a terrorist attack
against the Canal Hotel in Baghdad killed 22 people,
including Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Sergio Vieira de Mello, whom we remember
today, humanitarian workers continue to be attacked
or killed while working in conflict zones. Moreover,
discrimination and the restrictions imposed by
belligerents around the world continue to hamper the

14-510369/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

delivery of humanitarian aid, endangering the lives of
people in need. The perpetrators of such acts must be
prosecuted and held accountable. We reiterate our call
on all parties to conflict to observe strict compliance
with international law, to avoid targeting humanitarian
workers and their assets, to stop militarizing United
Nations and humanitarian facilities and to allow
unhindered access to humanitarian aid for affected
people.
We believe that effectively protecting humanitarian
workers requires concerted efforts by all stakeholders,
including the United Nations, in building a security
strategy that ensures broad-based acceptance of
the impartiality, neutrality and independence of
humanitarian organizations based on the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. That
requires continuous engagement with all the parties to
a conflict and building trust with the relevant political
forces at the local and national levels.
As the maintenance of international peace and
security remains an essential task of the United Nations,
humanitarian organizations rely on the sustained
efforts being made in this domain by the Organization,
especially by the Security Council. Peacekeeping
operations play an important role in that mission, as
they are often the only reliable force on the ground
to create conditions for humanitarian organizations
to operate. The Security Council should ensure that
the effective protection of humanitarian workers in
armed conflict is clearly outlined when authorizing
peacekeeping-mandated missions, as well as the means
for carrying out such mandates, including an emphasis
on the physicial protection of humanitarian workers.
However, as recalled by the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, military personnel should not be directly
involved in humanitarian action, as that would associate
humanitarian organizations — in the minds of local
authoritites and populations — with political or military
objectives, hence putting their mission in jeopardy.
Peacekeeping missions, however, should help the host
States in strengthening the rule of law and boosting their
protective, investigative and prosecutorial capacities in
order to ensure accountability and responsibility.
We believe that the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations can take advantage of the evolving
role of regional and subregional organizations in
building trust with parties to conflicts. Owing to
their regional, cultural, linguistic and even religious

10/22

19/08/2014

proximity, such organizations are better equipped to
conduct knowledge-based and culturally sensitive
campaigns, including raising awareness on compliance
with obligations under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, cultural proximity gives regional
organizations access to specific conflict zones that
would otherwise be risky or hard to reach by other
organizations, including the United Nations.
Most important, as conflicts remain the major cause
of human suffering, including the increasing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, we reiterate
our firm belief that conflict prevention is the better
way to provide protection, including for humanitarian
workers. We should strive to address the root causes
of conflict in the first place and put in place effective
early-warning mechanisms and mediation tools. In
that regard, we look forward to the open debate on the
prevention of conflicts to be convened by the United
Kingdom presidency on Thursday.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute, on
this International Humanitarian Day, to humanitarian
workers and their organizations for their trememdous
work on the ground. Not only do they have to deal with
the humanitarian consequences of increasing natural
disasters, due mainly to man-made climate change,
but they now also confront a concerning upsurge in
man-made disasters — armed conflicts — that deserve
from the Security Council and its influential members
solution-driven consideration, instead of the current
interests-driven approach.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, President Peter Peter Maurer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and Director
Masood Karokhail of The Liaison Office for their
informative briefings.
Today, as we commemorate the memory of the
22 staff members who lost their lives in the 2003
bombing in Baghdad, we are once again reminded
that we must prevent the recurrence of that kind of
tragedy. The safety and protection of humanitarian
workers has been affirmed in various international
instruments, including the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
The Security Council condemned all acts of violence
directed at humanitarian personnel, as well as attacks
on peacekeepers, in its presidential statement on the

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

protection of civilians adopted during my country’s
presidency of the Security Council in February 2013
(S/PRST/2013/2). Nevertheless, with the ongoing
humanitarian impacts of armed conflicts today,
humanitarian personnel are increasingly exposed to
more complex and risky environments than ever before.
A significant rise in abductions of United Nations
personnel and non-United Nations humantarian workers
has occurred in Afghanistan, Mali, the Sudan and other
places. Furthermore, in the past few weeks, 11 staff
members of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East were
killed during shelling in Gaza as they worked tirelessly
to provide humanitarian aid to those in need. Against
that disconcerting backdrop, I would like to make a
few observations on how to enhance the protection of
humanitarian workers and assets.
First, with regard to prevention, a defining
feature of many contemporary conflicts is a failure to
respect international humanitarian law by both State
and non-State armed actors. As such, it is absolutely
essential to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law as a robust preventive measure for
the protection of humanitarian workers in the field.
Fundamental international humanitarian law, such as
the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the 1977 Additional
Protocols thereto and the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
should be fully implemented. It is also importany to
raise awareness on the need for respecting humanitarian
action and humanitarian personnel, especially among
military and security forces.
Secondly, with regard to protection, a main challenge
for humanitarian workers is striking a balance between
effectively carrying out humanitarian programmes and
the risks faced by humanitarian workers. In particular,
as the humanitarian activities of local and international
civil society organizations have recently proliferated,
the protection of non-governmental humanitarian
personnel is also emerging as an urgent challenge.
The United Nations should continue to strengthen and
refine its security management strategy. In terms of
practical measures, it is necessary to further develop
guidelines and tools to support a risk-management
approach to humanitarian activities. At the same time,
dialogue with the relevant Governments and non-State
parties will help humanitarian organizations to better
understand often-fluid security situations, as well as
social and cultural factors on the ground.

S/PV.7244

Thirdly, with regard to accountability, it is critical
to ensure accountability for attacks and other violations
against humanitarian personnel. The primary obligation
to investigate and prosecute such violations lies with
national authorities; but in reality there are relatively
small numbers of prosecutions at the national level. It is
necessary, therefore, that the international community
provide financial and technical support with a view to
improving accountability at the national level. At the
same time, national accountability mechanisms can be
complemented by commissions of inquiry, fact-finding
missions and sanctions regimes, as well as by possible
referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to all
those humanitarian workers who lost their lives while
delivering life-saving assistance to people in need. We
have come to realize that, by targeting humanitarian
workers, such attacks have brought inhumane harm
to so many civilians waiting for assistance in dire
situations. That is an important lesson that we should
never forget.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Recently, you, Mr. President,
led the Security Council on a trip to Somalia and South
Sudan. There, the members of the group witnessed
for themselves the value and the difference that
humanitarian workers can make in the lives of displaced
persons and others affected by conflict.
Today’s briefing on the occasion of World
Humanitarian Day is very timely. We thank the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Director of The Liaison Office for their
helpful briefings. We also thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
presence. His remarks were inspiring, and the deficit of
humanity to which he so accurately referred is indeed
at the heart of the problem that we are addressing this
morning.
Eleven years ago today, the world was shocked by
the appalling news of the deliberate attack by terrorists
on the Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq. Twenty-two people,
including Sergio Vieira de Mello, lost their lives in that
atrocity, which also left more than 100 others injured.
The attack was a wake-up call to the international
community. It also reminded us of the stark reality that
the provision of humanitarian assistance in situations
of conflict was not without grave risks.
Since the 2003 attack in Baghdad, hundreds of
humanitarian workers have been attacked, kidnapped

14-5103611/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/08/2014

or killed in the line of duty. That is the reality in which
humanitarian workers operate in many parts of the
world today. They face such risks daily as they go about
their noble duties. That does not have to be the case.
Indeed, it should not be so.

perpetrators of such acts are held accountable. When
States are unwilling or lack the capacity to prosecute
such violations, the onus of referring such violations to
international mechanisms so that they can be addressed
and remedied lies with the international community.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms such
cowardly and outrageous attacks, which contravene
the highly protected status of humanitarian workers
under international humanitarian law. The foundation
of the protection afforded to humanitarian workers
lies in the fundamental principle of international
humanitarian law, which draws a clear distinction
between combatants and non-combatants. As persons
not participating in conflict, assaults on humanitarian
workers are unacceptable and indefensible.

Finally, we believe that it is essential to mitigate the
intensity and frequency of attacks against humanitarian
workers. The international community must remain
engaged in exploring various means to safeguard
their safety and security in the theatres of conflict
around the globe. We express our heartfelt gratitude to
humanitarian workers for their courage and dedication
to alleviating the suffering of people affected by conflict
despite the challenges that they face. We offer our
deepest condolences to the families of those who have
lost loved ones in the course of providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need.

States bear the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian workers.
However, most conflicts occur in a fluid atmosphere
of lawlessness, where governance structures are weak
and State authority is lacking. The situation is further
compounded by the proliferation of non-State actors,
including extremist groups, terrorists and criminal
networks. Such groups are usually ignorant of or
lack respect for human rights and the principles of
international humanitarian law.
Given the multiplicity of warring factions, it has
proved cumbersome in certain instances to negotiate
with every warring faction for the safe passage of
humanitarian personnel and assets. Strengthening
coordination among humanitarian actors is expedient,
within their respective mandates, in order to
complement their efforts and to enhance the safety
of their personnel. In addition, smart and adequate
security measures must be put in place to protect aid
workers. However, care should be taken to ensure that
such protective measures do not affect aid workers’
neutrality of passage or increase hostilities towards
them. We take note of the remarks by the Director of
The Liaison Office in that regard.
In that context, we also note the adoption of
alternative protection measures, such as communitybased policing, which are increasingly being adopted
by humanitarian agencies. Nigeria reiterates that the
parties to an armed conflict — State and non-State
actors alike — must take appropriate steps to ensure the
safety of humanitarian personnel. In order to to prevent
a culture of impunity, we call on States to ensure that
credible and timely investigations into alleged attacks
on humanitarian workers are conducted and that the
12/22

Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
dedicating the Council’s time this morning to this vital
issue. We thank the briefers for eloquently reminding
us today that millions of civilians are under threat,
caught up in humanitarian crises and directly attacked
in conflicts. Without the assistance of humanitarian
workers, their suffering would be indescribably worse.
The world is experiencing the greatest number of
simultaneous major crises in decades. At the end of
2013, more than 50 million people were displaced, either
internally or as refugees. Every one of those people
required some form of protection and assistance. As
an international community, we rely on humanitarian
workers to deliver vital assistance in dangerous places
and, as Mr. Maurer has emphasized, they rely on the
humanitarian principles to protect them.
As we commemorate today the tragic bombing
of the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad and
honour those who have given their lives in the service
of humankind, we also pay tribute to all humanitarian
workers currently working tirelessly and unarmed in
some of the world’s most volatile conflict and disaster
zones.
Humanitarian workers are more essential, and
yet more vulnerable, than ever before. The deliberate
targeting of humanitarian personnel has become
a sickening hallmark of conflict. Violence against
aid workers sank to new depths in 2013. The figures
recalled this morning are shocking. We mention in
particular the impact on national staff, who risk their
own safety, even while their families may be under
threat, in order to save lives in their own countries and
14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

communities. The vast majority of attacks in 2013 were
against national staff, as we have heard this morning,
and we know that the statistics tell only part of the
story. It is an outrage that those who work to save lives
become targets themselves for that very reason. That is
a security challenge that must be confronted.
Under international law, the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian workers, is the responsibility of
all parties to conflict. International humanitarian law
provides protection for relief and medical personnel.
Those rules must be respected. United Nations
premises must also be inviolable. Schools and hospitals
must remain sanctuaries. The Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol aim to protect such personnel and
to prevent impunity for attacks on United Nations
personnel or property. We urge all States to accede to
those instruments.
The work of the humanitarian community is
inextricably linked to the work of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security. The
majority of attacks against aid workers occur in situations
on our agenda. Civilians and civilian infrastructure
are increasingly targeted in armed conflicts. In some
cases, that is part of a deliberate military strategy. As
a result, the denial of humanitarian assistance for those
civilians, including attacks on humanitarians trying to
help them, has become more systematic. Put simply,
such actions have become an element of conflict. The
situation in Syria is a striking example, which is why,
faced with the magnitude of human suffering there, the
Council unanimously adopted resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014) in support of the humanitarian effort.
The Council has long recognized that the protection
of civilians is central to our work. In order to protect
civilians, we must safeguard humanitarians and ensure
access for them. It is incumbent upon the Council
to use all of the tools at its disposal to do so. In that
connection, there are things we should do.
First, we should ensure that resolution 1502 (2003),
on the protection of humanitarian personnel, is fully
implemented. But, given the increasing attacks on
humanitarian personnel, the Council should now build
upon that resolution.
Secondly, we should continue to mandate
peacekeeping missions aimed at establishing enabling
conditions for principled humanitarian action where
appropriate, as we have done in South Sudan. That can
range from support to peace processes, to reporting

S/PV.7244

on access challenges, as well as security actions to
protect humanitarian and United Nations personnel
and facilities and keep access routes open. In all cases,
humanitarian principles must be paramount.
Thirdly, where there is a sanctions regime in place,
we should apply sanctions against those who obstruct
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, the Council must work to end impunity
for attacks on humanitarians. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice before a court of law, whether domestic
or international. The Council should make clear its
expectation that attacks on civilian humanitarian
workers will be fully investigated. Where a State is
unwilling or unable to carry out such investigations,
the creation of United Nations fact-finding missions
can be appropriate. It is incumbent upon the Council
to support the prosecution of attacks on humanitarian
personnel. We welcome the fact that the International
Criminal Court is currently trying Abdallah Banda
Abakaer Nourain for an alleged attack on the African
Union Mission in the Sudan, for example, as the result
of a referral by the Council. It is incumbent upon the
Council to support such processes.
Finally, the proliferation of non-State armed groups
poses unique challenges. We applaud the work of
organizations such as Geneva Call and the International
Committee of the Red Cross aimed at promoting
compliance by those groups with their obligations. The
Council should continue to explore creative ways of
promoting compliance by such groups, as we have done
in dealing with the issue of children in armed conflict.
Humanitarian operations remain a crucial part of
the collective commitment to international peace and
security. We will not accept attacks on humanitarian
workers as an inevitable consequence of conflict. Very
often, humanitarians are the ones protecting civilians.
The Council must act to protect them.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is World Humanitarian Day. The Security Council’s
discussion today on the protection of humanitarian
workers is of special significance. I would like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing. China has also listened conscientiously to the
briefings by Mr. Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and the representative of
non-governmental organizations.
This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption by the Council of resolution 1265 (1999),

14-5103613/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Over
the past 15 years, the international community has
made unremitting efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflict, provide timely humanitarian relief and assist
the victims of conflict to improve their plight, and there
have been positive achievements. Meanwhile, regional
hot-spot issues continue to crop up. Conflicts have
become increasingly complicated. The humanitarian
workers of the United Nations, humanitarian agencies
and relief organizations working on the front lines
are facing an ever-deteriorating security environment
and conditions. From Iraq to the Gaza Strip and from
Somalia in the Horn of Africa to the Central African
Republic, humanitarian workers are constantly subject
to various forms of violent attacks. Some of them have
even lost their lives as a result of those attacks.
China attaches great importance to the protection
of humanitarian workers. We condemn attacks and
violent acts against humanitarian workers. We pay
tribute to those who brave difficulties in providing
selfless, life-saving services in armed conflicts.
China supports discussions by the international
community on the strengthening of the protection
of humanitarian workers. I would like to make the
following four observations.
First, the protection of humanitarian workers is
the inescapable responsibility of the parties to a given
conflict. All parties to armed conflict should abide by
international law, including international humanitarian
law and the conventions governing the safety of
United Nations personnel, and honour the obligation to
protect humanitarian workers. With regard to attacks
on and violent acts harming humanitarian workers,
the international community should encourage the
countries involved to carry out investigations, and we
should respect their findings. Perpetrators must be
held accountable, and assistance must be provided to
countries in need of financial and technical support.
Secondly, United Nations humanitarian agencies and
relief organizations, while carrying out humanitarian
relief work in conflict, should comply with the
Charter of the United Nations; uphold the principles
of humanitarianism, namely neutrality, impartiality
and independence; fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries involved; and avoid
engaging in the conflict or supporting any of the parties.
That is essential if humanitarian relief efforts are to
win the understanding and trust of all parties. It is also

14/22

19/08/2014

an important guarantee of the safety of humanitarian
workers.
Thirdly, the prevention and resolution of conflicts
is key to enhancing the protection of humanitarian
workers. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility to maintain international peace
and security. It should actively carry out political
mediation and preventive diplomacy, encourage the
parties concerned to resolve their differences through
peaceful means such as dialogue and negotiation,
prevent and curb the escalation of conflict and work
for a political solution, thus alleviating the harm
inflicted on humanitarian workers by addressing its
root causes. The Security Council’s authorization and
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
can play an important role in supporting the success of
humanitarian relief efforts and protecting humanitarian
workers.
Fourthly, in providing comprehensive protection
to humanitarian workers, Member States, the United
Nations and humanitarian agencies must take
coordinated and concerted actions so as to create
synergies. The United Nations should fully leverage
its comprative advantage, carry out an in-depth
analysis and evaluation of the risks in and challenges
to humanitarian relief work in conflict zones based on
respect for the views of the countries involved, maintain
communication and coordination with the parties to the
conflict and strengthen the protection of humanitarian
workers. Comprehensive measures must be taken to
effectively cope with all the security challenges faced
by humanitarian workers.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this timely briefing
on World Humanitarian Day, and the three briefers for
their sobering contributions.
With an unprecedented number of level 3
humanitarian crises and over 50 million refugees
and internally displaced people in the world, the
dedicated services of humanitarian workers could not
be more vitally important. As we pay tribute to all the
humanitarian workers whose selfless efforts testify
to what is best in our humanity, we must also seek to
ensure that their life-saving work does not exact the
ultimate price: the price of their own lives.
Last week, the Council visited South Sudan, seeing
at first hand those displaced as they tried to survive in
appalling conditions, threatened by cholera and other

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

diseases and on the brink of famine, with some 50,000
children at risk of dying from acute malnutrition. To
many of those displaced, United Nations protection
and humanitarian aid are their only lifeline. That
lifeline has been threatened by violations of status
of forces agreements and by incitement and attacks
against humanitarian workers. Early this month, six
humanitarian workers were killed. As Toby Lanzer,
United Nations Resident Coordinator in South Sudan,
lamented,
“I cannot imagine how anybody could do that.
Somebody who has come to provide medical
care and attention to your children, and you have
executed that person. It defies the imagination.”
And yet that which defies the imagination is an
increasingly dangerous reality for humanitarian workers
in all conflict zones. The year 2013 saw a total of 460
aid workers killed, wounded or kidnapped, the highest
number ever. The first eight months of 2014 have also
been deadlier for humanitarian workers than the entire
year 2012. As the most recent report of Humanitarian
Outcomes indicates, the number of victims relative to
the attack rate also continues to rise.
Locally recruited humanitarian personnel are
especially vulnerable to attacks and account for the
majority of casualties, kidnappings, harassment,
banditry and intimidation. We must do more to protect
humanitarian workers, including national staff.
Questions related to the proliferation of non-State actors
in conflict zones and the increasingly asymmetrical
nature of threats must be urgently addressed, among
other issues.
The Rome Statute defines attacks against
humanitarian workers as a war crime. Resolution
1502 (2003) establishes that status-of-forces, statusof-mission and host country agreements between
the United Nations and host countries should include
provisions designating attacks against humanitarian
personnel as crimes punishable by law and requiring
the prosecution or extradition of offenders. Yet how
often have we seen those provisions put into action?
Whether for lack of capacity or of political will, a
notable gap exists regarding accountability for crimes
against humanitarian workers. States need to make
sure that perpetrators of attacks committed in their
territory against humanitarian and United Nations and
associated personnel are brought to justice. As long as
the climate of impunity prevails, humanitarian workers

S/PV.7244

will be increasingly exposed to attacks and other
life-threatening situations.
For its part, the Council should consistently
condemn attacks against humanitarian medical workers
and should seek accountability for such crimes,
including through the use of the various instruments
at its disposal, such as sanctions, the designation of
criteria, commissions of inquiry, fact-finding missions,
reporting by human rights monitoring teams and
referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Humanitarian action, as described in the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols
of 1977, is based on the principles of impartiality,
neutrality and independence — the essential features
of any humanitarian operation, as was stressed earlier
today by the Deputy Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Violating those principles may incur grave
consequences for humanitarian workers themselves,
as well as for those who depend on the assistance they
provide.
In Syria, we have witnessed a most blatant violation
of those principles of impartiality and neutrality, as
parties to the conflict, in particular the Syrian regime,
have repeatedly obstructed humanitarian aid, withheld
consent for operations and redirected aid as a tactic
of war. The Council must ensure that the relevant
humanitarian resolutions are implemented in full and
must take the necessary further action in the event of a
failure to do so.
My delegation is also concerned with regard
to the politicization of humanitarian access on the
eastern borders of Ukraine, where attempts to deliver
purported humanitarian aid have been accompanied by
increased military movements on the part of Russia,
violations of Ukraine’s borders and continued support
to anti-Ukrainian rebel groups. All such attempts to
manipulate humanitarian access for military or political
purposes are totally unacceptable and go counter to the
spirit and letter of international humanitarian law.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jan Eliasson, to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Maurer, and to Mr. Karokhail for their participation
in today’s meeting and their substantive briefings.
The protection of humanitarian personnel
is an important aspect of protecting civilians in

14-5103615/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

armed conflict. Today, as we commemorate World
Humanitarian Day, once again we would like to pay
tribute to the bravery and self-sacrifice of personnel
from international humanitarian agencies who
are carrying out the crucial function of providing
assistance to and easing the suffering of civilians in
trying conditions.
Against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts,
the provision of humanitarian assistance has gained
the distinction of being one of the most dangerous
types of activities. In that regard, the Council has
repeatedly called upon the parties to armed conflicts
to scrupulously comply with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, to respect and protect
humanitarian personnel and humanitarian cargoes
and to take all the necessary steps to ensure the safe,
rapid and unimpeded movement of humanitarian cargo,
equipment and personnel.
Despite the measures undertaken by the
international community, efforts to ensure the safety
of humanitarian personnel and United Nations
personnel remain hampered, and their lives and
health are still threatened. We are seriously concerned
about information contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (A/68/489) on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and the number of killed and
wounded humanitarian workers in 2013. That number
is a record figure compared to all previous periods.
Eleven staff members of the United Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East died in
July in the course of the bloody conflict in Gaza, which
has yet to be ended.
The international community was shaken by
incidents involving the bombing of United Nations
schools sheltering Palestinian civilians. Dozens of
volunteers from the Red Crescent died in Syria while
implementing their humanitarian functions. All of
that serves to underscore the need for the additional
mobilization of efforts by Member States, the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations aimed at
strengthening mechanisms to ensure the safety of
humanitarian workers. We support the activities of the
Secretariat to strengthen the new system of security
levels in effect since 2011 and the implementation of the
United Nations work aimed at protecting humanitarian
personnel via the concept of standing and delivering.
Our position is that each incidence of violence
against humanitarian workers must be carefully
investigated and the guilty brought to justice. Of
16/22

19/08/2014

course, the imperative must be strict compliance by
humanitarian organizations of the guidelines laid out
in General Assembly resolutions with respect to the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
One of the priorities today must be the adoption of
urgent measures to provide humanitarian assistance to
the people of south-eastern Ukraine. One would recall
that certain members of the Council have admired the
“restraint” of the authorities in Kyiv, as if encouraging
them to undertake more reckless military actions. Now
that posture has led to hundreds of civilian casualties.
The Government forces and mercenary punitive units
continue to carry out indiscriminate artillery shelling
against cities and other localities in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, including using incendiary munitions.
It is obvious that the only truly effective way to protect
civilians in that conflict is an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire, which we have repeatedly called for.
At the meeting of the Council on 8 August, the
Ukrainian representative stated that there was no
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine (see S/PV.7239). As it
has done previously, Kyiv would prefer to ignore the
plight of hundreds of thousands of people in Donetsk
and Luhansk who, through Kyiv’s own fault, have
been left without water, electricity, medicine, medical
assistance and food. The continuing deterioration of
the situation and the increase in humanitarian needs
has been noted by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Based on its
data, just for the period from 10 to 15 August, more
than 22,000 people have left Donetsk and Luhansk.
Given those conditions, we attach great importance to
the successful implementation of the effort to deliver
Russian humanitarian assistance to the combat-weary
areas of south-eastern Ukraine, in conjunction with the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
How many unfounded political insinuations have
we had to listen to in that regard. The authorities in Kyiv
responded in their own way, ratcheting up hostilities
with the clear aim of cutting off the route negotiated
with them for the humanitarian assistance from the
Russian-Ukrainian border to Luhansk. The intensity of
the shelling of Luhansk and its suburbs has increased,
precisely in those places where it was planned to deliver
humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, the efforts
taken by the Russian leadership have borne fruit. All
the technical issues have been resolved, which was
confirmed in a recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers
of Germany, Russia, Ukraine and France in Berlin.

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We hope that no one will renew attempts to obstruct
the delivery of humanitarian assistance from Russia,
and that in the next few hours that effort can begin. At
the same time, there remains an urgent need that the
Ukrainian side guarantee the safety of humanitarian
personnel.
In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to the President of the ICRC, Mr. Maurer, for his
personal active involvement in organizing the delivery
of the Russian humanitarian assistance to the people in
eastern Ukraine, who urgently need it.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Karokhail for their
briefings.
As we commemorate World Humanitarian Day,
allow me to pay tribute to the efforts undertaken by
humanitarian workers in conditions that are often
dangerous to their lives. We commend the initiative
of the United Kingdom to convene this meeting,
which provides us with an opportunity to remember
and pay tribute to the humanitarian aid workers who
have lost their lives to save the lives of others. Today
civilian populations, as well as humanitarian workers,
are paying the toll for the wars around the world and
are often the target of the parties to a conflict. The
wars in Syria, Somalia, South Sudan, the Central
African Republic and Iraq today serve to highlight the
shortcomings in United Nations actions and also the
need to step up efforts in order to provide maximum
protection. While humanitarian workers and those of
the United Nations carry out their missions, that often
means that they themselves become helpless victims,
which is a source of discouragement, and it also means
that people feel abandoned.
United Nations action needs to be effective with
respect to civilians, and that is being challenged.
The high number of humanitarian workers who have
been killed is a logical consequence of this state of
affairs. However, the Security Council’s role with
respect to the protection of civilians is reaffirmed and
continues to be one of major concern. In its presidential
statement of 12 February 1999 (S/PRST/1999/6), the
Security Council underscores the close nexus between
systematic general violations of civilian rights and
the breakdown in international peace and security.
The recurrent Council debates of recent years, along
with those held by international legal bodies under
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, its 1977 Additional

S/PV.7244

Protocol II and the 1994 Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, should have
helped to improve the situation.
However, one would note that many challenges
persist. The attacks against civilians and United
Nations personnel are instead growing in scope. That
is an additional reason for the members of the Council
to wonder about the shortcomings of United Nations
actions in terms of improving the situation. Clearly, the
difficulties in providing assistance to civilians continue
to be many, and defending and protecting civilians in
countries in armed conflict and protecting the lives
of humanitarian workers unfortunately do not enjoy
the same means and resources internationally. The
protection of civilians is at times complex and can be
impeded when there are differences within the Council,
as is the case currently with respect to Syria or Ukraine.
On the other hand, the issue of the protection of
aid workers — and no one disputes this — can be
greatly improved by implementing the existing legal
and political mechanisms. Proposals of the SecretaryGeneral exist to do that. The 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel is
one route. That Convention requires Member States
to not only prevent attacks against civilians but also
urges that they be prosecuted and that perpetrators be
appropriately punished. Similarly, the implementation
of the Geneva Convention of 1949 and its Additional
Protocols need to be implemented. Resolution 1502
(2003) is important in that it calls on the SecretaryGeneral to include in status-of-forces agreements,
status-of-mission agreements and host country
agreements between the United Nations and the host
countries the necessary key measures under the 1994
Convention, particularly with respect to preventing
attacks against United Nations operations personnel.
What is key today is to prevent attacks of this kind
and to prosecute perpetrators. Similarly, there is no
follow-up system with respect to measures envisaged
against perpetrators of those acts internationally or
internally.
In conclusion, States need to be aware of their
responsibilities and act with awareness of the
consequences. The Security Council needs to focus
its efforts in the areas of prevention while restoring a
true dialogue with the countries involved in order to
prosecute perpetrators of crimes against humanitarian
workers and United Nations and local personnel.

14-5103617/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

19/08/2014

Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely discussion.
I also would like to thank the briefers for their
participation today.

of ensuring the safety and security of aid workers,
the United States reaffirms our commitment to the
independence, humanity, neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian operations.

On this eleventh anniversary of the Canal Hotel
bombing in Baghdad and as we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1994 Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, we honour fallen United Nations personnel
and humanitarian workers. I commend the work of
humanitarian workers around the world, including
national and local staff, and reaffirm our shared
view that attacks on United Nations peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers are a flagrant violation of
international law.

Humanitarian workers today face a growing threat
from non-State actors. Last November, insurgents
ambushed and killed five Afghans working on a literacy
project managed by a French charity. Just yesterday, the
Council released a press statement (SC/11523) regarding
two United Nations peacekeepers killed in an attack in
northern Mali over the weekend. Earlier this month, a
militia targeted and killed at least five South Sudanese
aid workers.

Humanitarian workers are the international
community’s emergency life line to vulnerable and
isolated communities. Today, 108 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance, and more
people are displaced by violence worldwide than
ever before. Humanitarian workers are critical to the
Security Council’s ability to respond to deteriorating
humanitarian situations caused by threats to peace
and security. Violence against humanitarian workers
has intensified in the past 11 years, with casualties
tripling since the 2003 attack in Baghdad. Last year
alone, there were 251 incidents of major violence
against aid workers in 30 different countries. Against
the backdrop of increasingly challenging conditions for
humanitarians, I would like to stress three priorities
for the United States: ensuring safety and access for
humanitarian workers, facilitating humanitarian
assistance and pursuing accountability.
We are extremely alarmed at the increasing
frequency of attacks against humanitarian workers
and the number of humanitarian workers killed in
2013, especially in Syria, where 109 aid workers have
been killed, detained, kidnapped or held hostage since
the beginning of the civil war. Despite the dangerous
conditions, Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers have
continued to deliver much-needed aid to people in
Syria.
Such attacks, in the words this morning of the
Deputy Secretary-General, represent a deficit of
humanity. Not only do they rob the world of brave,
committed individuals, but they also deny vulnerable
populations critical, life-saving humanitarian assistance
during dire humanitarian situations. In the interests

18/22

We stress that the primary responsibility under
international law for the security and protection of
United Nations personnel and humanitarian workers
lies with the Governments hosting United Nations
operations. That leads me to the question of access. The
United States is deeply disturbed by the rising number
of humanitarian crises to which the international
humanitarian community has little access because staff
safety and security cannot be guaranteed. The lack of
access in places like Syria, Iraq, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia, among
others, has prevented millions of vulnerable citizens
from receiving much-needed food, water, shelter and
medicine.
We call on all parties, States and non-State actors
alike, to facilitate full, immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access. United Nations peacekeeping
missions can play an essential role in creating secure
conditions for humanitarian operations if they are
mandated to do so. We welcome the collaboration,
coordination and cooperation among the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations humanitarian country teams, especially where
mandates include creating the necessary conditions for
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as
is the case with the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.
Finally, impunity for violence against humanitarian
workers must end. There has been little to no
accountability for humanitarian workers killed in the
line of duty. The United States supports efforts to
strengthen accountability and to bring to justice the
perpetrators of crimes against humanitarian workers.
We encourage the Council to employ commissions of

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

inquiry, fact-finding missions and sanctions, as well as
to support national authorities in their investigations
and prosecutions. At the same time, we encourage the
Council to develop creative solutions for dealing with
the threat posed by non-State actors to the dedicated
humanitarian workers we honour today. It is time for
the Council to take action.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for organizing this very important meting. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the
Director of The Liaison Office, Mr. Masood Karokhail,
for their briefings.
Today’s meeting is being held as we mark World
Humanitarian Day 2014 and as we commemorate the
eleventh anniversary of the terrible attack against
United Nations headquarters at Baghdad in 2003, which
claimed victims among the ranks of United Nations
personnel. In that regard, we pay well deserved tribute
to the humanitarian workers and actors who have lost
their lives in the line of duty. I would also like to pay
tribute to all those who continue to face danger in order
to provide humanitarian assistance in areas of conflict.
Recently, there has been an increase in the rate
of attacks perpetrated against United Nations staff
and individuals associated with the United Nations.
In fact, peacekeeping missions are no longer spared
by the frequency of armed conflicts and continued
attacks. United Nations personnel face threats and
even abductions, as well as restrictions that hinder
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. All of that
has adverse consequences for the ability of missions
to carry out their duties in order to meet the needs of
victims, who include civilians, namely, the victims of
internal conflicts.
The fact that the international community is
not present in areas of conflict endangers the lives
of humanitarian workers. The Security Council
must therefore assume its responsibility to restore
international peace and security in conflict zones and
to provide the necessary means within the framework
of mandates for humanitarian agents to assure the
necessary protection for humanitarians, as well as to
guarantee humanitarian access to those who need it. The
deficiencies with respect to humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones weakens the civilian population, which

S/PV.7244

means that there are additional burdens with regard
to the mandates issued by the Security Council. It is
therefore in the interests of the United Nations and the
Security Council to ensure the necessary protection
for humanitarian workers. In that regard, we reiterate
the need to uphold the provisions of international
humanitarian law and the need to implement them, while
taking all the necessary measures to protect civilians
affected by conflict with a view to putting an end to
their suffering. We also stress the need for the parties
to a conflict to respect their commitments regarding
humanitarian workers under the relevant conventions,
as well as the provisions of international humanitarian
law. That should be clear in the light of the flagrant
and massive violations we are witnessing in places like
Gaza, Syria, Iraq, the Sudan, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Somalia, the Great Lakes region and the Sahel.
We should also focus on the practical measures we
can take in order to improve the observance of World
Humanitarian Day and to guarantee the safety of such
actions.
In the light of the changes we have seen in United
Nations peacekeeping activities with respect to
concepts, mandates and missions, we have emerged from
the traditional military model into multidimensional
and multifaceted operations that include the role of
protecting civilians. That means that roles must be
defined in a clear, unambiguous manner. They must also
be coordinated in order to ensure that they correspond
to the respective mandates of their missions, whose
implementation sometimes requires clarification.
The Council, within the framework of the Charter of
the United Nations, must facilitate the cooperation of
United Nations missions with humanitarian agencies
and workers to ensure that they are provided with the
necessary protection. In order to address the challenges
related to attacks on humanitarian workers, we must
analyse the causes of such attacks, which could be
attributed to problems in defining humanitarian actors.
That can lead to a lack of distinction between roles,
because humanitarian workers, in the view of the
warring factions, are linked to military forces, There is
therefore a lack of clarity with regard to humanitarian
action.
We must also step up our efforts to promote the
preventive aspect by strengthening early-warning
mechanisms within peacekeeping missions in order to
be able to anticipate situations that may arise, as well
as address humanitarian needs and the need to protect

14-5103619/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

civilians in order to tackle the wave of violence to
which civilian and humanitarian actors are exposed in
conflict zones.
We must also ensure that humanitarian workers
are committed to upholding the basic humanitarian
principles related to neutrality, impartiality and
independence so that they are able to build trust
between themselves and the parties to a conflict and
thus contribute to reducing the number of attacks that
target them.
Finally, the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States. However, the international
community must remain focused on practical measures
that are likely to improve respect for international
humanitarian law, while bearing in mind certain
guarantees that will facilitate the implementation of
humanitarian action.
To conclude, I would like to reaffirm the need for
the perpetrators of such violations to be brought to
justice and to be held accountable for their acts. Those
responsible for such crimes must be held accountable
for their acts before international courts.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Director of The Liaison Office for their briefings.
Chile commends the President’s initiative in organizing
today’s meeting, which we consider particularly timely
since it coincides with the commemoration of World
Humanitarian Day.
The protection of humanitarian workers in areas
of conflict is a crucial matter that deserves the full
consideration of the Security Council. In fact, 15 years
after this body began to address the issue, while armed
intra-State conflicts have proliferated, there has also
been an increase in the number of deliberate attacks on
humanitarian workers, as well as their abduction and
even death in the danger zones where they are deployed.
That includes personnel of the United Nations and its
associated agencies and affiliates involved in providing
humanitarian assistance. According to the report
published today by the Aid Worker Security Database,
there has been a 66 per cent increase in the number of
victims with respect to the figures for last year.
States and non-State actors must comply with the
international humanitarian standards enshrined in the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Protocols additional

20/22

19/08/2014

to the Geneva Conventions of 1977 and 2005 and
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994. It is imperative to ensure
the conditions for humanitarian agencies to carry out
their work in accordance with humanitarian principles.
We strongly condemn attacks on humanitarian
workers, who perform the task of providing assistance
to civilians in armed conflicts, including women and
children, in extremely difficult situations. In places such
as Afghanistan, the Syrian Arab Republic, South Sudan,
the Sudan, Somalia, Mali and, recently, Gaza, among
others, it would seem that attacks on humanitarian staff
are par for the course. Such acts may constitute war
crimes, and their perpetrators must be investigated
and punished in order to prevent impunity. The host
Government must assume the primary responsibility
for the security and protection of humanitarian
workers and ensure national accountability processes,
impartial investigations, fair trials and the effective
fulfilment of sentences. If that is not the case, where
appropriate, there should be recourse to complementary
international judicial bodies, such as the International
Criminal Court.
The development of mandates for peacekeeping
operations must be appropriate in order to deal
with threats to the security and stability of those
countries, including the due protection of the civilian
population and of those who carry out humanitarian
tasks. We believe the significant number of mandates
for peacekeeping operations that contain an explicit
reference to the protection of civilians to be progress.
It is crucially important that peacekeeping missions
have the necessary resources to ensure compliance with
their mandates in that regard. During our recent trip to
South Sudan, where we visited the area of Malakal, we
witnessed on the ground the vital work that the United
Nations undertakes in that regard.
In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
humanitarian workers of the United Nations and its
agencies, as well as its implementing partners, who
carry out their work in the toughest conditions, and to
those who have lost their lives in fulfilling their duties.
We recall with respect and admiration the work done by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, Sergio Vieira de Mello, who, together with another
21 United Nations officials, fell victim to a terrorist
attack in Baghdad in 2003. Finally, in particular, we
remember the 11 officials of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

14-51036

19/08/2014

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

East who lost their lives as a result of military operations
in the Gaza Strip, underscoring their courage and
commitment.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Karokhail for their
briefings.
On World Humanitarian Day, France pays tribute to
the 22 members of the United Nations staff who lost their
lives during the attack on the Canal Hotel in Baghdad
in 2003. Eleven years later, unfortunately, this debate
is still relevant, as humanitarian actors are subject to
an increasing number of targeted and deliberate attacks
in the countries where they are present in order to save
lives.
France welcomes the commitment of humanitarian
actors, who provide assistance in increasingly difficult
conditions at the risk of their lives, in particular local
workers, who are the most affected, as Mr. Karokhail
has just underscored. France hopes that his message is
heard in this body, as well as by all States Members
of the United Nations, so that we can work together to
better protect lcoal staff.
Why do such attacks take place, since humanitarian
actors come to save lives, protect populations and
provide shelter to the most vulnerable? The reason is
because the strategy of repressive regimes seeks to
deprive people in rebel areas of all means of survival;
because a starving population who is terrorized and
abandoned is more likely to accept a dictatorship; and
because attacking humanitarian workers is an attempt
to scare away the international community in order to
oppress the population without being seen from outside
and with complete impunity.
In the Sudan yesterday and still today, humanitarian
organizations are being expelled. In Syria, in particular
in Aleppo, hospitals are the preferred targets of barrel
bombs launched by the regime’s forces. In Iraq, the
Islamic State sows terror and threatens humanitarian
staff. In Somalia, as elsewhere, the insecurity of
humanitarian workers further hampers access to those
in need. That is why it is essential to ensure follow-up
to the attacks on humanitarian personnel in the context
of a database.
Attacking humanitarian workers deployed in
situations of international armed conflict is a war
crime that can be referred to the International Criminal
Court. In addition to the general rules for the protection

S/PV.7244

of civilians applicable to staff of humanitarian
organizations, including the fundamental principles
of distinguishing between combatants and civilians,
precaution and proportionality, there are the specific
rules of international humanitarian law.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
act in order to prevent and stop such acts. Every tool
at our disposal must be mobilized. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations must provide for the
establishment of an environment conducive to
humanitarian access. We did that in particular in the
cases of Mali and the Central African Republic. We must
continue to use the possibility of referring a situation
to the International Criminal Court, when necessary,
as we did for the Sudan and Libya, but unfortunately
failed to do for Syria. We must also impose sanctions
against those responsible for hampering humanitarian
access and for deliberate attacks against humanitarian
staff.
Finally, we must ensure an effective follow-up
of our own decisions. In that regard, on 14 July, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2165 (2014),
on humanitarian access in Syria, in which we decided
that all the necessary steps should be taken by the
parties so as to ensure the safety and security of all
humanitarian actors. The Syrian regime and extremist
groups must immediately implement that resolution.
For all those reasons, as you, Mr. President,
proposed in your concept note (S/2014/571, annex), it
would be extremely relevant to update resolution 2165
(2014).
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to warmly thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross Peter Maurer and Director
of The Liaison Office Masood Karokhail for their
powerful briefings today.
Eleven years ago today, a heinous attack on the
United Nations compound killed 22 United Nations
staff members, including the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello. I,
like many others in the Chamber, paid my respects to
their memeory at a moving ceremony downstairs this
morning.
It is appalling that 11 years later, attacks against
humanitarian workers still continue. Indeed, the

14-5103621/22

S/PV.7244

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

problem is getting worse, with 2013 providing a record
high for the number of attacks on aid workers — a
66-per-cent increase on 2012. The year 2014 is on course
to exceed even that number. Seventy-nine aid workers
have already been killed this year, which is more than
were killed in the whole of 2012. The issue cannot be
ignored. That is why the United Kingdom arranged this
briefing to the Security Council today.
The Council has just visited Somalia and South
Sudan, which are two of the top five countries in the
world most affected by attacks on aid workers. Such
attacks are a war crime and exactly the sort of crime
that we entrusted the International Criminal Court with
prosecuting, as we heard in The Hague last week.
Across the world, aid workers operate in
unprecedentedly dangerous environments. Four of the
top five countries for attacks, namely, Afghanistan,
South Sudan, the Sudan, including Darfur, and
Syria, are on the Council’s agenda. Aid workers
face unprecedented threats. The rise in asymmetric
conflicts and the number of non-State actors poses new
challenges. The reality is that humanitarian workers are
viewed as a soft target. That is a moral outrage and is
totally unacceptable.
With the increasing demands on the United Nations
to operate in increasingly insecure situations, it is clear
that humanitarian workers will remain in the firing
line. I applaud the bravery of United Nations and other
international and national humanitarian staff, risking
their lives to get aid to people in need.
Today, the United Kingdom has announced a
further $1.5 million of funding to protect humanitarian
workers, including support for non-governmental
organization safety offices in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq
and Libya. The increasing disrespect for international
humanitarian law in those environments is of particular
concern. As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
has repeatedly told the Council, even wars have rules.
Attacks on humanitarian workers and their vehicles,
supplies and facilities have an impact not only on
the safety, security and psychology of those workers,
but also on their ability to reach people in need. The
international community must come together to ensure

22/22

19/08/2014

greater compliance with international humanitarian
law and accountability for those who flout it.
As Mr. Karokhail powerfully reminded us this
morning, it is important to recognize that the vast
majority — 80 per cent — of attacks are directed against
national, locally recruited staff. We heard at first hand
from him about the impact of insecurity on the front
lines of humanitarian operations in Afghanistan. But
it is the same pattern elsewhere. Recently, in Bunj,
South Sudan, we saw fatal ethnically motivated attacks
on South Sudanese aid workers. The shift towards
managing risk by using local staff to deliver aid will
only put those staff more and more at risk of attack.
Against that worsening background, it is the
Council’s duty to act. As colleagues have recalled,
we have a number of tools at our disposal. There is
condemnation. The Council’s statement on the killing
of aid workers in South Sudan was a welcome step and
raised awareness of the attack. There is direct action. We
raised the Bunj attack directly with President Kiir last
week, calling on him to speak out clearly against such
attacks irrespective of who committed them. We should
use our legislative role to ensure that peacekeeping
operations are mandated and equipped to create safe
conditions for the rapid and unfettered delivery of aid.
Special political missions have a key role in promoting
institutions to ensure accountability for attacks. We
should also, in the case of persistent behaviour, consider
sanctions, including against non-State actors.
Eleven years ago, the Council came together to
adopt resolution 1502 (2003) in the wake of the attack
on the United Nations compound in Baghdad. After
today’s briefing, there is a strong case for renewed
Security Council action. We shall therefore propose
a new draft resolution on how the Council can better
protect humanitarian workers. It is time for the Council
to be heard again.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

14-51036
