Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Bearing in mind the resolution on the United Nations
Development De<:ade, 10 in which reference is made to
the possibility and advisability of preparing a development charter which would serve as a guide for international co-operation to further economic, social and
cultural development,
C onvinced that the concerted practical action of the
United Nations in the social field should be concentrated, above all, on the solution of the basic social
problems, and should be aimed at creating better
standards of living for man and at guaranteeing respect
for his dignity,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1139 (XU) of 29 July 1966 concerning the reappraisal
of the role of the Social Commission ;11
2. Affirms the main objectives and principies of the
social programme of the United Nations and of the
Commission for Social Development and the methods
and means to be used by the United Nations, Member
States and specialized agencies in pursuit of these objectives, which are set forth in section I of Economic
and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI);
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission for Social Development to
prepare: on the basis of the purposes and principies of
the U mted N ations and the specialized agencies and
also on the basis of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Econornic and Social Council
and taking into account the docurnentation submitted
to the Third Committee 12 and the discussions in that
Committee at the twenty-first session of the Assembly,
~ draft declaration on social development which would,
m general terms, define the objectives of social development and _th_e methods and means of achieving them,
and to submtt 1t to the General Assembly for consideration at its twenty-third session at the latest ;
4. Calls further upon the Economic and Social Council to arrange for the specialized agencies to be consulted at appropriate stages in the preparation of the
draft declaration ;
5. Re_quests t~e Secretary-General, the Economic
and_ Social Counc1l and through it the Commission for
Socia~ Development, in co-operation with the specialized
agencies, to ensure that the periodic reports on the
world social situation reflect the over-all social situation
and social trends in different regions of the world and
in countries with differing economic and social systems, taking into account the clase interrelation between
economic and social factors, and to submit these reports,
together with practica! conclusions and recomendations
for the substantial improvement of the programmes
related to the social situation, to the General Assembly
for consideration every three years ;
6. Further requests the Se<:retary-General to prepare
a report on the implementation of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) and of the present resolution and to submit to the Council, and to the General
A~sembly for consideration at its twenty-second session,
th1s report, together with the revised programmes of
the Commission for Social Development and any recom1º General Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) of 19 December 1966, p. 42.
11 By this resolution, the Economic and Social Council
inter alia, decided that the Social Commission should be re~
designated the Commission for Social Development
12 Official Records of the Geneml Assembly T~enty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 54, documents AÍ6409, A/6434
and A/C.3/L.1419.

61

mendations made, in co11sultation with the Administrative Committee 011 Co-ordination, for strengthening
the co-ordination of the programmes of the United
N ations with those of the specialized agencies in thc
interests of greater conce11tration of efforts on priority
targets;
7. Decides to accord high priority to the consideration of the world social situation at its twenty-second
sess1on.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2216 (XXI). Freedom of information
The General Assembly,
Considering that because of the elaboration of thc
International Covena11ts 011 Human Rights the Third
Committee was unable to consider the draft Convention
on Freedom of Information and the draft Declaration
on Freedom of Information at the twenty-first session,
Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-second session the
consideration of the ítem on freedom of information.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2217 (XXI). International Year for Human Righl8
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 and 2081 (XX) oí 20 December 1965 on
the International Y ear for Human Rights,
l. Approves the further programme of measures and
activities envisaged for Member States, the United
_Nations, the specialized agencies and national and other
mternational organizations, which has been recommended by the Commission on Human Rights and is
set out in the annex to the present resolution;
~- lnvi_tes Member States, the specialized agencies,
r~g10nal mtergovernmental organizations and the nat10nal and international organizations concerned to
devote the year 1968 to intensified efforts and undertakings in the field of human rights, including the
measures set out in the above-mentioned programme,
and to keep the Secretary-General informed oí their
plans and preparations;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to make any necessary arrangements to facilitate the co-operation of compete?t regional intergovernmental organizations in observmg _196~ as International Year for Human Rights,
as prov1ded m General Assembly resolution 2081 (XX);
4. Requests the Se<:retary-General to co-ordinate the
rneasur~s and a~tivities undertaken by Member States,
the U:mt1;d Nat10ns, the specialized agencies, regional
or~amzations and the national and international organizat1?ns concerned, and in particular to collect and dissemmate at regular intervals information on activities
contemplated or undertake11 by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to ~he C?eneral Assembly at its twenty-second session
an mtenm report on the plans, preparations, arrange-
