V l.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

plementation of the recommendations and pledges made
at the Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the Declaration and Programme of Action, to monitor, in
consultation and close co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme, the follow-up to the Conference;
9. A/so requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/123.

Measures of assistance provided to South African and Namibian refugee women and children

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985,88
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General
on measures of assistance provided to women inside South
Africa and Namibia and to women outside South Africa
and Namibia who have become refugees as a result of the
practice of apartheid,89
Recalling its resolutions 34/93 K of 12 December 1979,
35/206 N of 16 December 1980 and 36/172 K of
17 December 1981 on women and children under apartheid,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/25 of 23 May 1986 on measures of assistance provided to South African, Namibian and refugee women,
Noting with regret that during the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
the status of women living under apartheid in South
Africa and Namibia deteriorated,
Concerned about the special needs of women and children forced to flee from South Africa and Namibia who
have become refugees as a result of the practice of apartheid,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/25 on measures of assistance provided to South African, Namibian and refugee women;
2. Calls upan ali Governments, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to intensify their support for and solidarity with refugee women
and children outside South Africa and Namibia and in
front-line States, in particular:
(a) To provide for the widest possible dissemination of
information about the situation of refugee women and
children;
(b) To provide legal, humanitarian and other assistance to refugee women and children and their families
who are victims of apartheid;
(e) To provide assistance to women in the national liberation movements to enable them to attend major inter88 Repon of che World Co11jáe11ce to Review and Appraise che
Achievements of the United Natio11.1 Decade .fur Womcn: t:quality.
Devdopment and Peaa. Nwrobi, 15-26 Julv ¡9¡¡5 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV. IO)
•
89 E/CN.6/1986/5.

181

------------------

national conferences and seminars and to undertake
speaking tours further to promote international solidarity
with the oppressed women;
(d) To support the projects and activities of the southern African national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity, particularly those involving refugee women and children;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure close coordination between United Nations bodies, in particular
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs, the Centre against Apartheid, the
Centre for Human Rights and the United Nations Council
for Namibia, as well as the Department of Public lnformation ofthe Secretariat, with a view to maximizing publicity
on the situation of refugee women and children;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to include in its programme ofwork for 1988 the organization of a seminar on the special needs ofSouth African and
Namibian refugee women and children and ways of increasing measures of assistance to them, in co-operation
with other relevant United Nations bodies;
5. Decides to consider the measures of assistance provided to South African and Namibian refugee women and
children under the item entitled "Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" of the provisional
agenda of its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/124.

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office, 90 as well as the report ofthe Executive Committee
ofthe Programme ofthe High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-seventh session.~ 1 and having heard the statements made by the High Commissioner on 7 and 11
November 1986,92
Recalling its resolution 40/ 118 of 13 December 1985,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner,
Noting with satisfaction that, following recent accessions, one hundred and one States are now parties to the
1951 Convention 93 and the 1967 Protocol94 relating to the
Status of Refugees, and endorsing the Geneva Declaration
thereon adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner at its thirty-seventh
session, 95
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concern to the High Commissioner continue to face distressingly serious problems in ali parts of the world,
Particular/y concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
90 Ojficial Rccords uf the Cenera/ Assernbly. Forty-Jirst Sessio11.
Sufrtement No. 12 (A/41/12).
!bid., Supplemelll No. 12A tA/41/12/Add.l).
92 /bid.. Forty-jirst Se.1.\1011.
Third Committe<', 39th meeting.
paras. IJ-16 and 42nd meeting, paras. 98-103.
1
"· Urnted Nations, Trmty Serie,. vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
º4 Jhid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p 267.
'" Ojficial R<'cord.1 of th<' General Assembly. Fonv-first Sessio11.
Supplml<'11I Vo. 12A (A/41/12'A.dd.1), para. 127

182

General Assembly-Forty-first Sessi~~

seriously jeopardized or. account of military or armed attacks and other forms of brutality,
Stressing the fundamental importance of the High Commissioner's function to provide international protection
and the need for States to co-operate with the High Commissioner in the exercise ofthis essential function, particularly in view of the continued and persistent violations of
the basic rights of refugees and asylum-seekers,
Emphasizing that there is a need to assist, on as wide a
basis as possible, the efforts of the High Commissioner to
promote speedy and durable solutions to the problems of
refugees,

Emphasizing also that voluntary repatriation or return
remains the most desirable solution to the problems of refugees and displaced persons of concern to the High Commissioner,
Emphasizing further the importance for the international community to continue to provide assistance and
resettlement opportunities for those refugees for whom no
other durable solution may be in sight, particularly in regions where countries of first refuge continue generously
to receive refugees arriving by land or by sea,
Commending States that, despite severe economic and
development problems of their own, continue to admit
large numbers of refugees and displaced persons into their
territories,
Welcoming the valuable support extended by Governments to the High Commissioner in carrying out bis
humanitarian tasks,
Taking note ofthe observations ofthe Board of Auditors
on financia! management matters of the Office of the High
Commissioner96 and the response to them by the High
Commissioner, 97
Welcoming the continuing and increasing co-operation
between the Office of the High Commissioner and other
bodies of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for the dedicated and efficient
manner in which they discharge their responsibilities and
pays tribute to the four staff members who lost their lives
in the course of their duties during the past year;
2. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental nature of the
High Commissioner's function to provide international
protection and the need for Governments to continue to
co-operate fully with his Office in order to facilitate the effective exercise of this function, in particular by acceding
to and implementing the relevant international and regional refugee instruments and by scrupulously observing
the principies of asylum and non-refoulement;
3. Appeals to ali States that have not yet become parties to the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating
to the Status of R,efugees to consider acceding to them in
order to enhance their universal character;
4. Condemns ali violations of the rights and safety of
refugees and asylum-seekers, in particular those perpetrated by military or armed attacks against refugee camps
and settlements and other forros of brutality and the failure to rescue asylum-seekers in distress at sea;
5. Welcomes the fact that arrangements introduced by
the High Commissioner have increased significantly the
rescue of asylum-seekers in distress at sea and that preven-

96 /bid., Suppleme111 No. SE (A/41/5/ Add.S), sect. l.
97 /bid., sect. 11.

tive measures have resulted in a decline in the number of
refugee boats attacked by pirates;
6. Urges ali States, in co-operation with the Office of
the High Commissioner and other competent international bodies, to take ali measures necessary to ensure the
safety of refugees and asylum-seekers;
7. Notes with deep concern that large numbers of refugees and asylum-seekers in different areas ofthe world are
currently in detention or subject to similar restrictive measures and welcomes the conclusions on this subject
adopted by the Executive Committee ofthe Programme of
the High Commissioner at its thirty-seventh session; 98
8. Recognizes the importance of fair and expeditious
procedures for determining refugee status or granting asylum in order, inter alía, to protect refugees and asylumseekers from unjustified or unduly prolonged detention or
stay in camps, and urges States to establish such procedures;
9. Urges ali States to support the High Commissioner
in his efforts to achieve durable solutions to the problem of
refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office,
primarily through voluntary repatriation or return, including assistance to returnees, as appropriate, or, wherever appropriate, through integration into countries of
asylum or resettlement in third countries;
10. Recognizes the importance of finding durable solutions to refugee problems and recognizes also that the
search for durable solutions includes the need to address
the causes of movements of refugees and asylum-seekers
from their countries of origin, and takes note of the final
report of the Group of Governmental Experts on International Co-operation to Avert New Flows of Refugees; 99
11. Expresses deep appreciation for the valuable
material and humanitarian response of receiving countries, in particular those developing countries that, despite
limited resources, continue to admit, on a permanent or
temporary basis, large numbers of refugees and asylumseekers, and, reaffirming the principie of international
solidarity and burden-sharing, urges the international
community to assist receiving countries in order to enable
them to cope with the additional burden created by the
presence of those refugees and asylum-seekers;
12. Recognizes with appreciation the work done by the
High Commissioner to put into practice the concept of development-oriented assistance to refugees and returnees,
as initiated at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, 87 and urges him to continue that process, wherever appropriate, in full cooperation with appropriate international agencies, and,
further, urges Governments to support these efforts;
13. Emphasizes the essential role of developmentoriented organizations and agencies in the implementation
of programmes that benefit refugees and returnees and
urges the High Commissioner to strengthen his cooperation with those organizations and agencies;
14. Commends ali States, international agencies and
non-governmental organizations that facilitate the attainment of durable solutions and contribute generously to the
High Commissioner's programmes;
15. Notes with satisfaction the efforts undertaken by
the High Commissioner to identify and meet the special
needs of refugee women and children and urges him to
continue these efforts;

98
99

/bid., Supplemen1 No. 12A (A/41/12/ Add.1), para. 128.
A/41/324, annt'x

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Tbird Committee

16. Calls upon Governments to contribute, in a spirit
of international burden-sharing, to the High Commissioner's programmes with the aim of ensuring that the
needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons of concem to the High Commissioner are met.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/125.

International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking

The General Assembly,
Concerned that the alarming and destructive effects of
drug abuse and illicit trafficking remain a threat to national stability and to the well-being of mankind and
therefore constitute a grave threat to the security and development of many countries,
Recalling its resolution 40/122 of 13 December 1985, by
which it decided to convene in 1987, in response to the
initiative of the Secretary-General, an International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking at the ministerial level, at Vienna, with the mandate to generate universal action, and as an expression of the political will of
nations to combat the drug menace and a means of tackling the serious and complex international drug problem
in ali its forms,
Noting with appreciation the important work done by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs acting as the preparatory
body for the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking at its first session held at Vienna from 17
to 21 February 1986,
Recalling a/so Economic and Social Council decision
1986/128 of 21 May 1986,
Taking into consideration that in response to the threat
posed by the drug problem, the intemational community
has adopted numerous declarations and initiatives, interregional and regional, multilateral and bilateral, in order to condemn and combat the problem and to achieve its
total eradication, 100
Commending the valuable contributions of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral of the International Conference on Drug Abuse
100 As illustrated, by, in ter alía, the following meetings and initiatives:

The Inter-American Programme of Action against the Illicit Use and
Production of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and Traffic
Therein, adopted by the Inter-American Specialized Conference on
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs, held at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 22 to
26 April 1986;
The Tokyo Declaration entitled "Looking forward to a better future",
issued at the Tokyo Economic Summit, held from 4 to 6 May 1986 (see
A/41/354, annex I, para. S);
The nineteenth Ministerial Meeting of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, held at Manila on 23 and 24 June 1986;
The recommendations of the first lnterregional Meeting of Heads of
National Drug Law Enforcement Agencies, held at Vienna from 28 July
to I August 1986 (see A/41/559, para. 10);
The Economic Declaration of the Eighth Conference of Heads of Sta te
or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare from I to
6 September 1986 (see A/41/697, annex, sect. 11);
The tenth meeting of senior officials of the States members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations on drugs, held at Manila from
30 September to 2 October 1986;
The Puerto Vallarta Declaration, adopted al the Regional Meeting of
Ministers of Justice and Attomeys-General, held al Puerto Vallarta,
Mexico, from 8 to 10 October 1986 (A/C.3/41/5, annex);
The Meeting of Ministers of Interior and Justice of the 12 member
States ofthe European Community, held in London on 20 October 1986;
The recommendations of the lnterregional Conference on the
lnvolvement of Non-Governmental Organizations in Prevention and
Reduction of the Demand for Drugs, held al Stockholm from 15 to
19 September 1986 (A/C.3/41/7, annex, para. 84).

183

and Illicit Trafficking to the preparatory work for the
Conference and noting the continuing efforts of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control, the Intemational Narcotics Control
Board, the Division of Narcotic Drugs of the Secretariat,
intergovemmental and non-governmental organizations
and the regional commissions in this regard,
Welcoming the commitment ofthe Secretary-General to
cover the cost of holding the Conference through absorption within the regular budget for the biennium
1986-1987, without prejudice to ongoing initiatives, programmes and work of the United Nations in the field of
drug control,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of preparations for the Conference, 1º1

l. Requests all States, in reaffirmation of the commitment of the international community and asan expression
of their political will to combat the threat posed by drug
abuse and illicit trafficking, to give the highest priority to
the holding of the Intemational Conference on Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking at Vienna in 1987 and to participate actively in the Conference in order to stimulate
comprehensive world-wide co-operative action to combat
the drug problem in ali its forms at the national, regional
and international levels;
2. Takes note with saUsfactian of the report of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs acting as the preparatory
body for the International Conference on Drug Abuse and
Illicit Trafficking on its first session, 102 and of the recommendations contained in that report, adopted by the Eco-nomic and Social Council in its decision 1986/128, in
which it decided. inter alía, that the preparatory body for
the Conference should convene for its second session immediately following the thírty-second reguw session of
the Commission on N~coti.c •Orugs;
3. Requeststhe preparatory body for the Conference to
complete its work when it next meets at Vienna, in February 1987, particularly the drafting of the comprehensive
multidisciplinary outline offuture activities relevant to the
problems of drug abuse and iDicit ti.-afficking. based on
comments and modifications proposed by Oovernments,
so that the Conferenc.e may consider it f~r adoption;
4. Further requests the preparatory body for the Conference to report on its work to the Economil; and Social
Council at its first regular seiision of 1987;
•
5. Reaffirms the importance of the contribution of the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs and requests ali States
and ali United Nations organs and organizations, as well
as non-governmental organizations, to co-operate fully
with the Commission and with the Secretary-General of
the Conference in order to ensure effective preparations
for the Conference and its success;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution, particularly with
regard to the results of the lntemational Conference on
Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking, for consideration under the relevant agenda item.
97th p/enary meeting
4 December 1986

101 A/41/665 and Add. l.
102 A/CONF.133/PC/6.
