United Nations

S/PV.9334

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9334th meeting
Tuesday, 30 May 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cassis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mrs. Hackman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Shaheen
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-15020 (E)
*2315020*

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

engagement of the IAEA’s Incident and Emergency
Centre. There have been 12 expert missions to Ukraine;
I personally led seven of them, including two to the
Zaporizhzhya plant.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Rafael
Mariano Grossi, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grossi.
Mr. Grossi: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for allowing me the
opportunity today to update the Council on International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) activities concerning
safety, security and safeguards in Ukraine. Your own
personal conviction, Sir, in supporting me and the
work of the IAEA has been remarkable. I thank you
very much. I also thank the Council for its continuing
support for the IAEA’s efforts. I will also lay out basic
principles needed to prevent a nuclear accident.
I have addressed the Council on the situation in
Ukraine four times before, on 4 March (see S/PV.8986),
11 August (see S/PV.9109), 6 September (see S/PV.9124)
and 27 October 2022 (see S/PV.9172). However, I see
today’s meeting as the most important one, and I will
explain why. But first I want to briefly update members
on what the Agency has been doing in Ukraine.
It is now over 15 months since the beginning of
the war. May I remind the Council that this is the first
time in history that a war is being fought amid the
facilities of a major nuclear power programme. That
includes several of Ukraine’s five nuclear power plants,
and other facilities have come under direct shelling.
All of those plants have lost off-site power at some
point. Furthermore, one of Ukraine’s nuclear power
plants — the Zaporizhzhya plant — has come under
Russian military and operational control.
The IAEA has been closely monitoring the situation
and assisting Ukraine every single day since the start
of the war. That assistance has involved the continuous
2/16

30/05/2023

In addition, since 1 September 2022, we have had
an IAEA Support and Assistance Mission stationed at
the Zaporizhzhya plant, which is literally on the front
lines of this war. And we are on the eighth rotation of
our dedicated and courageous staff, who have had to
cross that front line to undertake that vital work many
times. Twenty-three of our staff have been part of
those teams.
And, since January of this year, we have had other
dedicated IAEA experts stationed at every other major
Ukrainian nuclear site — the Rivne, South Ukraine,
Khmelnytskyi and Chornobyl nuclear power plants.
Their presence allows us to provide the international
community with reliable information on the safety and
security situation at each of those sites as well. Another
58 of our staff have been part of those teams, totalling
more than 2,350 person-days of our staff in Ukraine.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Safety and Security and the Under-Secretary-General
for Operational Support once again for their help in
making that happen.
Moreover, we have facilitated an international
assistance package totalling more than €5 million,
with 17 deliveries of vital equipment to Ukraine. I
thank Member States for their contributions in that
regard. We are putting in place a comprehensive
programme of health-care assistance, including through
equipment and psychological support for all Ukrainian
nuclear workers.
In addition to our work on nuclear safety and
security, we are also continuing our vital safeguards
verification activities across Ukraine, ensuring
that there is no diversion of nuclear material for
military purposes.
We are also keeping the world informed of the
situation at Ukraine’s nuclear sites in more than
160 web statements, updates, reports and briefings,
including to the General Assembly and members here
at the Security Council.
The nuclear safety and security situation at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in particular
continues to be extremely fragile and dangerous.
Military activities continue in the region and may well
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

increase very considerably in the near future. The plant
has been operating with a significantly reduced staff,
which, despite being in temporary shut-down, is not
sustainable. There have been seven occasions when the
site lost all off-site power and had to rely on emergency
diesel generators, which, as everyone knows, is the last
line of defence against a nuclear accident, in order to
provide essential cooling of the reactor and spent fuel.
The most recent one — the seventh — occurred just one
week ago.
We are fortunate that a nuclear accident has not yet
happened. As I said to the IAEA Board of Governors in
March, we are rolling the dice, and, if this continues,
then one day our luck will run. We therefore must all
do everything in our power to minimize the chance that
it does. As the Council knows, since returning from
my first of two missions to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant in September 2022, I have been urging all
parties to preserve the nuclear safety and security of the
plant. That has involved numerous meetings, intensive
consultations and exchanges, including at the highest
levels in Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
As the Council will recall, only a year ago I
elaborated on the seven indispensable pillars for
ensuring nuclear safety and security during an armed
conflict. They are as follows: first, the physical
integrity of facilities — whether it be the reactors,
fuel ponds or radioactive waste stores — must be
maintained; second, all safety and security systems and
equipment must be fully functional at all times; third,
the operating staff must be able to fulfil their safety and
security duties and have the capacity to make decisions
free of undue pressure; fourth, there must be a secure
off-site power supply from the grid for all nuclear sites;
fifth, there must be uninterrupted logistical supply
chains and transportation to and from the sites; sixth,
there must be effective on-site and off-site radiation
monitoring systems and emergency preparedness and
response measures; and, seventh, there much be reliable
communication with the regulator and others.
Those common-sense rules derive from a vast
body of IAEA documents, guidelines and experience.
They have been universally cited and supported. That
is very encouraging. A nuclear or radiological accident
during the ongoing conflict could have disastrous
consequences for the people of Ukraine, the people of
Russia, neighbouring States and beyond. The time has
come to be more specific as to what is required. We must
prevent the dangerous release of radioactive material. To

S/PV.9334

that end, and mindful of the seven indispensable pillars,
which I just cited, I have been working intensively, and
in consultation, with the leadership of Ukraine and
the Russian Federation. As a result of the intensive
consultations, I have identified the following concrete
principles to help ensure nuclear safety and security
at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in order to
prevent a nuclear accident and ensure the integrity of
the plant. I see the commitments as essential to avoiding
the danger of a catastrophic incident.
First, there should be no attack of any kind from or
against the plant, in particular targeting the reactors,
spent fuel storage, other critical infrastructure or
personnel. Secondly, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant should not be used as storage or a base for heavy
weapons — for example, multiple-rocket launchers,
artillery systems and munitions and tanks, or military
personnel that could be used for an attack from the plant.
Thirdly, off-site power to the plant should not be put at
risk. To that effect, all efforts should be made to ensure
that off-site power remains available and secure at all
times. Fourthly, all structures, systems and components
essential to the safe and secure operation of the plant
should be protected from attacks or acts of sabotage.
Fifthly, no action should be taken that undermine these
principles. The IAEA experts onsite, namely, the IAEA
Support and Assistance Mission to Zaporizhzhya, will
report to the IAEA Director General on the observance
of the principles. The Director General will report
publicly on any violations of the principles.
I respectfully and solemnly ask both sides to
observe the principles. I request the members of the
Security Council to unambiguously support them. Let
me say something very clearly: the principles are to no
one’s detriment; they to everyone’s benefit. Avoiding a
nuclear accident is possible. Abiding by the IAEA’s five
principles is the way to start.
The IAEA’s five principles to avoid a nuclear
accident are hereby established. The IAEA intends
to start monitoring the principles through its
on-site mission.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Grossi
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Councillor and Head of the Federal Department
of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.

23-150203/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

Switzerland welcomes the continued commitment
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and its Director General to ensuring the protection of
civilian nuclear installations in Ukraine. Switzerland
has often recalled in the Security Council its position
on the Russian military aggression against Ukraine. We
reiterate our call on the Russian Federation to withdraw
its troops from Ukrainian territory and condemn any
attack perpetrated against civilian infrastructure. For
our country, respect for international law in general,
and international humanitarian law in particular, is the
foundation of international security.
The seven pillars determined by the IAEA
perfectly encapsulate what must be done to ensure
nuclear safety in all armed conflicts. Today we have
an opportunity to support five concrete principles to
protect the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. There
are five principles for implementing the seven pillars in
this particular case; five principles to prevent a nuclear
disaster, with all its consequences for the population and
the environment beyond a generation; five principles,
in effect, to ensure the protection of civilians.
Switzerland welcomes the Agency’s efforts and
fully supports those proposals. We are talking about a
pragmatic and targeted approach. I am convinced that
it is an important contribution in this crisis situation.
Switzerland calls on all Council members to support
the seven pillars and five principles proposed by the
Agency. In particular, we call on the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to fully implement the five principles
and commit to protecting the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
Respect for international humanitarian law is a
priority of Swiss foreign policy. The Geneva Conventions
and the Protocols Additional thereto bestow a clear and
major responsibility upon us. No civilian infrastructure
must be attacked during armed conflicts and, secondly,
civilians must be protected against the consequences of
war, especially in occupied territories.
The rules for ensuring such protection exist, but
their implementation is lacking. The military situation
is very tense. The danger surrounding the nuclear power
plant remains. We are all aware of the risks to civilians
when a nuclear power plant becomes the focus of an
armed conflict. It is our duty to prevent those risks.
Switzerland is pleased to be able to discuss issues
relating to the safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant within the Council. We are
4/16

30/05/2023

committed to protecting civilians. That was the spirit
in which we assumed the presidency of the Council.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
As we approach the end of the month, I take this
opportunity, Mr. President, to acknowledge the
impeccable work of your country and your delegation
in presiding over the Security Council in May. I
also appreciate the convening of today’s meeting,
as requested by France and Ecuador. And I welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Ukraine in today’s meeting.
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, not only
for the clarity of his briefing on a sensitive issue but
also for his work at the helm of the IAEA and his efforts
regarding nuclear safety and security in Ukraine. The
courage and professionalism of his team on the ground
and his own leadership, reflected in his on-site visits
in 2022 and 2023 to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, enhance the work of the United Nations nuclear
security agency and the role of the Organization.
I therefore reiterate that safe, unhindered and
unrestricted access for the IAEA at all levels, at any
nuclear facility, and in this case in Zaporizhzhya, must
be guaranteed at all times. I also reiterate the obligation
of the parties to provide the IAEA with access to the
information necessary to assess physical and technical
safety and security.
I also recognize the sacrifice and dedication of
Ukrainian civilian technical personnel in ensuring the
operation of nuclear facilities for peaceful purposes. We
also reiterate the need to preserve them and facilitate
the provision of health services, including mental
health care.
Furthermore, Russia must cease its military
aggression, as ordered by the International Court
of Justice, and restore full control over the territory,
infrastructure and facilities belonging to the people of
Ukraine, including the Zaporizhzhya power plant.
The world remains on edge in the face of the danger
of a nuclear catastrophe, whether from the risk of an
accident at a plant used for peaceful purposes or from the
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

threat posed by nuclear weapons, given their catastrophic
humanitarian consequences and the devastation it can
cause to human existence and the environment. We call
for the cessation of harmful narratives and actions in
order to prevent misinterpretation or miscalculation, as
well as the avoidance of any actions that pose a threat to
nuclear facilities.
The parties must comply with the assurances
provided by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons to ensure the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. In that regard, we deplore the fact that, at the
most critical time for the objectives of the Treaty and
when it most needed to be strengthened, the tenth
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty, held here
at Headquarters in August 2022, was prevented from
adopting its final recommendations.
We also deplore the fact that the establishment of a
nuclear safety zone has thus far, not been possible. The
Council must a fortiori demand respect for the Statute
of the IAEA, the Charter of the United Nations, the
Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Joint Convention on
the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its
Amendment and international humanitarian law.
Ecuador further reiterates the need for compliance
with the seven pillars of nuclear security and confirms
its full support for the five principles promoted by the
Director General of the IAEA. We encourage the parties
to agree on, and commit to, their implementation.
While they are minimum principles, they are also vital
elements on compliance, on which IAEA experts in the
field should have the full capacity to report.
I should underscore that the various proposals
and frameworks to achieve peace, whether we are
talking about President Zelenskyy’s 10-point plan, or
the 12-point peace plan proposed by China, all include
nuclear security in their key components. Moreover,
General Assembly resolution ES/11-6, on the principles
of the Charter underlying a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in Ukraine, adopted on 23 February by the
Assembly at its eleventh emergency session, urges all
Member States to cooperate in a spirit of solidarity to
address the global impact of the war on nuclear security.
Reaching an agreement that guarantees nuclear
safety and security is vital to lowering the risks and
easing the tensions in this area and to preserving human
life, health, the environment and the energy resources of
the Ukrainian people, which in this case are represented
by the largest nuclear power plant in Europe.

S/PV.9334

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Director General for his briefing
and welcome him to this meeting.
Only a week ago, the electrical supply to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant was once again cut
off for several hours for the seventh time since Russia’s
aggression began. For the seventh time, we have
come close to a nuclear accident at Europe’s largest
nuclear power plant, which Russia has cut off from its
emergency power supply lines. France is extremely
concerned about the threat to the safety and security
of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. The deterioration in
the conditions for gaining access to them, which has
prevented the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) from rotating its team of experts scheduled to
visit this weekend, is extremely worrisome. Russia is
solely responsible for the situation. And as we know, it
was Russia that forcibly seized the plant and massed its
armed forces and military equipment at its site. Mining
the surrounding area and consolidating military
positions at the site of the power plant are unacceptable.
We must act to avoid an accident, which would have
irreparable consequences. First, France continues to
urge Russia to return full control of all nuclear facilities
to Ukraine and stop pressuring and threatening their
personnel, which increases the risk of human error.
Above all, Russia must stop using the Zaporizhzhya
plant as a military base. Secondly, France would like
to emphasize that while the demilitarization of the
plant remains a priority, in the meantime we are fully
committed to reducing the risk of a nuclear accident
at the plant as much as possible. To that end, we
welcome and fully support the efforts of the IAEA
Director General. The principles that the Director
General has just outlined for us are likely to ensure the
safety and security of nuclear installations. We support
them and will continue to support the Agency in its
efforts to advance the plan, which respects Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Thirdly, it is
imperative that IAEA experts continue to have access
to all Ukraine’s nuclear infrastructure. They must be
able to communicate directly, without interference,
with the Ukrainian personnel in charge of operating
the facilities.
France will continue to support Ukraine. That
is why we signed an agreement on 5 May with the
IAEA and Ukraine’s atomic energy agency, which will
guarantee the operation of emergency generators at
the South Ukraine nuclear power plant. Our position is

23-150205/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

clear. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant must be
safely returned to Ukraine, and Russia must withdraw
its troops and stop playing with fire.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Rafael Grossi, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his briefing.
Ensuring the nuclear and physical safety of
nuclear facilities has always been and always will be
an unequivocal priority for our country. From the very
beginning, with the support of the Agency’s leadership,
Russia has made every possible effort to prevent the
threats to the security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant created by the Zelenskyy regime and its
Western backers. The Director General’s initiative
establishing a nuclear safety and security protection
zone at the Zaporizhzhya plant, announced following
his visit there on 1 September 2022, included a number
of important elements whose implementation would
have helped to prevent Ukraine’s attacks on the plant
and any emergency situations or human-made disasters
with unpredictable consequences. The Director General
and the Agency’s secretariat worked very hard on that,
but thanks to Kyiv’s reluctance to reach an agreement
and its unwillingness to accept its obligation to refrain
from shelling the plant, the initiative did not succeed.
We share the Director General’s apprehension about
the continuing threats to the safety of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. Ukraine’s shelling of the plant
is absolutely unacceptable. Mr. Grossi’s proposals for
ensuring its safety correspond to the measures that we
have long been implementing in our national capacity
in accordance with decisions taken at the national level.
In that regard, no attacks have been launched from the
plant’s site and no heavy weapons or ammunition have
been deployed there. There are no military personnel
stationed at the plant who could be used to launch an
attack from the site. We have taken concrete steps to
protect the plant’s most sensitive structures, systems
and components from attacks or sabotage.
In the current circumstances, Russia intends to
take every possible measure to strengthen the plant’s
nuclear safety and security in accordance with its
national legislation and obligations under the relevant
international legal instruments to which our country
is party. In the light of the nuclear safety and security
principles outlined by the Director General, we will
continue to protect the plant to ensure that there is no
6/16

30/05/2023

chance that Kyiv and the collective West can grossly
and irresponsibly violate them. Russia will respond
with extreme measures to any attacks by Ukraine on
the plant or its critical infrastructure, including its
power supply lines, or on Enerhodar, the town where
the plant’s personnel and their families live.
We hope that in taking into account Mr. Grossi’s
statement, the IAEA secretariat, for its part, will also
display the Agency’s impartiality and impartiality and
openly condemn the actions of Ukraine, which has
already repeatedly brought the world to the brink of a
nuclear incident that would affect not only the territory
around the plant but lands far beyond its borders,
including in Europe. That would be a nuclear disaster.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): We are delighted to
see you, Mr. President, back in New York for the final
stretch of your country’s very successful first-ever
presidency of the Security Council. I thank Mr. Rafael
Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his important briefing,
and I acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine at this meeting.
This year the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists set
its Doomsday Clock at 90 seconds to midnight, which
is the closest to midnight that it has been since it was
established in 1947 to illustrate global existential threats
at the dawn of the nuclear-weapon age. That sense
of urgency is echoed by the IAEA in its publication
entitled Nuclear Safety, Security and Safeguards in
Ukraine: February 2022–February 2023, which states,
“Since the start of the armed conflict, the
events that have arisen have either partially or
fully compromised the IAEA’s seven indispensable
pillars for ensuring nuclear safety and security
during an armed conflict for almost all nuclear
facilities and many activities involving radioactive
sources in Ukraine.”
This conflict has reminded the world that a potential
escalation into a nuclear conflagration — whether
by accident, intention or miscalculation — is a real
possibility. The conflict has already put the nuclear
reactor sites at Chornobyl and in Zaporizhzhya in
the middle of a war zone, risking the possibility of a
widespread release of radioactive material. To add
to the sense of urgency, nuclear doctrinal postures
are being revived and non-proliferation agreements
suspended. While deterrence theory has traditionally
dominated nuclear doctrines, we are witnessing shifts
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

towards doctrines emphasizing the limited use of
tactical nuclear weapons as a possible response to the
use of similar weapons by an adversary. Those changes
increase the risk of misunderstandings, miscalculations
and unintended escalation, all of which undermine our
efforts to achieve a nuclear-safe world.
Mozambique supports any measure aimed at
protecting and preventing any nuclear incident or
accident, including those put forward by the Director
General of the IAEA. As we heard, the Agency
emphasizes the importance of a stringent, globally
coordinated approach to nuclear safety. An African
perspective on the issue advocates for reinforced
collective responsibilities in which a nuclear threat
anywhere is a threat to all humankind, as our Pelindaba
Treaty states. It is therefore our collective responsibility
to avoid a scenario with a repeat of a nuclear incident
or accident in Ukraine and in an already fragile
geopolitical context.
In conclusion, we must commit to a cooperative
global effort to enhance nuclear safety and security
in Ukraine and indeed the world. We must heed the
IAEA’s advice and support the talks for an agreement
on the urgent establishment of a nuclear safety and
security protection zone. As we have repeatedly stated,
ending the conflict is the most viable and sustainable
solution if we are to ensure nuclear safety and security
and save lives — indeed, save humankind. The conflict
has gone too far and has brought us to a febrile and
dangerously destabilizing place of imminent nuclear
confrontation. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and a return to
direct negotiations between the parties as a matter for
urgent action by the Security Council.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Director General Grossi for briefing
the Council on a pressing issue. I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
this meeting.
The United States appreciates the focus and
leadership that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has demonstrated in its efforts to help
prevent a nuclear calamity in Ukraine, particularly at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. I also extend my
heartfelt thanks to the IAEA and Ukrainian staff at the
plant, who have laboured under unimaginable pressure
to prevent a catastrophic incident.

S/PV.9334

We appreciate the concrete principles that
Mr. Grossi has presented to us today. We urge everyone
in this Chamber to support those important principles,
just as we urge everyone to support all efforts to avoid
a nuclear incident at Zaporizhzhya — an incident that
could have a disastrous impact on both Ukraine and
the surrounding region. The principles laid out today
should foster an ongoing discussion about the steps
we must take to ensure nuclear safety and security at
Zaporizhzhya. I will also note that those principles build
on the seven indispensable pillars of nuclear safety and
security that the Director General introduced last spring.
We know that one country — a permanent member
of the Council — continues to demonstrate flagrant
disregard for those principles. Since March of last year,
when Russia illegally seized the Zaporizhzhya plant,
the international community has held its breath each
time the facility has been hit by shells, each time it
has lost external power and each time Russian forces
have detained essential staff. An image released in
April by the United Kingdom that showed Russian
military emplacements atop reactors at the plant only
heightened our concerns about the facility’s nuclear
safety. To make matters worse, recent news reports
indicate that Moscow has disconnected Zaporizhzhya’s
vital radiation-monitoring sensors, which means that
the plant’s data is now being sent to the Russian nuclear
regulator. That is a clear escalation of Russia’s efforts
to undermine Ukrainian sovereignty and authority over
the Zaporizhzhya plant and undermines our ability
to have confidence in the level of nuclear safety at
the plant.
Let me be clear. The Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant belongs to Ukraine and its data should go to
Ukraine, not Russia. Russia’s reckless actions stand
in stark contrast to Ukraine’s responsible behaviour.
Throughout the conflict, Director General Grossi has
made it clear that Ukraine has fully cooperated in
implementing safeguards at all of its nuclear facilities
and that the IAEA has not found any indication
of proliferation concerns in Ukraine. The IAEA’s
independent assessments have been essential in
verifying the lack of diversion of nuclear material in
Ukraine, and the presence of the Agency’s technical
experts has helped support safe and secure operations
at all of Ukraine’s nuclear power plants.
Those of us who sit on the Council are entrusted with
a sacred responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. There can be no doubt that Russia’s

23-150207/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

actions are an attack on the safety and security of the
region and the world, and we must stand together and
demand that President Putin end this madness. If Russia
wants to show that it is serious about reducing nuclear
risk at Zaporizhzhya, it can take steps to remove its
weapons and civil military personnel from the plant;
maintain an uninterrupted power supply to the plant
from the territory under Ukraine’s control; provide a
humanitarian corridor so that Ukrainian personnel can
be rotated at the plant to reconnect the plant’s radiation
monitoring systems; and return full control of the plant
to the competent Ukrainian authorities. If Russia wants
to show that it is serious about reducing nuclear risk
more broadly, it must cease its irresponsible nuclear
rhetoric and stop undermining the arms-control regime.
The United States is also deeply concerned about
Russia’s stated intent to deploy nuclear weapons in
Belarus — as we all should be. It is entirely within
Moscow’s control to avert a nuclear catastrophe and
end its war of aggression against Ukraine, a war that
has caused so much pain, destruction and death. The
United States will continue to stand with the Ukrainian
people and support Ukraine for as long as it takes.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Director General Rafael Grossi for
the information he has just shared with the Council on
the volatile situation around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
The fact that the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant was again disconnected from the national grid
for several hours last week is very alarming. Cut off
completely from its external power supply, the plant’s
cooling system had to rely on emergency generators.
The situation is clearly far from being under control,
as the risk of overheating leading to a nuclear accident
continues to be plausible. I would like to add my
voice to the words of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and say
that this situation cannot continue. Such a grave risk
must be avoided at all costs. I commend the tireless
commitment of Rafael Grossi and his teams of experts
on the ground, who are intensifying their efforts to
contain the situation and avert a potential catastrophe.
To that end, my country supports the five principles
proposed by the IAEA to secure the nuclear power
plant. In that regard, I would like to make the following
additional observations.
First, my country condemns any manipulation or
attempt at bargaining using the nuclear threat. The
8/16

30/05/2023

potential consequences of a nuclear accident are known
to all, and no one has the right to put the world at
such risk.
Secondly, we reject any attempt to politicize the
issue and emphasize the central and exclusive role
that the IAEA must continue to play in nuclear safety
and security.
Thirdly, nuclear power plants are elements of civil
infrastructure protected by international humanitarian
law and, more specifically, by a number of instruments,
such as the Amendment to the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Code of
Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources and the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The parties
to the conflict must comply with them.
Fourthly, I urge the parties to cooperate in full
transparency with the IAEA to implement its five
security principles in order to reduce the risk of an
accident and restore compliance with the seven security
pillars guaranteeing the normal functioning of the plant.
We reiterate our call for de-escalation. The bombing
of the nuclear power plant must stop. My country is
also opposed to any action by the parties that would
increase the risk of a nuclear escalation of the conflict.
The tendency to trivialize a nuclear escalation of the
conflict is extremely regrettable. Yet recent history
speaks for itself on the extent of the damage caused to
populations and the environment by a nuclear disaster.
The parties must commit to dialogue to put an end to
the war. It is the only viable way out of this conflict.
We continue to support initiatives aimed at bringing the
parties to the negotiating table. We remain convinced
that that is possible, if the parties build on the model of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Finally, the channels of diplomacy must supersede
this dangerous gamble of brute force, and peaceful
coexistence must prevail over the logic of confrontation.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Director General Grossi for his briefing.
Since the start of its full-scale invasion, Russia’s
reckless actions at nuclear facilities across Ukraine
have threatened the safety of Ukrainians and the
international community. Let me be clear, Russia’s
control of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant is
illegal and continues to pose a serious threat to the
facility’s safe and secure functioning.
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The February report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed the continued
presence of military personnel and activity across
the site and described a situation that is “dangerous,
precarious and challenging”. Unauthorized military
vehicles and stores sit in turbine halls. Landmines in
the vicinity of the plant endanger Ukrainian operating
staff and delay maintenance work. Supply chains and
associated logistics continue to be severely affected
by the conflict, and off-site power supplies remain
vulnerable. New imagery shows that Russian forces
have established sandbag fighting positions on the roofs
of several of the six reactor buildings. That indicates
that they have integrated the actual reactor buildings
of Europe’s largest nuclear power plant into tactical
defence planning.
Russia’s actions have violated all of Director
General Grossi’s seven pillars of nuclear safety and
security. We have always been clear that as long as
Russia’s illegal control of the plant continues, its safe
and secure operation cannot be ensured. As the Director
General said, the situation simply cannot go on. I thank
him and his colleagues at the IAEA for their bravery and
ceaseless efforts to support nuclear safety and security
in Ukraine, together with the Ukrainian Government.
We continue to support the IAEA’s work in
Ukraine and its efforts to ensure the safe and secure
use of nuclear technology around the world. We
recognize Director General Grossi’s efforts to maintain
safety at the Zaporizhzhya plant, including through
his five principles, as part of a solution that respects
Ukraine’s sovereignty. I also pay tribute to the bravery,
professionalism and resilience of Ukrainian staff at the
plant, who continue to work tirelessly under duress.
The situation at Zaporizhzhya is entirely of Russia’s
making. Russia can resolve this situation at any time. It
should withdraw its troops from the plant and from all
of Ukraine.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Allow me to begin my
statement by expressing our sincere appreciation to
Director General Grossi for his insightful briefing on
the latest developments on the ground.
We reaffirm our support for the seven indispensable
pillars of nuclear safety and security and highlight the
importance of ensuring and promoting the safety and
security of nuclear facilities under any circumstances.

S/PV.9334

We once again express our gravest concern
about Russia’s grossly irresponsible seizure and
militarization of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
That poses a serious threat to the nuclear safety and
security of not only Ukraine but also Europe and the
entire world. As the Director General said just now, the
situation of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and
its Ukrainian operating staff remains dangerous and
precarious, with the seven pillars outlined by him being
compromised constantly.
We condemn in the strongest terms Russia’s
manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
its aggression against Ukraine and its continued
control over the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
Japan strongly urges the Russian Federation to
immediately withdraw its forces and personnel from
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
We also condemn the signing by the defence
ministers of Russia and Belarus of an agreement
establishing procedures for the deployment of
Russian tactical nuclear weapons in Belarus, which
further increases tensions, while Russia continues its
aggression against Ukraine. Japan can never accept
Russia’s nuclear threats, let alone its use of nuclear
weapons, under any circumstances. Other Member
States should also refrain from supporting such actions
directly or indirectly.
Japan reiterates its deep appreciation to Director
General Grossi and the secretariat of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and continues to
support their efforts to strengthen the nuclear safety
and security of nuclear material and facilities in
Ukraine and applying safeguards to them. We salute
the continued presence of the IAEA experts and their
focus on ensuring nuclear safety and security at the site
during this very difficult time. In that regard, we also
commend the ongoing work by the Director General to
ensure the nuclear safety and security of the facilities. In
particular, the role of the IAEA Support and Assistance
Mission to Zaporizhzhya is essential to acquiring a
first-hand, objective and impartial observation of the
situation regarding the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. Japan has contributed financially to enabling
the secretariat to facilitate missions, including support
for procuring special vehicles for the periodic rotation
system for IAEA staff, bringing our total contribution
to the IAEA’s activities to approximately €12 million.

23-150209/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

30/05/2023

Japan continues to support Mr. Grossi’s efforts in
a manner that respects Ukrainian sovereignty over its
internationally recognized territory.

their important duties without restrictions, threats
or pressure, and supply networks must be restored to
ensure the stability of the plant’s six reactors.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Director General
Grossi for his briefing and his new proposal. Albania
appreciates the professionalism, objectivity and
impartiality of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and considers the role of the Agency central to
the non-proliferation regime. We support its continued
efforts to secure the protection of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant in Ukraine.

As Director General Grossi said earlier, the general
situation in the area near the Zaporizhzhya plant remains
unpredictable and potentially dangerous, undermining
the seven essential pillars of nuclear safety and security,
as defined by the IAEA. It is therefore imperative
to protect the plant to prevent the risk of a serious
nuclear accident, with catastrophic consequences for
the population and the environment. The proposals
presented today by Director General Grossi could be
a good basis for ensuring the protection and safety
of nuclear facilities in Ukraine, and specifically the
Zaporizhzhya power plant, and we have full confidence
in the IAEA’s ability to facilitate their implementation.

Since Russia invaded Ukraine and occupied
Zaporizhzhya, we have asked some very basic yet
fundamental questions. Under what rights and rules has
Russia occupied and taken ownership of a key piece of
the power generation infrastructure of another country?
By what logic has Russia militarized the biggest nuclear
power plant in Europe? Like other questions related to
the war of choice in Ukraine, those have so far remained
unanswered except through propaganda and a distorted
narrative for domestic use.
We know that since the facility’s occupation began
its normal activity has been severely disrupted, and in
no fewer than seven cases it has lost all external power
for several hours, creating an extremely precarious
nuclear safety and security situation for a major
disaster. Professionals have long warned that on-site
diesel generators cannot cool each of the six reactors
in the long term. And as long as the current situation
continues, the risk of major escalation is real — a clear
and present danger. Albania strongly condemns Russia’s
illegal seizure and militarization of Ukrainian nuclear
power plants by Russia. The intentional weaponization
of a nuclear plant is wrong and dangerous. There is no
other case in history — I repeat, none — when a nuclear
plant has been used as a shield to protect military
troops and hardware, as Russia is doing. The absurd
and dangerous situation highlights the need for urgent
international regulation governing nuclear power plants
in our time, and we hope the IAEA will tackle the issue.
In the meantime, we call on Russia to implement
the resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors without
delay so that the competent Ukrainian authorities
can regain full control of all nuclear facilities located
within the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine, including the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. Ukrainian personnel operating at the plant
under Russian occupation must be able to perform
10/16

But the root of the problem will remain unresolved
until Russia withdraws its troops from Ukraine’s nuclear
facilities and transfers their control to the legitimate
Ukrainian authorities. That alone will offer the best
guarantee for the protection and safety of nuclear power
plants in Ukraine. Russia’s military has no business at
Ukraine’s power plants. It has no business in Ukraine.
That is why we reiterate our call on Russia to end
the war, withdraw its troops from the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and start sincere talks
for a peaceful solution. Any initiative aimed at reaching
just and sustainable peace must show full respect for
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the resolutions of the General Assembly.
We do not need to wait and hope for a roll of the
dice to bring luck. We need to ask, insist, work and
expect Russia to see reason.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by congratulating Switzerland on its impeccable
presidency of the Security Council during the month
of May. I would also like to underline the excellent
cooperation between the delegations of Brazil and
Switzerland during this period when we have coincided
as elected members of the Security Council. And I want
to thank Director General Grossi for his detailed and
very important briefing.
Brazil is a strong supporter of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We have been
especially appreciative of the Agency’s recent efforts
to enhance transparency and trust and ensure the safe
and secure operation of nuclear facilities in challenging
dossiers. We believe the Agency has played and should
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

continue to play a key role in ensuring the safety and
security of nuclear facilities in a way that is depoliticized
and open to dialogue with all stakeholders. As Director
General Grossi has said in the Council on previous
occasions, nuclear accidents do not recognize borders.
We are encouraged by the fact that the IAEA has been
able to keep a permanent presence at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, providing both technical support
for operations through its experts, as well as timely
updates on the plant’s functioning through its publicfacing communications.
We strongly support the IAEA’s seven pillars of
nuclear safety and security in armed conflict, and we
welcome the reports that the plant continues to have
sufficient staff for the safe operation of the plant. We
are nevertheless concerned about repeated disruptions
to the plant’s only existing external power line, which
was temporarily disconnected last week for the seventh
time. Each of those disruptions raises the risk of a
nuclear accident, and the repeated disruptions to plant
operations also make the system less safe. Upholding
the seven pillars requires preserving secure off-site
power at all times.
Brazil welcomes the proposal presented today
by the Director General on the five principles for
addressing the situation at the Zaporizhzhya power
plant. Those principles represent an adequate solution
to the political pitfalls that have so far prevented the full
implementation of the seven pillars of nuclear safety
and security at the plant. We call on both the parties to
the conflict to individually confirm to the IAEA their
intention to adhere to those principles, which represent
the best way to avoid a nuclear catastrophe until a
complete cessation of hostilities can be achieved.
We hope that future reports by the Director General
on the situation at the Zaporizhzhya power plant will
include information on the implementation of the five
principles. Brazil cannot stress enough the critical
importance of safe and secure nuclear facilities.
The Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting
and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) is a success
story with potential lessons. As recognized by General
Assembly resolution 76/52, which was adopted by
consensus in December 2021, the Agency has been an
effective bilateral confidence-building mechanism with
positive effects for peace and security at subregional
and regional levels. We are fully aware that we cannot
draw a direct parallel to the current situation in Ukraine
and that the objectives of ABACC are not related

S/PV.9334

to safety and nuclear facilities. Nevertheless, that
experience in our region may inspire us to think about
how to explore cooperation on technical issues as an
effective confidence-building measure. Cooperation at
the technical level can in fact be a driver for dialogue in
other areas, contributing to a positive cycle, as Brazil and
Argentina have now sustained for over three decades.
We hope to tap into that experience and the contribution
of regional mechanisms for cooperation and peace and
security during our presidency in October.
Despite the divergent perspectives on how the
conflict in Ukraine should be resolved, there is a
consensus on the need to prevent a nuclear disaster from
taking place in Zaporizhzhya. A radius of protection
of the plant must be ensured, and that should be seen
as an opportunity to establish confidence-building
measures among all the different parties involved. The
Agency and other partners could help facilitate that
process, but it requires political will from all actors
directly involved.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over
the important meeting this afternoon. I congratulate
Switzerland on its successful completion of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I thank Director General Grossi for his briefing.
At present, the crisis in Ukraine continues to drag
on and the situation remains serious. China has always
been on the side of peace and dialogue and insists on
promoting peace talks and a political settlement. We
look forward to and support the resumption of peace
talks between Russia and Ukraine as soon as possible.
That requires the joint efforts of the international
community and, more importantly, the parties
concerned to create conditions to that end by starting
with themselves and accumulating mutual trust.
The ongoing crisis in Ukraine poses a grave
challenge to the safety and security of Ukraine’s
nuclear facilities. China has repeatedly stated its
position in previous Security Council deliberations,
and on 24 February, China’s position on the political
settlement of the crisis in Ukraine was issued, which
specifically calls for keeping nuclear power plants safe
and opposes armed attacks against nuclear power plants
or other peaceful nuclear facilities.
It is disconcerting that, despite repeated warnings
and appeals from the international community,
including China, military operations have continued

23-1502011/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

to take place at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and the surrounding area. Off-site power supplies have
been interrupted several times, related facilities have
been damaged on several occasions and the military
risks in the area have continued unabated. China is
deeply concerned about that.
The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has focused on the common
concerns of all parties and put forward a safe initiative
for the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which
includes the five principles, and is actively exercising
his good offices in that regard. China appreciates the
Director General’s efforts and supports him and the
IAEA in playing a constructive role in promoting the
safety and security of nuclear facilities.
We call upon the parties concerned to adhere to
the spirit of humanity, science, common sense, communication and cooperation; strictly abide by the Convention on Nuclear Safety and other relevant international law; avoid any action that endangers nuclear
facilities and make every effort to avoid any accident.
The issue of safety and security at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant is only one aspect of the crisis in
Ukraine, and its resolution ultimately depends on the
prospects for a political settlement to the crisis in
Ukraine. All parties should focus on the overall picture
of peace and common security and meet each other
halfway, so as to create favourable conditions for the
resumption of dialogue and an appropriate solution of
the related issues, including the safety and security of
nuclear power plants.
Moreover, the country with significant influence
should play a responsible and constructive role rather
than adding fuel to the fire. China will continue to work
to promote peace talks and play a constructive role in
advancing a political settlement of the crisis in Ukraine.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I warmly welcome your
presence, Mr. President, at this meeting, as we once
again seek convergence to address the critical concerns
of nuclear safety and security arising from the Russian
Federation’s sustained aggression against Ukraine. I
thank Ecuador and France for their initiative in calling
for today’s meeting and also thank Mr. Rafael Grossi,
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his briefing, which highlighted
efforts to rein in those actions that undermine the
physical and operational integrity of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest nuclear plant.
12/16

30/05/2023

My delegation continues to share the concerns
expressed in today’s briefing and more fully espoused
in the IAEA report issued in February and in the
subsequent situational reports on Ukraine.
Ghana considers it extremely important for nuclear
facilities anywhere to be operated with the highest
standards of safety and security. It is in that context that
we fully support the seven pillars of nuclear safety, first
outlined in March 2022, to address the issues relating to
the physical integrity of the facilities, the functionality
of equipment and security systems, the safety and
independence of operating staff, secure off-site power
supply, uninterrupted logistical supply chains and
transportation, effective radiation monitoring systems,
emergency preparedness and response measures and
reliable communications with the regulator and other
stakeholders. In the precarious context of the ongoing
violent conflict in Ukraine, where the associated risks
to human lives and their environment are elevated, we
affirm that those pillars are important in themselves
and need to be implemented as a collective to realize the
full gamut of protection that they can afford Ukraine
and the world at large.
We urge the cooperation of the parties on all
necessary measures, including the commitments just
outlined by Director General Grossi, to ensure nuclear
safety and security, beginning with the demarcation of
a demilitarized zone in and around the power plant and
its facilities. All efforts must also be made to restore
the civilian character of the power plant at the earliest
possible date.
We encourage continuous monitoring, as is being
done during the various mechanisms of the IAEA,
including the expert missions to Ukraine, and the
establishment of the presence of technical experts at the
facility and also welcome further engagements with the
Security Council on the implementation of the outlined
pillars and commitments.
Today’s meeting offers an opportunity to
remind ourselves of the historical, ethical and
normative underpinnings of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation and, in doing so, to collectively renew
our commitment in support of a world without nuclear
weapons. We encourage restraint in rhetoric and actions
that carry the potential to further escalate and protract
the war. Our view is that ending the war in Ukraine is
the best way to reduce the chances of accidental risk
and avoid a catastrophic incident of global magnitude.
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Our concerns on the humanitarian aspect of the
war remain unresolved, as we continue to witness the
persistent targeting of civilian-populated areas, contrary
to the stipulations of international humanitarian law. In
this month of May, the city of Kyiv has experienced
more than 15 episodes of drone and missile attacks,
with reported incidents of civilian casualties. We are
compelled to reiterate the obligations of warring parties
to respect and uphold the rules of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
In the context of today’s discussions, we also
underline article 56 of Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Convention, which specifically prohibits
attacks against works or installations, including nuclear
electrical generating facilities, if such attacks “may
cause the release of dangerous forces and consequent
severe losses among the civilian population”.
Ghana remains resolute in the call for peace in
Ukraine. On that basis, we reiterate the urgent need
for the cessation of hostilities in order to curtail the
loss, suffering and destruction, which, unfortunately,
has not let up since the commencement of the war in
February, last year.
We reaffirm our support for political settlement
through the channels of dialogue and diplomacy and
maintain the viewpoint that all peace efforts must
respect and uphold international law and the core
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Lastly, I reaffirm Ghana’s unwavering commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine and call on the Russian Federation
to end the war by the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of its troops from the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Director General Grossi for his valuable
briefing today. I extend my gratitude to him and his
team at the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for their efforts since the outbreak of the war
in Ukraine. The United Arab Emirates welcomes their
ongoing engagement with all relevant actors to ensure
the safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant.
Today’s report follows months of careful assessment
and visits to the site by the IAEA, and we appreciate
the technical approach of the team of experts, which

S/PV.9334

emphasizes nuclear safety and security on the ground.
We urge all relevant parties to cooperate with the IAEA.
The situation surrounding the Zaporizhzhya
plant remains alarming. The fact that Chornobyl and
Fukushima have been invoked in the Chamber and
elsewhere demonstrates that the world has not forgotten
how grave the consequences of a nuclear misstep could
be. It also reminds us that when it comes to nuclear
safety, our security is intertwined. A nuclear accident
would have catastrophic consequences for Ukraine, the
wider region and the world.
We remain concerned by the disconnections of the
power plant from the Ukrainian electrical grid, which
have resulted in interruptions of energy supplies, thus
further threatening the safety and lives of Ukrainians
already living in a severe humanitarian situation.
De-escalation is critically important in order to
guarantee the plant’s normal functioning and to prevent
a nuclear disaster from becoming an unintended
consequence of this war. Ensuring the safety of nuclear
facilities is of the utmost importance for the United
Arab Emirates. We recall the fundamental principles
of international humanitarian law of necessity,
proportionality and distinction and the special
protections that nuclear facilities are afforded under
international humanitarian law, including the Protocols
Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, as well
as the obligation to take care to protect the natural
environment against widespread, long-term and severe
damage. Those obligations must be respected.
In recent weeks we have seen positive developments
emerge — the Black Sea Grain Initiative will continue
for another 60 days. Those efforts are proof of what can
be achieved when there is political will. The Initiative
should be taken seriously, and by opening the door
to political discussions, the Initiative’s potential as a
confidence-building measure could lay the groundwork
for further talks aimed at a resolution to this conflict.
As we have said many times before, the cessation
of hostilities throughout Ukraine is the only way to
guarantee the prevention of a nuclear miscalculation.
We reiterate our call for de-escalation and dialogue to
bring this conflict to a peaceful, sustainable solution in
line with the Charter of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by congratulating
Switzerland for its outstanding presidency of the
Council this month.

23-1502013/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the United Arab Emirates for her
expression of gratitude.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I too thank Director General
Grossi for his briefing. As we just heard, the situation
regarding nuclear safety and security in Ukraine
continues to be of great concern. Since February 2022,
the world has watched with worry as Russia has occupied
Zaporizhzhya, Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, as
part of its aggression against Ukraine.
Let us not forget that the root of the problem is the
illegal presence of Russian military personnel at the
site. We stress the fact that without their presence, the
situation we are discussing today would not exist.
With that in mind, it is deeply regrettable that
military activities in and around the facility, as a result
of Russia’s actions, have placed the nuclear safety and
security of the entire continent in jeopardy. As stated
by Director General Grossi, the situation is becoming
increasingly unpredictable and, consequently, more
dangerous. Such risks are completely unacceptable.
While it remains occupied, the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant has been operating with significantly
reduced staffing numbers. It has been reported that
the Ukrainian staff who are still there are working
in extremely challenging conditions, faced with
intimidation, interrogation and even abduction, in some
instances. A humanitarian corridor for the rotation of the
management, operational and repair staff of the power
plant is an idea that should be given serious consideration
to make sure that the station continues to function in a
safe way.
We also note that in recent weeks there have been
reports of evacuations from the town of Enerhodar, where
most staff and their families live. That creates further
uncertainty about the staffing situation. We welcome the
presence of staff from the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) deployed to Zaporizhzhya and other
Ukrainian power plants, but emphasize that this does
not amount to a solution. Even in a shut-down State, the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant requires adequate
maintenance and other work.
Since Russia’s illegal invasion and occupation of the
region last February, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and its surrounding area have been exposed to
dangerous military activity. The power lines, essential
to the operation and maintenance of safety of the plant,
have been damaged on a number of occasions.
14/16

30/05/2023

Malta deeply regrets that, despite assurances,
Rosatom has not granted the IAEA access to the
Zaporizhzhya thermal power plant, which has provided
back-up power for the nuclear power plant in the past. It
is urgent that the IAEA be granted access.
While we welcome the delivery of 200
portable-power systems to Ukraine to compensate for
frequent power losses, as well as the agreement reached
earlier this month between the IAEA, France and
Energoatom for the delivery of necessary spare parts
for emergency diesel generators of the South Ukraine
nuclear power plant, we also underline the need for
guarantees of uninterrupted power supply to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant from the territory
under the control of the Government of Ukraine.
Malta also welcomes the General Assembly’s
recent adoption by consensus of the resolution entitled
“Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl disaster” (General
Assembly resolution 77/288), which is indicative of
the importance placed by the international community
on nuclear safety and security in Ukraine and the
significance of the serious long-term consequences of
nuclear disasters. The risks currently posed to nuclear
safety and security in Ukraine, endangering the entire
world, are a direct consequence of Russia’s illegal,
unjustified and unprovoked war against Ukraine.
Once again, Malta reiterates its call on the Russian
Federation to immediately cease its war of aggression
and withdraw all its forces and military equipment from
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders.
We also remain supportive of the IAEA’s continued
efforts aimed at finding a permanent solution for the
safety and integrity of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. In this regard, Malta welcomes the principles
outlined today that constitute an important foundation
to continue to build and guide future discussions.
The return of full legitimate control over the facility
to the competent Ukrainian authorities, including the
demilitarization and de-occupation of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, is a first priority. This is a key
prerequisite for restoring not only nuclear safety and
security but also respect for international law.
We thank the Director General for his tireless
efforts and the experts that form part of the IAEA
Support and Assistance Mission to Zaporizhzhya for
their valuable work.
23-15020

30/05/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
We express our appreciation for the professionalism
and commitment of the experts of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) mission to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which is being
temporarily and illegally occupied by Russia. They
continue to work under extremely precarious conditions
caused by regular dangerous provocations by Russian
troops. We praise the bravery of the Ukrainian
personnel working in inhumane conditions of constant
intimidation and threats of detention and torture by the
Russian military.
Russian forces have mined the perimeter and
shelled the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant site and
adjacent areas. These actions have led to the violation
of the physical integrity of the power plant and serious
damage to the station and its facilities, thereby posing
a direct threat to the lives and health of the operating
personnel. The shelling seriously undermines the
nuclear safety of the plant and could lead to a nuclear
incident or accident, in clear violation of the first pillar
of the IAEA Director General’s seven indispensable
pillars of nuclear safety and security, which envisages
that the physical integrity of nuclear installations, be
it the reactors, the fuel ponds or the radioactive-waste
stores, be properly maintained.
Russian military activities regularly lead to the
loss of off-site power. Since the beginning of Russia’s
illegal occupation there have been seven emergency
cases where the plant was in blackout, running only on
diesel generators. The most recent blackout occurred a
week ago, on 22 May, after the Russian missile attack
resulted in the disconnection of the last high-voltage
transmission line running, notably the Dniprovska
line, which supplied power for the inhouse needs of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Thanks to the
work of Ukrainian power engineers, the operation of
the transmission line was restored at noon on the same
day, and the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant was
reconnected to power from the Ukrainian power system.
Russia continues to actively use the nuclear plant
for military purposes, deploying approximately 500
military personnel and 50 units of heavy weaponry
on the site. Equipment, munition and explosives are

S/PV.9334

located in the turbine buildings of units 1, 2 and 4
of the plant. The threat of a dangerous accident as a
result of these irresponsible and criminal actions hangs
over us. Accordingly, we support the IAEA Director
General’s commitment to addressing this inappropriate
situation and restoring nuclear safety and security at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in line with
aforementioned seven indispensable pillars.
We also take note of the Director General’s
principles to help ensure nuclear safety and security at
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. They are partially
based on the seven indispensable principles, which are
applicable to any nuclear facility across the globe. In the
case of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, however,
due to the uniqueness of the situation — the illegal
occupation of the station by another State — these
principles must be complemented with the demand
of the full demilitarization and de-occupation of the
station. We reiterate that by illegally occupying the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and making it an
element of its military strategy, Russia has violated
all key international principles of nuclear safety and
security and the vast majority of its obligations under
international treaties. One can hardly consider Russia to
be a reliable partner capable of upholding commitments
it has undertaken.
For its part, the Ukrainian side confirms that we
have never resorted and will never resort to any action
that could lead to a nuclear incident at the Ukrainian
nuclear power plant. We realize the catastrophic
consequences of such an incident both for Ukraine
and neighbouring States, which is why our position on
the fundamental principle of ensuring nuclear safety
and security at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
remains clear and consistent. To ultimately remove
the nuclear threats stemming from the illegal Russian
presence at the plant, the troops and weaponry must be
withdrawn, and the station must be de-occupied and
returned to the legitimate full control of Ukraine.
I would like to remind the Council that a clear call
upon Russia to immediately cease all actions against
and at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant so that
the competent Ukrainian authorities may regain full
control over the facility is also enshrined in relevant
resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors. In this
regard, the principles to ensure nuclear safety and
security at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
should also include the following elements: first, the
withdrawal of troops and all other Russian personnel

23-1502015/16

S/PV.9334

Threats to international peace and security

illegally present at the station; secondly, guarantees of
uninterrupted power supply to the power plant from
the territory under the control of the Government of
Ukraine; and thirdly, a humanitarian corridor to ensure
the rotation of management, operational and repair
personnel of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in
order to maintain it in safe condition. We also deem it
necessary to include these elements and the reference
to the need to fully implement the aforementioned
resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors on the
situation in Ukraine in a new draft resolution of the
Board of Governors, if such a document is proposed for
adoption at its next session.
Ukraine consistently adheres to the approaches
designed to prevent a nuclear accident at the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which are reflected
in the General Assembly resolution ES-11/6 entitled
“Principles of the Charter of the United Nations
underlying a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in Ukraine”, as well as in the peace formula of the
President of Ukraine.
I wish to recall that radiation and nuclear safety
is the first point under the peace formula presented by
the President of Ukraine, and it is vitally important to
further consolidate efforts around this initiative, the
implementation of which will ensure a just and lasting
peace in Ukraine and prevent the recurrence of similar
crimes in future, including in a nuclear area.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor once again to Mr. Grossi for him to make
concluding remarks.
Mr. Grossi: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council, as well as the
representative of Ukraine for the important elements
they have brought to the discussion today. Their words
undoubtedly constitute an expression of support for
the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) since the beginning of the war. We take note of
the different nuances and aspects raised by all around
this table.
As my Brazilian colleague was saying, there
may be differences, but there is consensus in the
Chamber around the idea that there should never be a
nuclear accident. To that end, the work of the IAEA is
truly indispensable.

16/16

30/05/2023

In the midst of these complex and concerning
circumstances in which we have been living over the
past year and a half, today constitutes a step in the right
direction when it comes to the safety and security of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We are encouraged
by the expressions of support for our work, including on
the seven indispensable pillars and the five principles
that I have established today. We commit to continue
working to consolidate them and to be even more
effective in protecting this facility.
I also express our readiness, as indicated on
various occasions, to continue keeping the Council
abreast and informed about the situation, including the
implementation and observance of the five principles
that I enumerated today.
I will say that our work continues. The IAEA
Support and Assistance Mission to Zaporizhzhya
continues to be present there. We will continue and
reinforce our presence to avoid what must be avoided at
all costs — that on top of the situation that we are living
in this conflict, we would add the unspeakable tragedy
of a nuclear accident. That should never happen, and
the IAEA will spare no effort to make sure that it does
not happen.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grossi for the clarifications he has provided and
for his conclusions.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of May, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Switzerland to the
members of the Council and the Council’s secretariat
for their support. At the end of a busy month, we are
pleased that we rallied to arrive at consensus on several
important issues within our purview.
We could not have done it alone and without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
including the technical support team and the conference
service officers, interpreters, translators, verbatim
reporters and security staff. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates good luck in its
presidency in the month of June.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

23-15020
