A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/107
13 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 88 (f)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/728/Add.6)]
49/107.

Programme for the Second Industrial
Development Decade for Africa (1993-2002)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/177 of 22 December 1992, by which it adopted
the programme for the Second Industrial Development Decade for Africa, and its
decision 48/456 of 21 December 1993, by which it endorsed Economic and Social
Council resolution 1993/65 of 30 July 1993,
Recalling also the Mauritius Declaration on Africa’s Accelerated
Industrial Recovery and Development in the Context of the Second Industrial
Development Decade for Africa (1993-2002) and Beyond, adopted by the
Conference of African Ministers of Industry at its eleventh meeting, held at
Port Louis from 31 May to 3 June 1993,
Taking cognizance of the establishment of the African Economic Community
and the need to ensure its operation,
Recalling further the resolutions adopted by the General Conference
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization at its fifth
session, 1/ in particular resolution GC.5/Res.12 on the Second Industrial
Development Decade for Africa, resolution GC.5/Res.16 on the industrialization
of the least developed countries and resolution GC.5/Res.20, containing the
Yaoundé Declaration, 2/ which emphasized that the organization should pay
special attention to the industrialization of the least developed countries,

1/
See United Nations Industrial Development Organization, Decisions
and Resolutions of the General Conference, Fifth Regular Session, Yaoundé, 6-10
December 1993 (GC.5/INF.4).
2/
95-76387

Also reproduced in A/49/347, appendix.
/...

A/RES/49/107
Page 2

and accord high priority to the industrialization of Africa and to the
realization of the objectives of the Second Decade,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the programme for the Second Industrial Development Decade
for Africa (1993-2002); 3/
2.
Reaffirms the importance of industrialization as a dynamic
instrument of growth, essential to sustainable economic and social development
of developing countries, particularly in Africa;
3.
Considers industrial development to be an important vehicle for
poverty eradication, income and employment generation, social integration and
vertical diversification;
4.
Recognizes the need for increasing the integration of African
industry in world manufacturing, and for that purpose calls for the support of
the international community in achieving the goals of the Second Decade;
5.
Also recognizes the responsibility of the African countries in the
implementation of the programme of the Second Decade, and calls upon them to
continue to undertake appropriate measures to promote economic growth and
sustainable development, including by continuing to promote a favourable
climate for foreign investment;
6.
Requests the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to
give full assistance to improving the competitiveness of the industrial sector
in Africa and to formulating measures to improve it in the light of the
conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations;
7.
Also requests the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, in cooperation with the African Development Bank and other
subregional, regional and international financial and banking institutions, to
provide support, especially in the development of new and innovative measures
to mobilize resources and promote foreign direct investment, to African
countries;
8.
Calls upon the Economic Commission for Africa and the Organization
of African Unity to facilitate cooperation with the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization in order to provide support to improve African
industrial cooperation and to integrate the African Economic Community into
the industrial sphere, particularly in the areas of industrial policy,
technology, human resource development, industrial investment, small-scale
industries, enterprise development and institutional infrastructure, all of
these being essential for poverty eradication, employment generation, social
integration and vertical integration;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of
the present resolution to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994

3/

A/49/372.
/...
