S/2012/176

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 23 March 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the request of the Security Council in paragraph 21 of
resolution 2036 (2012), concerning the implementation of the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, I have the honour to transmit a report dated
20 March 2012 (see annex), which I received from Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-27549 (E) 300312

*1227549*

S/2012/176

Annex
Letter dated 20 March 2012 from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
In line with the request contained in paragraph 21 of resolution 2036 (2012),
adopted by the Security Council on 22 February 2012, I have the honour to forward,
herewith attached, a report on the efforts deployed by the African Union, in
partnership with the United Nations, to implement relevant provisions of the said
resolution (see enclosure).
The report provides a narrative of the progress made, the efforts currently
under way and planned activities with a view to consolidating security and stability
throughout South-Central Somalia, including by establishing a presence in the four
sectors, increasing the force strength of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) from 12,000 to a maximum of 17,731 uniformed personnel, comprising
troops and formed police units, as well as enhancing the effectiveness of the Somali
security forces, as set out in the AMISOM Strategic Concept.
I would appreciate it if you would transmit this report to the Security Council.
I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate the African Union’s deep
appreciation to the United Nations Security Council and Secretariat for the support
extended to AMISOM. I would like, once again, to thank you for your personal
commitment and support.
(Signed) Jean Ping

2

12-27549

S/2012/176

Enclosure
Report of the Chairperson of the Commission pursuant to
paragraph 21 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2036
(2012) on United Nations support to the African Union Mission
in Somalia

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 21 of United Nations
Security Council resolution 2036 (2012). In that resolution, the Security Council
requested the African Union (AU) to keep it regularly informed, through the United
Nations Secretary-General, on the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and progress made with regard to establishing
AMISOM presence in the four sectors, increasing AMISOM force strength from
12,000 to a maximum of 17,731 uniformed personnel, comprising troops and formed
police units (FPUs), as well as enhancing the effectiveness of the Somali National
Security Forces (NSF) as set out in the AMISOM Strategic Concept.
2.
The present report provides a brief overview of the security situation and
outlines the preparatory work and the activities of the AU Commission, AMISOM,
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) and interested countries,
United Nations entities and the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia
towards the implementation of the AMISOM Strategic Concept, as approved
in the communiqué adopted by the AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) at its
306th meeting held on 5 January 2012 [PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCVI)], and the
enhancement of AMISOM operations on the ground.

II. Security situation
3.
In recent months, the security situation in Mogadishu has significantly
improved. AMISOM and TFG’s forces gained more ground in the Daynille district,
which is on the outskirts of Mogadishu city. The secured locations include Maslah
House, Albagedo and Tredisha Hill. In the northern sector of Mogadishu, AMISOM
secured the following positions: Maslah military compound, the road from Ex-Control
Balaad to Maslah, Slipper factory and Borne factory. AMISOM and TFG forces
have also recently gained full control of Karan and Huriwa districts, the last two
strongholds of Al-Shabaab in the capital. In the Huriwa district, AMISOM and TFG
forces captured the entire Wahar’adde neighbourhood and Dayak livestock market.
4.
AMISOM and TFG forces are gradually pushing towards Afgoye and Balaad,
which are towns of key tactical importance to Al-Shabaab. The current operations
by AMISOM/TFG and loss of ground by Al-Shabaab have triggered an influx of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from the Afgoye corridor to Mogadishu. It is
important to highlight the fact that Al-Shabaab has also resorted to a new tactic of
infiltrating IDP camps and planting improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and
suicide bombs. This situation represents a security challenge to AMISOM.
AMISOM and TFG are embarking on an exercise of winning the hearts and minds
of the populations concerned to deprive Al-Shabaab of any support, through the
implementation of quick impact projects (QIPs).

12-27549

3

S/2012/176

5.
In the Juba and Gedo regions, where the Kenyan Defense Forces (KDF) are
operating, it appears that Al-Shabaab has lost momentum. TFG and KDF advanced
to within 30 kilometres of Bardhere, the largest city in Gedo, still under the control
of Al-Shabaab, capturing the village of Taraaka, on 16 March 2012. Al-Shabaab
elements have now resorted to IED attacks. In the Bay, Bakool and Hiraan regions,
the key towns of Baidoa and Beledweyne have been captured by the Ethiopian
National Defense Forces (ENDF) and Somali forces. Plans are under way to insert
AMISOM troops to relieve the ENDF in Baidoa and Beledweyne, which are in
Sector 3. However, the gaps left in between these key towns are posing some
security challenges, as Al-Shabaab has resorted to attacks against ENDF and TFG
supply routes.

III. Status of deployment
6.
The total strength of AMISOM uniformed personnel stands currently at 9,961.
This includes the Force headquarters staff (76), the Ugandan contingent (5,159), the
Burundian contingent (4,627), the advance elements of the Djiboutian battalion (99),
and Individual Police Officers (49). The formal re-hatting of the Kenyan contingent
(4,660) and the additional Uganda (1,500) and Burundi (1,000) troops, which will
be deployed in Sector 3 (Baidoa) by 30 April and for which the predeployment
verification and training procedures are under way, will bring the force level to
16,660. The deployment of Djibouti battalion in Sector 4 (Beledweyne) is planned
for mid-May 2012, which will bring the force level to 17,530. One FPU from
Uganda will deploy in Sector 1 by April 2012. The second FPU is to be provided by
Djibouti, and efforts are under way to expedite its deployment.
7.
Future deployment will be guided by the sectorization and troops-to-task as
outlined in the Strategic Concept, the new AMISOM concept of operations
(CONOPS) and the operational benchmarks adopted at the first meeting of the
Military Operations Coordination Committee (MOCC), held on 9 March 2012. With
technical support from the United Nations, the AU Commission is working towards
the finalization of the memorandum of understanding (MoU) and the letter of assist
(LoA) with Kenya, to facilitate the integration of the Kenyan forces into AMISOM.
The discussions with the Kenyan Government are expected to be finalized soon, for
signature to take place by 30 March 2012. The AU Commission has already signed
an MoU with Sierra Leone, which is due to deploy its battalion-size contribution to
AMISOM in June 2012. These agreements are important in facilitating reimbursement
of contingent-owned equipment (COE). Planning is also under way with the United
Nations for the first major equipment verification exercise for COE belonging to
Kenya.

IV. Other related military and logistical aspects
8.
Following the adoption of United Nations Security Council resolution 2036
(2012), the AU Commission, with the support of the United Nations, has begun
operationalizing the command and control architecture as contained in the Strategic
Concept. As indicated above, the first meeting of the MOCC took place on 9 March
2012. At that meeting, attended by the Chiefs of Defense Force (CDF) of AMISOM
TCCs, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone and Somalia, the United Nations and other partners,

4

12-27549

S/2012/176

the MOCC, which is a strategic-level advisory body chaired by the AU Commissioner
for Peace and Security, approved its terms of reference (ToR) and made
recommendations to the Commission on the recruitment and posting of staff officers
at the Force headquarters. The MOCC also adopted the AMISOM operational
benchmarks for implementation.
9.
The implementation of the AMISOM operational benchmarks is expected to
provide guidance, and a monitoring and evaluation tool for the implementation of
key tasks envisaged in resolution 2036 (2012), which would help the successful
monitoring and implementation of key activities envisaged in the resolution. To this
end, a joint AU-United Nations Technical Planning Mission, consisting of five teams,
has been constituted to undertake concurrent planning activities in Mogadishu,
Nairobi, Kampala, Bujumbura and Djibouti. The teams will, among others, work on
the development of force requirements, the Force Commander’s operational order,
the development of police operational documents and the conduct of predeployment
visits to AMISOM TCCs and PCCs.
10. On the Guard Force, the AU Commission, working with the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU) and the United Nations Support Office to
AMISOM (UNSOA), is developing the necessary policy guidelines to speedily
establish and operationalize the Guard Force, as requested by the Security Council
in resolution 2010 (2011). This includes the determination of the exact strength and
resources required to establish the Guard Force in Mogadishu, as part of the
development of the force requirements and the Force Commander’s operational
order and plan. In the meantime, the AMISOM Force Commander will continue to
provide guard duties within existing resources and capability.
11. My Special Representative for Somalia, Boubacar Gaoussou Diarra, continues
to engage with UNSOA on the planning assumptions and resource requirements for
the expanded AMISOM force, and how its requirements can best be met. In
particular, I am informed that UNSOA has requisitioned approximately $30 million
worth of major equipment, including heavy trucks, material handling equipment and
an engineering plant. A procurement process has also been initiated for the provision
of logistics support services for fuel, warehousing, workshops, medical, power, and
water. Furthermore, UNSOA is increasing its rations and general supplies reserves
to allow it to respond to the increased pace of deployment of AMISOM forces.
Reconnaissance of land routes and airfields across Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia is
under way, and the designs of the support hubs to be deployed to the new Sectors
have also been developed. To this end, the AU Commission, with the support of
UNOAU, has established a biweekly videoconference with AMISOM and UNSOA
(Nairobi) and AMISOM (Mogadishu) to continuously engage all stakeholders on the
implementation of the operational benchmarks and related activities.
12. I am also informed that UNSOA is currently preparing a revised budget for
2012/13 that will reflect the amended mandate and increased resource requirements,
to be reviewed by the United Nations General Assembly in due course. I am
encouraged by the support provided by bilateral and multilateral donors both to the
AU directly, to AMISOM TCCs and to the United Nations-administered Trust Fund
in Support of AMISOM.

12-27549

5

S/2012/176

V. Public information
13. With regard to public information, AMISOM continues to work in cooperation
with UNSOA and the AU-United Nations Information Support Team (IST) on the
implementation of its communication strategy. Information activities and measures
undertaken to date have resulted in increased public support for AMISOM, as well
as further marginalization of Al-Shabaab. Despite strong indications of favourable
public support for AMISOM in Mogadishu, expanded operations across multiple
Sectors will present challenges to effective public information activities. Notably, if
military operations are not accompanied by concurrent stabilization and local
recovery efforts, there is a risk that the expectations of the local population will not
be met, with a possible negative effect on public support for AMISOM. Managing
the associated communication challenge is anticipated to place a significant demand
on strategic communication and public information resources.
14. In response to the increased scope and complexity of operations, UNSOA has
doubled the resources available to the AU-United Nations IST. Security and access
permitting, plans are also well advanced to expand the broadcast footprint of Radio
Bar Kulan. In addition to the provision of additional support through the AU-United
Nations IST, a clearly structured and well organized communication mechanism is
required to ensure Mission-wide public information coherence. In this regard,
AMISOM is integrating all information resources and activities through the
establishment of a Joint Information Component located at its headquarters in
Mogadishu, with more limited public information capacity in each Sector.
Furthermore, following the decision of the MOCC to adopt a comprehensive
AU-United Nations public relations strategy for AMISOM operations, the
AU Commission, with the support of the United Nations, is developing a
mechanism to establish an overarching public relations strategy that would
sufficiently service the strategic, operational and tactical levels.

VI. Stabilization of liberated areas
15. Of critical importance is the stabilization of areas secured by AMISOM and
the Somali security forces, with a view to promoting reconciliation, law and order,
facilitating the delivery of basic services and strengthening governance at district,
regional, state and federal levels. In this respect, my Special Representative for
Somalia has been working with the United Nations Special Representative for
Somalia and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Facilitator for
Somalia National Peace and National Reconciliation to support the implementation
of the IGAD Grand Stabilization Strategy adopted by the 20th extraordinary session
of the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government on Somalia, and the TFG
Plan for the Newly Liberated Areas, adopted on 15 March.
16. Concretely, it is envisaged that the AU, IGAD and the United Nations will
jointly undertake a mapping exercise to identify key actors in South-Central Somalia,
to be followed by a consultative process that will be inclusive, democratic and
participatory, in order to achieve genuine reconciliation, as well as put in place local
administration that would be responsible for security arrangements, disarmament
and the delivery of basic services to the population. The military operations of
AMISOM, as outlined in the Strategic Concept and new AMISOM CONOPS, will
therefore take due cognizance of these local reconciliation and stabilization efforts.

6

12-27549

S/2012/176

VII. Protection of civilians
17. The protection of the civilian population in AMISOM’s area of operations
remains of particular concern. At present, the number of IDPs seeking refuge in
TFG and AMISOM-liberated areas continues to increase. Indeed, a number of
civilians are moving away from areas in which Al-Shabaab operates and where
armed conflict continues to pose a significant risk. As AMISOM operations expand
beyond Mogadishu, this situation is expected to intensify. Pursuant to the PSC
communiqué of 15 October 2010 [PSC/MIN/1.(CCXLV)] and 18 May 2011
[PSC/PR/BR.(CCLXXIX)], as well as to United Nations Security Council resolutions
2010 (2011) and 2036 (2012), AMISOM continues to spare no efforts in ensuring
strict compliance with international humanitarian law (IHL) in the conduct of its
operations. To strengthen the Mission’s ability to protect civilian populations in its
area of operations, AMISOM is working to mainstream the AU Draft Guidelines on
the Protection of Civilians into its operations.
18. Steps have also been taken towards the implementation of the AMISOM Indirect
Fire Policy (IDF) and the establishment of a Civilian Casualty Tracking Analysis
and Response Cell (CCTAR). The Mission is also strengthening its ability to utilize
public information strategies, benefiting from a strengthened public information
capability, to enhance civilian protection. The protection of the civilian population
at risk in Somalia remains of utmost concern, and the AMISOM leadership and I
will continue to prioritize this as AMISOM operations expand in the coming months.

VIII. Support to the Transitional Federal Government
19. Support to the TFG is crucial to the implementation of the Strategic Concept
on future AMISOM operations. In adopting the AU-United Nations Strategic Concept,
the PSC stressed the need for the enhancement of the TFG and allied forces, to
empower them and enable them to play an increased role in the implementation of
the Strategic Concept.
20. In this regard, the AU Commission has decided to convene, in Addis Ababa, on
30 March 2012, a workshop on Somali Security Sector Empowerment. This meeting
will be attended by the United Nations and other partners, and will seek to galvanize
greater attention from the international community to support and enhance the
strategic and operational effectiveness of the NSF. Specifically, this workshop seeks
to achieve the following objectives:
(a) To facilitate practical support in meeting the needs of the NSF along the
following administrative and operational requirements:
(i) Equipment (personal protective equipment (PPE), arms and ammunition,
transport and communication);
(ii)

Sustenance (monthly stipends, accommodation, medical and welfare);

(iii) Logistics (petrol, oil and lubricants (POL), boots, uniforms and
accoutrements, office equipment and general stores;
(iv) Capacity-building (specialized training, non-commissioned officer (NCO)
training, junior officer training, staff officer training for NSF headquarters and
Ministry of Defence headquarters);

12-27549

7

S/2012/176

(b) To consider practical support mechanisms for the effective integration of
the regional and allied forces into the NSF unified command and control
architecture; and
(c) To consider practical modalities in addressing the issues of restructuring
the NSF, including establishing a severance scheme to cater for the needs of retirees,
those wounded or killed in action, among others.

IX. Observations
21. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), the AU
Commission and the TCCs to AMISOM have spared no efforts towards the
implementation of the relevant aspects of the said resolution. While a lot remains to
be done in this respect, significant steps have been taken or are under way, as
demonstrated notably by the development of operational benchmarks, the planning
activities being conducted by the Joint AU-United Nations Technical Planning
Mission, the convening, under the chairmanship of the AU Commissioner for Peace
and Security, of the inaugural meeting of the MOCC, and the engagement with the
Government of Kenya for the effective integration of its forces into AMISOM. The
second meeting of the MOCC is scheduled to take place on 30 March 2012, to
finalize consideration of issues relating to the staffing of the Force headquarters and
to the deployment of AMISOM troops in all Sectors, with a view to making
appropriate recommendations to the AU Commission, which has the overall authority
for the management of the Mission, on the basis of PSC decisions and relevant
United Nations Security Council resolutions.
22. In parallel, AMISOM and TFG forces, together with the ENDF, have pursued
their operations on the ground, recording additional gains. The continued
improvement of the security situation in Mogadishu, in spite of attacks by Al-Shabaab
elements, and the pressure that continues to be exerted on this terrorist group
elsewhere in Somalia create a more conducive environment for the implementation
of the political process, with a view to completing the transition by August 2012, as
well as for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to needy populations. The seeming
cracks in the ranks of Al-Shabaab, despite the announcement on 10 February 2012
of its merger with Al Qaeda, and expectations that it could become a much weaker
force, are a direct result of the gains and enhanced operational effectiveness of
AMISOM.
23. Ultimately, and as agreed by all stakeholders, Somalis have to take charge of
the security of their country. Only they can, in a sustainable manner, provide for the
security that their people have been yearning for over the past decades. Hence the
critical importance of the strengthening of the Somali forces. It is against this
background that the AU Commission decided to convene, on 30 March 2012, a
workshop on Somali Security Sector Empowerment, which should lead to concrete
and implementable steps in support of Somalia’s security institutions.
24. The international community should continue to urge the leadership of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) and the other Somali stakeholders to
expedite the implementation of their commitments, in order to translate the military
achievements into political gains and take full advantage of the renewed interest and
mobilization of the international community, as eloquently illustrated by the success
of the timely London International Conference on Somalia of 23 February 2012.

8

12-27549

S/2012/176

25. I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate the AU’s deep appreciation to
the United Nations Security Council and its members for the adoption of resolution
2036 (2012), as expressed by the PSC at its 313th meeting held on 8 March 2012
[PSC/PR/BR(CCCXIII)]. Clearly, the adoption of the resolution is not only a
testimony to the commitment of the Security Council and the larger United Nations
system to help advance the peace process in Somalia, but also a very significant step
towards building an innovative and forward-looking partnership between the AU
and the United Nations in addressing today’s complex and multifaceted peace and
security challenges in Africa.
26. I would also like to, once again, stress the AU’s satisfaction at the outcome of
the London Conference on Somalia. The steps agreed to at the Conference will go a
long way in furthering peace and reconciliation in Somalia, as well as greater stability
and security for the region and beyond. The AU is grateful to the United Kingdom
Government, particularly Prime Minister David Cameron, for having taken that
initiative in support to the AU’s efforts in Somalia. It is critical that we maintain the
current international momentum in support of the peace and reconciliation process
in Somalia. In this respect, I look forward to the upcoming Istanbul Conference on
Somalia.

12-27549

9
