188

General Assembly- Fortieth Session
····-··-----·····--··-·------------------------

international agencies concerned, is preparing a conference
of donors for Guinea, which will be organized as soon as
possible,
Considering that Guinea is one of the least developed
countries,
Noting the statement made by the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation of the
Republic of Guinea on 4 October 1985, 173 in which he described his country's economic problems,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 174
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General

for his report and for the steps he has taken to mobilize
assistance to Guinea;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the States and organizations that have provided assistance to that country;
3. Again appeals to the international community,
including the specialized agencies and other United
Nations bodies and organizations, to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to Guinea's economic and social development;
4. Invites all States and relevant organizations of the
United Nations system to provide the Government of
Guinea with all possible assistance with a view to meeting
the population's critical humanitarian needs and to furnish
it, as appropriate, with food, medicaments and essential
hospital and school equipment;
5. Also invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Bank and
the International Fund for Agricultural Development to
intensify and expand their assistance programmes in order
to meet the needs of Guinea;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and
intensify his efforts to mobilize all possible assistance
within the framework of the United Nations system in
order to assist the Government of Guinea in its rehabilitation and development efforts;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
173 See Official Records of thi• <ienera/ Asremhly, hmieth Session. P/enarv
Meetings, 21rd meeting.

of 1986, and to the General Assembly, at its forty-fin,t session, on the progress achieved in the implementation of
the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/236. Special programmes of economic assistance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the need for the international community to
respond to the needs of countries facing special economic
problems,
Recognizing that, owing to their diverse nature, those
problems require special and prompt responses.
Recognizing also the need for an adequate response b'I
the international community to the specific measures identified in the special programmes of economic assistance, as
well as the need for enhanced co-ordination within the
United Nations system in that regard,
Taking into account the views expressed in the Second
Committee on the rationalization of the work of the Committee,

I. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1986, on ways and means of enhancing efficiency and
effectiveness in the implementation of decisions taken by
intergovernmental bodies regarding the special programmes of economic assistance, including the mobilization of the resources necessary for the implementation of
those programmes, taking into account available information provided by Governments and the related activities
undertaken by the bodies of the United Nations system;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report recommendations regarding the consideration of
special programmes of economic assistance in the appropriate intergovernmental bodies.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985
174 A/40/441. sect IX
