United Nations

A/RES/55/143

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 18

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/55/578)]

55/143.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of
Tokelau, 1
Recalling the solemn declaration on the future status of Tokelau, delivered by
the Ulu-o-Tokelau (the highest authority on Tokelau) on 30 July 1994, that an act of
self-determination in Tokelau is now under active consideration, together with the
constitution of a self-governing Tokelau, and that the present preference of Tokelau
is for a status of free association with New Zealand,
Recalling also its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to Non-Self-Governing
Territories, in particular General Assembly resolution 54/89 of 6 December 1999,
Recalling further the emphasis placed in the solemn declaration on the terms
of Tokelau’s intended free association relationship with New Zealand, including the
expectation that the form of help that Tokelau could continue to expect from New
Zealand in promoting the well-being of its people, besides its external interests,
would be clearly established in the framework of that relationship,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New
Zealand as the administering Power with regard to the work of the Special
Committee relating to Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United Nations
visiting missions to the Territory,
Noting also with appreciation the collaborative contribution to the
development of Tokelau by New Zealand and the specialized agencies and other
1

A/55/23 (Part II), chap. XI. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 23.

00 56797

A/RES/55/143

organizations of the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme and the International Telecommunication Union,
Recalling the dispatch in 1994 of a United Nations visiting mission to Tokelau,
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the situation of
most remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting also that, as a case study pointing to successful decolonization, Tokelau
has wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete its work in
decolonization,
1.
Notes that Tokelau remains firmly committed to the development of selfgovernment and to an act of self-determination that would result in Tokelau
assuming a status in accordance with the options on future status for Non-SelfGoverning Territories contained in principle VI of the annex to General Assembly
resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
2.
Also notes the desire of Tokelau to move at its own pace towards an act
of self-determination;
3.
Further notes the inauguration in 1999 of a national Government based
on village elections by universal adult suffrage;
4.
Acknowledges the participation of the Ulu-o-Tokelau in the Pacific
regional seminar, held at Majuro, from 16 to 18 May 2000, 2 and his account of how
the Modern House of Tokelau project, in both its governance and its economic
development dimensions, is seen by Tokelauans as the means to achieving its act of
self-determination;
5.
Welcomes the statement of the Council of Faipule of July 2000 that,
following consultations in each village and a meeting of the General Fono in June
2000, full and overwhelming support has been given to the implementation of the
project;
6.
Notes the confirmation by the Council of Faipule that in the twelve
months from July 2000 there will be significant movement in implementing the
project, in conjunction with New Zealand;
7.
Acknowledges that New Zealand has committed substantial additional
funding to the project in 2000-2001, and its intention to collaborate with Tokelau in
ways that can produce a significant momentum;
8.
Notes the changes being made in arrangements for the delivery of public
services, within an environment in which the institution of the village is truly
recognized as the foundation of the nation, and the expectation that the New Zealand
State Services Commissioner may be able to withdraw from his role as employer of
the Tokelau Public Service at a time to be set by mutual agreement when Tokelau
has established a suitable local employment framework;
9.
Also notes that the constitution of a self-governing Tokelau will continue
to develop as a part and as a consequence of the building of the Modern House of
Tokelau, and that both have national and international importance for Tokelau;

2

A/55/23 (Part I), chap. II, annex, para. 30. For the final text, see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 23.

2

A/RES/55/143

10. Acknowledges Tokelau’s need for reassurance, given that local resources
cannot adequately cover the material side of self-determination, and the ongoing
responsibility of Tokelau’s external partners to assist Tokelau in balancing its desire
to be self-reliant to the greatest extent possible with its need for external assistance;
11. Notes the special challenge inherent in the situation of Tokelau, among
the smallest of the small Territories, and how a Territory’s exercise of its inalienable
right to self-determination may be brought closer, as in the case of Tokelau, by the
meeting of that challenge in innovative ways;
12. Welcomes the assurance of the Government of New Zealand that it will
meet its obligations to the United Nations with respect to Tokelau and abide by the
freely expressed wishes of the people of Tokelau with regard to their future status;
13. Calls upon the administering Power and United Nations agencies to
continue their assistance to Tokelau, as it further develops its economy and
governance structures within the context of its ongoing constitutional evolution;
14. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session.
83rd plenary meeting
8 December 2000

3
