A/55/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

81st plenary meeting
Monday, 4 December 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)
3

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 103 to 114 and 12.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Ms. Anzhela Korneliouk of Belarus, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Third Committee.
Ms. Korneliouk (Belarus): I have the honour to
present for consideration the following reports of the
Third Committee on the agenda items allocated to it by
the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 103, entitled “Social
development, including questions relating to the world
social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons
and the family”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/55/591, paragraph 9, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 104, entitled “Follow-up to
the International Year of Older Persons”, the Third
Committee recommends in document A/55/592,
paragraph 9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 105, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Committee
recommends in document A/55/593, paragraph 20, the
adoption of six draft resolutions.

I would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to paragraph 14 of the report, which falls
under
the
discussion
of
draft
resolution
A/C.3/55/L.8/Rev.1, entitled “Combating the criminal
misuse of information technologies”. In that paragraph,
the names of Norway and Venezuela should be added
to the list of sponsors.
In addition, I would also like to draw the
attention of the Assembly to a correction in draft
resolution V, on page 15 of A/55/593, last preambular
paragraph, beginning “Noting the work”. The title of
the Committee should read “Committee of Experts on
Crime in” — not “and” — “Cyberspace of the Council
of Europe”. In the same paragraph, after “United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland”, “in
May 1998” should read “on 17 May 1998”.
Under agenda item 106, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/55/594, paragraph 7, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 107, entitled “Advancement
of women”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/55/595 and corrigenda 1 and 2, paragraph
35, the adoption of six draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 36, the adoption of one draft decision.
I would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to part III of the report. In draft resolution I,
entitled “Working towards the elimination of crimes
against women committed in the name of honour”, the
following corrections should be made to the text to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-77961 (E)

A/55/PV.81

bring it into line with the text of A/C.3/55/L.11/Rev.1,
as it was before the Third Committee at the time of its
adoption.
In the third preambular paragraph, the phrase “a
common feature of which is premeditation,” should be
deleted, and the phrase “and that the failure to do so
constitutes a human rights violation” should be added
to the end of the same paragraph.
The following paragraph should be inserted after
the fourth preambular paragraph:
“Noting
general
recommendation
19
concerning violence against women adopted by
the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women”.
In the seventh preambular paragraph, the words
“awareness campaigns through print and electronic
media, as well as educational programmes, are required
to underline” should be deleted and replaced by
“fundamental changes in societal attitudes are required,
and underlining”.
In operative paragraph 1, the word “crimes”
before “that are identified in the outcome document”
should be deleted and replaced by the word “those”.
The phrase “a common feature of which is
premeditation”, which appears after “including crimes
against women committed in the name of honour”,
should be deleted.
In operative paragraph 7, after the phrase
“elimination of the crimes in question”, the phrase
“and on the issue of crimes of passion” should be
deleted.
Under agenda item 108, entitled “Implementation
of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on
Women and of the special session of the General
Assembly entitled ‘Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century’”,
the Third Committee recommends in document
A/55/596, paragraph 10, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 109, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Committee
recommends in document A/55/597*, paragraph 25, the
adoption of six draft resolutions and, in paragraph 26,
the adoption of one draft decision. I would like to draw

2

the attention of the Assembly to paragraph 21 of the
report, which falls under the discussion of draft
decision A/C.3/55/L.70, entitled “Assistance to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa”. In
that paragraph, the name of Japan should be added to
the list of sponsors.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends in document A/55/598,
paragraph 14, the adoption of two draft resolutions and,
in paragraph 15, the adoption of one draft decision. I
would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to
paragraph 8 of the report, which falls under the
discussion of draft resolution A/C.3/55/L.18/Rev.2,
entitled “The rights of the child”. In that paragraph, the
name of Morocco should be added to the list of
sponsors.
Under agenda item 111, entitled “Programme of
activities of the International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People”, the Committee recommends in
document A/55/599, paragraph 8, the adoption of one
draft resolution.
Under agenda item 112, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, the Committee
recommends in document A/55/600, paragraph 26, the
adoption of four draft resolutions and, in paragraph 27,
the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 113, entitled “The right of
peoples to self-determination”, the Committee
recommends in document A/55/601, paragraph 17, the
adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 114, entitled “Human rights
questions”, the Committee recommends, in paragraph 4
of document A/55/602, the adoption of one draft
decision.
Under agenda item 114 (a), entitled “Human
rights questions: implementation of human rights
instruments”, the Committee recommends, in
paragraph 16 of document A/55/602/Add.1, the
adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 114 (b), entitled “Human
rights questions: human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms”, the Committee recommends, in paragraph
94
of
its report
contained
in
documents

A/55/PV.81

A/55/602/Add.2 and A/55/602/Add.2/Corr.1,
adoption of 21 draft resolutions.

the

I would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to revisions in draft resolution V, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Cambodia”. The word
“Mr.” should be inserted before the name Thomas
Hammarberg in paragraph 4 and before the name Peter
Leuprecht in paragraph 5. In paragraph 8, the initial
letters of the words “Governance Action Plan” should
be capitalized. In paragraph 17, a comma should appear
after the second appearance of the words “Khmer
Rouge”. In paragraph 27, the words “to take all steps”
should be inserted before the words “to prevent such
violence”, and the final words of the paragraph should
read “through seeking technical assistance”. Finally, in
paragraph 29, the word “requests” before the words
“the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees” should be replaced by the word “asks”.
Under agenda item 114 (c), entitled “Human
rights questions: human rights situations and reports of
special
rapporteurs
and
representatives”,
the
Committee recommends, in paragraph 49 of document
A/55/602/Add.3, the adoption of eight draft
resolutions. In connection with that report, I would like
to draw the attention of the Assembly to a correction to
draft resolution VI, entitled “Situation of human rights
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”. In the sixth
preambular paragraph, the word “all” before the word
“parties” should be deleted.
Under agenda item 114 (d), entitled “Human
rights questions: comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action”, the Committee indicates in its report
contained in document A/55/602/Add.4 that no draft
proposals were submitted and no action taken under
that sub-item.
Under agenda item 114 (e), entitled “Human
rights questions: report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights”, the Committee
indicates in its report contained in document
A/55/602/Add.5 that no draft proposals were submitted
and no action taken under that sub-item.
Under agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, the Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/55/603,
the adoption of two draft decisions.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the members
of the Group of Eastern European States for having
given me the honour of representing them as a member
of the Bureau of the Third Committee. I should like
also to thank the Chairperson of the Committee and her
deputies, the Secretariat staff and the interpreters for
their efforts to ensure the success of our work.
The President: I should like to inform members
that the representative of the Dominican Republic has
expressed the desire to make a statement in connection
with the report of the Third Committee on agenda item
107, “Advancement of women”, contained in
documents A/55/595 and corrigenda 1 and 2. May I
take it that the General Assembly, bearing in mind rule
66 of the rules of procedure, agrees to discuss that
report?
It was so decided.
The President: I shall call on the representative
of the Dominican Republic when we come to agenda
item 107.
Other statements will therefore be limited to
explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Third Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the Assembly
agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations too that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where a recorded vote or separate vote was

3

A/55/PV.81

taken, we will do the same. I would also hope that we
may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Third Committee.

Agenda item 105 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/593)

Agenda item 103
Social development, including questions relating to
the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/591)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The draft
resolution, entitled “International Year of Volunteers”,
was adopted by the Third Committee without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly likewise
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/57).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 103?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 104
Follow-up to the International Year of Older
Persons
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/592)
The President: The General Assembly will take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The draft
resolution, entitled “Follow-up to the International
Year of Older Persons: Second World Assembly on
Ageing”, was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly too
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/58).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 104?
It was so decided.

4

The President: The Assembly has before it six
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 20 of its report.
The Assembly will take a decision on the six
draft resolutions one by one. After all the decisions
have been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote or position.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the
Challenges of the Twenty-first Century”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/59).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II, entitled “Follow-up to the Tenth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders”, without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/60).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“An effective international legal instrument against
corruption”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/61).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution IV, entitled “United Nations African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of
Offenders”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/62).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution V, entitled “Combating the criminal

A/55/PV.81

misuse of information technologies”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

as well as on a draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 36 of its report.

Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
55/63).

In this connection, I would like to inform
members that action on draft resolution VI will be
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review of
the programme budget implications by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
and the Fifth Committee. The Assembly will take
action on the draft resolution as soon as possible,
before the recess in December.

The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution VI, entitled “Strengthening of the
United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, in particular its technical cooperation
capacity”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
55/64).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
105.
Agenda item 106
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/594)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “International cooperation against
the world drug problem”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/65).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 106?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 107
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/595 and
Corr.1 and 2)
The President: The Assembly has before it six
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 35 of its report and in corrigenda l and 2,

In accordance with the decision taken by the
General Assembly at the beginning of this meeting, I
now give the floor to the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
Ms. Álvarez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Dominican Republic
profoundly regrets that it has been necessary to
postpone the adoption of draft resolution VI in
document A/55/595, on the critical situation of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), to a later stage
of the fifty-fifth session. My delegation has joined the
consensus regarding the report in document A/55/595,
on the advancement of women, only because you, Mr.
President, have assured us that the draft text on
INSTRAW, together with the recommendations of the
Fifth Committee on the financial implications, will be
presented at a later date before the General Assembly
recesses in December.
It is our delegation’s understanding that, on the
basis of paragraph 6 of the draft resolution on
INSTRAW, the Institute will be provided with
resources so that it can continue its activities
throughout 2001. It is also our understanding, on the
basis of resolution 54/250, that these resources could
come from the contingency fund, which, at the end of
the fifty-fourth session, had $16,362,700.
Finally, it is to be regretted that the Third
Committee presented its report to the General
Assembly in plenary meeting without taking into
account the provisions of rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. The delegation of
the Dominican Republic hopes that an omission of this
kind will not be repeated in the future.
The President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting.

5

A/55/PV.81

Mr. Carp (United States of America): We will
join the consensus for adopting draft resolution V, but
we would like to state for the record that there is only
one criterion for judging whether or not a reservation
to a treaty is acceptable. That criterion, in our opinion,
is that the reservation must be compatible with both the
object and the purpose of the treaty. There is no other
international treaty law that has a bearing on
reservations.
Mr. Al-Mohannadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation would like to offer its views on the draft
resolution on crimes of passion against women. In
Qatar, as in other Islamic countries, we try to protect
women’s rights, and we have always recognized full
equality between men and women.
My country believes that all crimes against men
or women are equally reprehensible, and my delegation
rejects these constant attacks against Islam, a religion
that has more than 1.25 billion adherents. These crimes
are not confined to any particular people or region. We
believe that crimes called “crimes of honour” are
crimes against people. Hence, we have reservations on
the draft resolution entitled “Working towards the
elimination of crimes against women committed in the
name of honour”, and we shall abstain in the voting.
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on draft resolutions I through V and the draft
decision, one by one. After all the decisions have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity
to explain their vote or position.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Working towards the elimination of crimes against
women committed in the name of honour”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,

6

El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela,
Viet Nam,
Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Lesotho
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon,
China, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab Emirates
Draft resolution I was adopted by 146 votes to 1,
with 26 abstentions (resolution 55/66).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Lesotho
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour; the delegation of Mauritania had
intended to abstain.]
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II, entitled “Traffic in women and
girls”, without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

A/55/PV.81

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/67).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution III, entitled “Elimination of all forms
of violence against women, including crimes identified
in the outcome document of the twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly entitled ‘Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century’”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/68).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution IV, entitled “Improvement of the status
of women in the United Nations system”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/69).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution V, entitled “Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against
Women”, without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
55/70).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision, entitled “Note by the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women”, recommended
by the Third Committee for adoption. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I call on the representative of
France on a point of order.
Ms. De Carne (France) (spoke in French): There
are corrections needed for the French version of draft
resolution III. I note that the English version is correct,
so perhaps it is just the French version where
corrections need to be made.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly decides to take note of the corrections to the
French version of the resolution?

It was so decided.
The President: I call on the representative of
Jordan, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote on
one of the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Naber (Jordan): My delegation abstained in
the voting on resolution 55/66, as, early on in the
discussions, my delegation believed it was crucial that
we include the term “premeditated” before the word
“crimes” in the third preambular paragraph and in
operative paragraph 1 of the resolution. Without the
inclusion of the term “premeditated” in these
paragraphs, the scope can include crimes committed in
sudden bursts of rage in reaction to particular
circumstances. Or, to put this another way, it would
include implicitly not only those crimes that fall within
the broad understanding of this resolution, but also
those that overlap with crimes of passion.
My delegation fervently believes that there
should not have been any half measures here. If
passion is intended, then passion should be mentioned,
and the scope of the resolution be broadened explicitly.
If passion is not intended, there should have been no
difficulty for the membership to accept “premeditation”
in the text, since it is a common feature of the crime
anyway. This would have added precision where
precision is needed. Without this, the result is, of
course, utterly illogical.
In the third preambular paragraph States are
reminded that they have an obligation to exercise due
diligence to prevent, investigate, punish, and so forth.
How could States possibly exercise due diligence to
prevent such crimes if the crime in question is
committed in a sudden state of rage? All States in
which there are crimes of passion would in due course
leave themselves open to potential accusations of
human rights violations for not having exercised
enough due diligence to prevent the commission of
such crimes.
I wish to emphasize my delegation’s willingness
to work in the future towards bridging the gaps on this
issue. We look forward to expressing our views
regarding the upcoming Secretary-General’s report.
Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I asked
for the floor not to explain the vote that my country
cast, but only to note that my country was one of the
sponsors of draft resolution IV, “Improvement of the
status of women in the United Nations system”, and

7

A/55/PV.81

this fact was not reflected in the report. We trust that
the Secretariat will indicate that my country
co-sponsored draft resolution IV.
The President: The Assembly takes note of the
announcement by the representative of the Sudan
regarding its inclusion as one of the sponsors of draft
resolution IV.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 108?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 109
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions

The Assembly is reminded that we are acting on
draft resolutions recommended for adoption by the
Third Committee, and Member States cannot become
additional sponsors in the plenary. Any corrections
delegations may have concerning the lists of sponsors
of draft resolutions contained in the reports of the
Third Committee should be submitted to the Secretariat
of the Committee for issuance of corrigenda. However,
the floor will be given to any delegations that wish to
make corrections to the text of any draft resolution
contained in reports of the Third Committee.

The President: The Assembly has before it six
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 25 of its report, and one draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 26
of its report.

May I take it that the General Assembly has now
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
107?

I now give the floor to the representative of
Norway, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 108
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women and of the special session of
the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/596)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth World
Conference on Women and full implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
outcome of the twenty-third special session of the
General Assembly”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/71).

8

Report of the Third Committee (A/55/597)

Mr. Leiro (Norway): I refer to the draft
resolution entitled “Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”. To date, such draft
resolutions have always been adopted by consensus.
The main purpose of the draft resolution is to express
the support of all Member countries for the work of the
High Commissioner. At a time when the tasks entrusted
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) are more challenging than
ever, and refugees all over the world depend on the
assistance provided by UNHCR, the best way to
express solidarity with the plight of refugees and the
work of UNHCR would be to adopt the draft resolution
on this subject by consensus again this year.
A vote on a specific paragraph at this time is
particularly regrettable, bearing in mind that this year
marks the
fiftieth
anniversary
of UNHCR.
Furthermore, it should be recalled that the paragraph
on which a vote has been requested contains agreed
language from resolution 54/146, which was adopted
by consensus at the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly. Based on these considerations, Norway
supports the draft resolution, will vote in favour of the
paragraph and hopes other Member countries will
express their support for UNHCR by doing the same.
We hope the current situation will be an exception and

A/55/PV.81

that it will not lead to any precedents with regard to
resolutions on this important subject.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the six draft resolutions and one draft
decision, one by one. After all the decisions have been
taken, representatives will again have the opportunity
to explain their votes or positions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/72).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“New international humanitarian order”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/73).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”.
A separate, recorded vote has been requested on
operative paragraph 20 of draft resolution III.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put to the
vote operative paragraph 20 of draft resolution III.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,

Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia,
Comoros,
Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, India, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Operative paragraph 20 of draft resolution III
was retained by 139 votes to none, with 31
abstentions.
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution III as a whole without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III as whole was adopted
(resolution 55/74).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Ad hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the
announcement of voluntary contributions to the

9

A/55/PV.81

Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/75).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Fiftieth anniversary of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and World
Refugee Day”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
55/76).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VI
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
55/77).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 26 of its report.
The draft decision is entitled “Documents relating
to the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons and humanitarian questions”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote after the voting.
Ms. Álvarez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of the Dominican Republic
abstained in the voting on operative paragraph 20 of
draft resolution III, entitled “Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”, contained
in the Third Committee’s report.

10

We would like to state explicitly that operative
paragraph 10 of the resolution, which condemns the
refoulement of persons seeking asylum, should not be
understood to mean that the Dominican Republic
renounces its sovereign right to apply its migration
policy within the terms of international and human
rights laws.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 109?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 110
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/598)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position before action is taken.
Mr. Carp (United States of America): The
Government of the United States will join the
consensus on draft resolution II, entitled “The rights of
the child”, because we want to reaffirm our
commitment to protecting those who are most
vulnerable, our children. Overall, we believe that this
draft resolution contributes to that process. We note
with regret, however, that we disagree with the
sponsors on certain paragraphs; most notably with
paragraph 8 of section V. We are deeply disappointed
that we were unable to arrive at a compromise on the
language in that paragraph.
In January this year, the United States, along with
many Member States, had the honour to participate at
Geneva in the Working Group on a draft optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The
result was a major step in the protection of children, of
which we can all be very proud.
The language in paragraph 8 of section V of the
draft resolution does not take into account the fact that
the questions of the age of military recruitment and
participation in armed conflict were resolved in
Convention No. 182 of the International Labour
Organization and in the Optional Protocol. We strongly
believe that any language in United Nations resolutions
referring to the above-mentioned issue should

A/55/PV.81

accurately reflect not only the most recent but,
arguably, the most significant progress in the
development of legal instruments to protect children.
While the language in paragraph 8 does not alter
in any way the legal obligations of these two singular
treaties, we maintain that, in the interest of accuracy,
any language that refers to these issues should be in
line with the language that so many of us negotiated
over such a long period of time. That said, our efforts
now are best directed towards ensuring compliance by
States parties and at persuading non-parties to improve
their practices and consider signing and ratifying the
Optional Protocol. In that way, we will truly be
working towards our common goal of protecting the
world’s children.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 14 of its report, and
on the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 15 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “The
girl child”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/78).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II, entitled “The rights of the child”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/79).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child”.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 110?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 111
Programme of activities of the International Decade
of the World’s Indigenous People
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/599)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution, entitled “International Decade of the
World’s Indigenous People”, without a vote. May I
consider that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/80).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 112
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/600)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position before action is taken.
Mr. Carp (United States of America): We truly
appreciate the hard work and the real spirit of
compromise shown by everyone in order to reach the
degree of consensus we have attained with these texts
on the elimination of racial discrimination. Such a
cooperative spirit bodes well for the upcoming World
Conference against Racism. The United States knows
the tragedy of racism first-hand. We are committed to
combating it in all its manifestations, both at home and
abroad. We look forward to the World Conference, and
we are working hard to make it a success.
However, unfortunately, there are some elements
in these draft resolutions that trouble us and keep us
from becoming co-sponsors. Specifically, we are
concerned about references that are inconsistent with
the First Amendment rights set out in our Constitution,
concerning freedom of speech. Thus, while we may
denounce certain opinions, the right to express them is

11

A/55/PV.81

guaranteed by our Constitution. The United States took
a limited reservation to that effect under the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination.
Secondly, we do not believe the General
Assembly has the power to direct States to ratify
treaties or conventions. We would prefer urging States
to consider ratification or accession.
Furthermore, while we support the use of all
appropriate measures to combat racism, “all available
measures” are mentioned in the draft resolution. In our
view, that is an overly broad formulation that could be
subject to misinterpretation.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the four draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 26 of its report and
the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 27 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/81).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Measures to be taken against political platforms and
activities based on doctrines of superiority which are
based on racial discrimination or ethnic exclusiveness
and xenophobia, including, in particular, neo-Nazism”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/82).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution III, entitled “Measures to combat
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/83).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Third Decade to Combat Racism and Racial

12

Discrimination and the convening of the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/84).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision entitled “Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination”. May I take
it that the General Assembly decides to adopt the draft
decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 112.
Agenda item 113
The right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/601)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 17 of its report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/85).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Antigua
and
Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei

A/55/PV.81

Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Japan, Luxembourg, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Estonia, France, Georgia, Greece, Ireland, Israel,
Italy,
Kazakhstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco, New
Zealand, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution II was adopted by 119 votes to
19, with 35 abstentions (resolution 55/86).

[Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad

13

A/55/PV.81

and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Canada, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, Tonga
Draft resolution III was adopted by 170 votes to
2, with 5 abstentions (resolution 55/87).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114
Human rights questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/602)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 4 of its report. The draft
decision is entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of
human rights”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
114.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee
(A/55/602/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.
I turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Convention on the Protection of the

14

Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/88).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/89).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Effective implementation of international instruments
on human rights, including reporting obligations under
international instruments on human rights”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/90).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/55/602/Add.2 and Corr.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it 21
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 94 of its report.
I call on the representative of Qatar to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Al-Mohannadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation asked for the floor to explain our vote
before the vote on draft resolution VI, on promoting
and consolidating democracy. The State of Qatar, under
the leadership of His Highness the Emir, Sheikh bin
Hamad Al-Thani, took a great stride forward to build a
democratic State enjoying individual and juridical

A/55/PV.81

freedom, and this has been expressed clearly in the
freedom of expression and freedom of information and
the press. Women have been given wide opportunities
in all walks of life, and the State of Qatar is truly
committed to democracy, to human rights and to
support for human rights.
We are not against this draft resolution, yet we
are concerned about some paragraphs contained in it.
Therefore we will abstain in the vote.
The President: The representative of Cuba has
asked to speak on a point of order.
Mrs. de Armas Garcia (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): It is not actually a point of order. I would like
to seek clarification concerning draft resolution X.
When this draft resolution was considered in the
Committee, we had clarified that Ghana mistakenly
was included in the list. We had corrected that. We do
not know why, but this error has been repeated. So in
the records, could that please be corrected? Ghana is
not a sponsor of draft resolution X concerning the right
to universal freedom of travel and the vital importance
of family reunification.
The President: The Assembly takes note of the
statement of the representative of Cuba.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Ms. Ito (Japan): My statement is concerning the
corrections announced by the Rapporteur of the Third
Committee for draft resolution V, entitled “Situation of
human rights in Cambodia”. The last correction
announced, for paragraph 29, was not quite what was
intended in the draft resolution in the Third Committee.
The word “asks” will replace “requests” in front of the
words “the Government of Cambodia”, which appear in
the third line of the English version, and not the
“requests” in front of “the office of the United Nations
High Commissioner”.
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the 21 draft resolutions, one by one. After
all the decisions have been taken, representatives will
again have the opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, “Human rights
and cultural diversity”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 55/91).

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Protection of migrants”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

15

A/55/PV.81

Against:
None
Abstaining:
India, Israel, Malaysia, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Myanmar, Palau, Singapore, United
States of America
Draft resolution II was adopted by 165 votes to
none, with 8 abstentions (resolution 55/92).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Lesotho
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Proclamation of 18 December as International
Migrants Day”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
55/93).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
IV, entitled “United Nations Decade for Human Rights
Education, 1995-2004, and public information
activities in the field of human rights”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
55/94).
The President: The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution V, entitled “Situation of human rights
in Cambodia”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
55/95).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Promoting and consolidating democracy”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape

16

Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Honduras, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Maldives, Myanmar,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Swaziland, Viet Nam
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 157 votes to
none, with 16 abstentions (resolution 55/96).
[Subsequently the delegation of Honduras
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]

A/55/PV.81

The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution VII without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
55/97).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of
Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote
and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution VIII without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
55/98).
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Strengthening of the rule of law”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution IX without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution
55/99).
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel
and the vital importance of family reunification”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,

Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belgium, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uzbekistan
Draft resolution X was adopted by 106 votes to 1,
with 67 abstentions (resolution A/55/100).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Colombia and
Tajikistan advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Respect for the purposes and principles contained in
the Charter of the United Nations to achieve
international
cooperation
in
promoting
and
encouraging respect for human rights and for
fundamental freedoms and in solving international
problems of a humanitarian character”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

17

A/55/PV.81

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic
Republic of),
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Brazil, Cape Verde, Chile, Guatemala,
Nauru, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore, South Africa,
Thailand, Uruguay

18

Draft resolution XI was adopted by 104 votes to
52, with 15 abstentions (resolution 55/101).
The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of
all human rights”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Antigua
and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic
Republic of),
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former

A/55/PV.81

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Singapore, Thailand, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 112 votes to
46, with 15 abstentions (resolution A/55/102).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Tajikistan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour, and the delegations of Chile and
Cuba, that they had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XIII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
55/103).
The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“Strengthening United Nations action in the field of
human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XIV without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
55/104).
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XV without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution
55/105).
The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Human rights and extreme poverty”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution XVI without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
55/106).

The President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic
Republic of),
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,

19

A/55/PV.81

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Morocco,
Paraguay, Peru, Senegal
Draft resolution XVII was adopted by 109 votes
to 52, with 7 abstentions (resolution 55/107).
The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“The right to development”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XVIII without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XVIII was adopted (resolution
55/108).
The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field
of human rights”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution XIX without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution
55/109).
The President: Draft resolution XX is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures.”
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Angola,
Antigua
and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,

20

Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, Fiji, Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea,
Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution XX was adopted by 117 votes to
49, with 6 abstentions (resolution 55/110).
[Subsequently the delegations of Kuwait and
Tajikistan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XXI is entitled
“Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution XXI without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution XXI was adopted without a vote
(resolution 55/111).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kuwait informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]

A/55/PV.81

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote after the vote.
Mr. Francis (Jamaica): My delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution II, on the protection of
migrants, and supports its general thrust. However, we
wish to express some concern over operative
paragraph 4, which has several implications for
national immigration policy and by extension, for
social and economic development. Jamaica supports
the welfare and protection of migrants. However,
economic circumstances often do not allow for the
accommodation of an influx of migrant workers. The
revision and review of immigration policy is a matter
within the domestic jurisdiction of each State. National
immigration policy is also conditioned by the
availability of resources and the economic and social
conditions which prevail.
Mr. Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to explain its vote on draft
resolution I, on human rights and cultural diversity, in
document A/55/602/Add.2.
The Chilean delegation has joined in the
consensus on the adoption of the draft resolution on
human rights and cultural diversity. Nevertheless, it has
serious reservations about the relevance of including
the theme of cultural diversity in the context of human
rights. My country firmly respects the coexistence of
various cultural systems in the international arena; it
could not be otherwise regarding a country like Chile,
where cultures of such diverse origins coexist.
Nevertheless, we feel that the question of cultural
diversity pertains to other areas of United Nations
efforts, not to human rights.
The great legacy of the twentieth century is the
recognition and validation of the principle of the
universality of human rights. For Chile, the
universality of human rights means incorporating the
inherent dignity of all inhabitants of the planet,
independent of their culture, religion, social status,
ethnic origin, gender or traditions. Neither lack of
development nor cultural differences can be invoked to
justify limits on human rights recognized in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, as well as the rest of the
conventions which comprise the universal system for

the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Opening a debate on the
question of human rights and cultural diversity could
mean, in our delegation’s view, a step backward in the
universality and implementation of these rights.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/55/602/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it eight
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 49 of its report.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the vote.
Mr. Al-Ethary (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic):
Democracy has now become a characteristic feature of
modern Yemen. This has led us to take a strong and
clear position on several political issues regarding
strengthening of human rights at the national and
international levels.
We would like to confirm our full respect for
international instruments, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and international humanitarian law in
general. We believe that human rights are an indivisible
whole and should not be selective. Hence we condemn
any violations of human rights wherever they occur,
without any exception. Any politicization of human
rights issues means using them as a tool against
individual countries and for purposes unrelated to
noble human rights issues. We reject selectivity and
double standards and do not believe in targeting any
individual religions or other related issues.
Accordingly, my delegation will not vote on all
the draft resolutions on human rights in all countries,
without exception, as set out in document
A/55/602/Add.3.
Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea): I was going to
speak after the vote, but since you have given me the
floor before the vote, I would like to explain that Papua

21

A/55/PV.81

New Guinea has traditionally abstained on all the draft
resolutions contained in document A/55/602/Add.3.
The Government of Papua New Guinea considers
that the rule of law is fundamental to the protection and
promotion of human rights. In this regard, democratic
institutions cannot flourish where political expediency
may appear to legitimize arbitrary administrative
actions contrary to the principle of the rule of law. In
other words, Papua New Guinea considers arbitrary
administrative actions as inimical to democratic values,
norms and institutions and threatens the very basis and
fundamentals of the rule of law. Papua New Guinea
will accordingly vote in favour of these draft
resolutions.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the eight draft resolutions, one by one.
After all decisions have been taken, representatives
will again have the opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution
55/112).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The President: Draft resolution II entitled
“Situation of human rights in parts of South-eastern
Europe”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/113).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Grenada,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,

22

Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu,
Yugoslavia
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Brunei Darussalam, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Gambia, Ghana, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile,
Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Dominican Republic,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia, Guinea, Haiti,
Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Mexico,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South
Africa, Swaziland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay
Draft resolution III was adopted by 67 votes to
54, with 46 abstentions (resolution 55/114).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Human rights situation in Iraq”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/55/PV.81

In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu
Against:
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Sudan
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China,
Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 102 votes
to 3, with 60 abstentions (resolution 55/115).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Sudan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Algeria, Bahrain, Chad, China, Comoros, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Egypt, Gambia, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia,
Ghana, Guinea, Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya,
Lesotho,
Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia,

23

A/55/PV.81

Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Mozambique, Nepal,
Nigeria, Palau, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, Uganda, Ukraine, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America
Draft resolution V was adopted by 85 votes to 32,
with 49 abstentions (resolution 55/116).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Yugoslavia
Against:
Rwanda, Uganda

24

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Bhutan,
Botswana,
Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 102 votes to
2, with 63 abstentions (resolution 55/117).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Haiti”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution VII without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
55/118).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Question of human rights in Afghanistan”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution VIII without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
55/119).
The President: I call on the representative of
Bolivia, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
after the voting.
Mr. Salamanca (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Bolivia voted in favour of draft resolution
III, entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”. My delegation is aware of positive
elements that indicate greater progress in the efforts of
the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement human rights in that country. But the
Government of Bolivia notes with concern that since
1996, no invitation has yet been extended by the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the

A/55/PV.81

Special Representative of the Commission on Human
Rights to visit the country. Such a visit would make it
possible to obtain more official information on the
situation on human rights in Iran, which of course is
the subject of the draft resolution and of the
recommendations it contains.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 114.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action
Report of the Third Committee
(A/55/602/Add.4)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
takes note of the report of the Third Committee on
agenda item 114 (d)?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/55/603)
The President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the two draft decisions recommended by
the Third Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled
“Organization of work of the Third Committee and
biennial programme of work of the Committee for
2001-2002”. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to adopt draft decision I?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President: We turn now to draft decision II,
entitled “Report of the Economic and Social Council”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
decision II?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
all the chapters of the report of the Economic and
Social Council allocated to the Third Committee?
It was so decided.

(e) Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights
Report of the Third Committee
(A/55/602/Add.5)
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
takes note of the report of the Third Committee on
agenda item 114 (e)?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

Programme of work
The President: I would like to inform members
of the following additions to the programme of work of
the General Assembly.
On Wednesday morning, 6 December 2000, the
General Assembly will take up the second report of the
Credentials Committee, followed by agenda item 47,
“Assistance in mine action”, to consider a revised draft
resolution contained in document A/55/L.51/Rev.2 and
Corr.1. The General Assembly will also take up the
reports of the Fifth Committee under sub-items (a) to
(e) and (g) of agenda item 17, “Appointments to fill
vacancies
in
subsidiary
organs
and
other
appointments”.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

25
