SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-THIRD

NEW

RECORDS
YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2065)

Adoption

of the agenda

, . , . . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . .

. . . .

, ,. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . , ,, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12578)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. , . . , . . , . . . . . . .

S/PV.2065

NOTE

Symbols
figures.

of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents
of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The
adopted
Secfc~ity

adopted

resolutions
of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions mid Decisions of the
Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2065th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 10 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
S/12588, containing the text of a letter dated 9 March
addressedto the Presidentof the Council by the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta on behalf of the African Group of States, and
S/12590, containing the text of a letter dated 9 March
from the representativeof Liberia to the President of the
Council, transmitting the text of a letter from the President of Liberia.

President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. The first speaker is the Commissionerfor External
Affairs of Nigeria, His Excellency Mr, Garba, whom I
welcome to the Council and on whom I call.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2065)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): It is with a heavy heart that I
come again to New York to addressthe Security Council
on matters affecting southern Africa, the dignity of the
African continent and the black people. They also bear
on the dignity of my country.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12.578)

5. Mr. President, I know your personalhistory and the
fight which you put up in your youth and which you still
sustain in the quest for dignity, justice and freedom in
southern Africa, As a functionary of your Govermnent in
‘he Council, please be reassured that if my remarks
appear heavy-handed, they are not directed at YOU
personally, but at the principles involved in the way the
Government you representtoday and the previous Administrations of the United Kingdom have handled the qucstion of the decolonization of southern Africa.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
l’he agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Chargk d’Affaires
a.i, of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to
the United Nations addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council (S/12578)

6. This is another occasion to thank the aecretaryGeneral for his consistentdedication to the promotion of
the principles of *humanvalues in the execution of his
very delicate task. His timely pronouncementson the new
dimensions of the problem of independence aud selfdetermination in Rhodesiaand on the recent aggression
by the Smith regimeagainstMozambique, Botswanaand
Zambia were well received by my Government, I am
happy that the Secretary-Generalreiterated what should
be clear to every decent human being-namely, that:

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Kenya,
Mozambique, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber,

“for any solution to be just and lasting, sucha solution
must have, as its objective, the establishmentof majority rule in accordancewith the principle of one man,
one vote”.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mrs. Gbujama (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Medani (Sudan), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Salim
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta)
and Miss Konie (Zambia) took the places reservedfor
themat the sideof the Council chamber.

7. When we in Nigeria heard about the questionable
actions of Bishop Muzorewa, Reverend Sithole and Chief
Chirau in joining the illegal minority racist rdgime, WC
brushed the news aside, considering it an exercise in
self-deception and futility, We took it for granted that the
British Government would immediately reject the SO-

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of the Council members to the following documents:
1

called Salisbury settlement and so inform the Security
Council and States Members of the United Nations.

puppets in the name of moderation or can foist on us a
new breed of individuals created by the West to foster
external interests in southern Africa. This will only postpone the evil day and will merely nurture and bolster the
very reactionary forces that should be neutralized. We
thought that by now the Western Powers would have
learnt their lesson from the failure of their policies jn
other parts of the world and most recently in Angola, But
it appears that the British are again in the process of
subordinating human values in Rhodesia to short-sighted
political and economic considerations and of trying to
find what they think is an easy way out.

8. We have, of course, been aware of the Sausbury talks
from the press, as of the Turnhalle talks, over the months,
We have treated these talks with the contempt that they
deserve. We also regarded the so-called Salisbury internal
settlement with utter contempt. We treated it as something contrived by the illegal racist regime with its
cohorts in Pretoria in the hope of delaying its doom. We
regarded it not as a problem but as a symptom of the
~~~daise
of the racist rt5gimes in southern Africa generally,
which are desperately trying to formulate fake solutions
in a vain attempt to bamboozle world public opinion,

12. Nigeria has been consistent in its policies towards
southern Africa. I hate to dwell on the past, but looking
back to the genesis of the Rhodesian problem and at all
the attempts so far made to resolve it, my Government
cannot but recall with intense displeasure the British
hesitations that have frustrated all meaningful efforts at a
just and lasting settlement.

9. I wish to express here the disappointment
of my
delegation at the fact that this series of meetings of the
Security Council was called at the initiative of the African
Group rather than by the administering Power in Southern Rhodesia. My disappointment is even greater at the
news reports that the British Foreign Secretary ran away
from attending this meeting, apparently
because of a
remark made by the representative of the United States. I
wish to associate my delegation with that statement
because it is a true description of the behaviour of the
United Kingdom, which, for 12 years, has been running
away from a just and fair solution to the Rhodesian
question. It has, hOWeVer,
aLWays
managed to create the
impression of taking action when, in reality, all it has
done all this time has been to wring its hands helplessly.
We had thought that the present Administration
in the
United States would provide the British
with much
needed spine. We still hope that the United States will
not allow the British Government to run away from its
responsibilities to the international community.

13. My Government is deeply concerned at the manifestly inexorable drift in the situation and refuses to be
convinced that Smith can continue to circumvent the
issues involved in resolving the problem of Southern
Rhodesia. If the United Kingdom in particular and the
international community in general resolve to end the
crisis, Mr. Smith and his small gang of settlers-who are
hardly a hundredth part of the population of the Territory-cannot hold us to ransom.
14. We have been let down too often in this matter.
Inaction, particularly on the part of the administering
Power, has all along impeded all efforts to achieve a just
and lasting peace in Rhodesia. The Council must, on this
occasion, take clear, decisive and final action, bearing in
mind the interests of the 35 million suffering peopleblacks and white-in
southern Africa as a whole. We
cannot renege on our commitments to those people. We
cannot continue to allow the United Kingdom to bold
back the very pressures that will bring down Ian Smith
and, in the same breath, continue to mystify US about a
peaceful solution that amounts to no solution at all. I ask
members of this body to bear this in mind in trying to
understand the Anglo-American moves for a negotiated
settlement in Rhodesia. I also ask members of the Council
to remember this in assessing Ian Smith’s recent version
of a so-called internal settlement one full year after the
collapse of the Geneva constitutional talks on the political
future of the Territory.

10. My delegation does not believe that this series of
meetings of the Security Council should be regarded as
being convened solely in order to discuss the so-called
internal settlement. On the contrary, we believe that these
meetings should be used to discuss the deteriorating
situation in Southern Rhodesia and the continued aggression by the racist regime against independent
African
countries.
11, The Council should also be informed by the United
Kingdom and by the Secretary-General
of what they have
done since September, when this matter was last brought
before the Council. We should then consider further
action in view of the gravity of the situation in Rhodesia
and in southern Africa in general and the apparent
paralysis and inability, real or feigned, of the United
Kfngdom to force Ian Smith to surrender.
For example,
we already have before us the report* of the Committee
on Sanctions, which the Security Council must now
consider and take action on. We hope, therefore, that the
United States will not be taken in by the British Governmcnt in its present despicable manoeuvres
designed to
frustrate the genuine interests and aspirations
of Africa.
We have warned again and again against the belief that
any one can replace the true nationalist
leaders with
1 official Records
of the
Specid Supplement
No. 2.

Security

Cound.

T?~irty-tllird

15. The failure of the diplomatic shuttle undertaken 1st
November by the British Resident Commissioner designate, Lord Carver, and Lieutenant-General Prem Chand,
the Secretary-General’s representative, once again underscores the nagging problem of how to achieve the tramition- from Rhodesia to Zimbabwe. To the best or OUT
knowledge, Lord Carver’s mission ran into trouble OVC~
what should be the precise nature and composition of tile
armed forces of post-independent Zimbabwe. At the sar~e
time, the rebel leader-apparently drawing fresh inspirotjon and support from his political mentors at Pretoria
and elsewhere-chose this time once again to display his
characteristic arrogance towards the majority African

Year,

2

population in Rhodesia and the international
as a whole.

community

appear that it has decided, for reasons other than those of
acceptable moral standards and legality, not to discharge
its duty in the matter in accordance with international
law and practice and the recorded decisions of successive
British Governments. Last January, during Nigeria’s presi.
dency of the Council, we expressed our reservations about
involving Smith in any serious negotiation [2&5&h meeting]. We tried to persuade the Council and the British to
declare categorically that any settlement brought about
under the auspices of the illegal minority racist rigime
should not be accorded any recognition by this aLgust
body. But the talks held in Malta with the Patriotic Front
were then used as an excuse to block any such action by
the Council. It has been one full month since Malta, and
it would now appear that the Anglo-American initiative
has slipped, by accident or design, into the deep-freeze.
MY delegation views with great concern the inaction that
has followed the Malta talks between the British Foreign
Secretary and the leaders of the Patriotic Front.
Mr. Nkomo also underlined this when he addressed the
Council yesterday /2064th meeting].

16. The Nigerian Government, like other well-meaning
Governments, accepted the Anglo-American package as
one that provided a reasonable basis for negotiation, in
spite of its many inherent imperfections. In adopting this
attitude, we were guided by the overriding consideration
and the pragmatic necessity of bringing to a speedy end
the current bloodshed in Rhodesia. We believed that, in
spite of the Smith rdgime’s ignoble record of suppression,
repression and callous brutality, there was still a slight
chance of evolving a harmonious multiracial society in
Rhodesia, in which all the people could be guaranteed
true freedom and equality. We also entertained hopes
that, through the Anglo-American initiative, after we had
turned a blind eye to Smith’s perfidious past, it would
still be possible to transform Zimbabwe into a showcase
of a multiracial society, devoid of racial rancour and
mutual antagonisms, from which the high priests of
a/~u/Y/zeidjust across the border would be able to draw a
contemporary lesson.

20. The talks were by no means a failure because of the
far-reaching concessions that were made by the Patriotic
Front vis-&vis the Anglo-American proposals. There is
hardly a precedent in the history of liberation struggles of
freedom fighters having taken the tremendous risk of
agreeing to lay down their arms in favour of the political
process of free and fair elections, as envisaged for the
transformation of Rhodesia into Zimbabwe. This was the
crux of the problem. The Patriotic Front conceded this in
Malta. We did not take advantage of the good tide.
Probably the British were overwhelmed by this concession.

17. But all along we had our misgivings, and voiced them
whenever we had the opportunity, to the effect that Ian
Smith could not be taken at his word. We stated this here
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly. We
said again and again that Smith had always adopted a
conciliatory posture only when international pressures, as
well as military pressures from valiant Zimbabwean freedom fighters, had reached suffocating levels. But once the
pressures on Ian Smith were eased, even marginally, and
he was armed with renewed assurances of support from
the racist rBgime in South Africa, he once again confronted us defiantly, taunting the entire world, including
the Council, to do its damnedest.

21. We all watched with concern while Smith proceeded
at full steam towards his own brand of internal scttlement. As it turned out, and as if to justify the scepticism
which we have maintained all along, the net result of the
political charade stage-managed by Smith at Salisbury was
a diabolical manoeuvre. With the full support of the
racists in South Africa and the active connivance of
certain vested interests, Smith intends to install a government which will remain in power under his firm grips and
which is, in fact, a “black-washed” racist regime composed of the same coterie of racist politicians Who
declared independence unilaterally in 1965. What Smith
has done this time is merely to harness to a discredited
government a shadow of black participation, in the vain
hope of gaining international acceptability.

18. When Lord Carver and Lieutenant-General Prem
Chand returned empty-handed, the British and the
Americans did nothing about it. Upon inquiry, the British
informed us that the mission had not been a failure. We
suspected that it was only a question of time before an
attempt would be made to forge a fraudulent internal
solution in collaboration with so-called moderate black
leaders that would ensure the perpetuation of white
minority domination, No wonder. The momentum for a
just and durable settlement that began with the AngloAmerican proposals was lost in the imbroglio of AngloAmerican inaction. It is said “between a dream and its
realization there must be action”. In this case, there has
been very little action. The initiative was allowed to slip
by default into Smith’s hands. And yet the year 1977,
which saw the abortive Carver-Chand mission to Rhodesia,
was in fact the twelfth anniversary of the unilateral
declaration of independence.

22. This blatant fraud of an agreement reportedly signed
at Salisbury last Friday is nothing but Smith’s charter for
the preservation of minority interests and the perpetuation of white control in a supposedly black-majorityoriented government. No one can fail to see that this
fraudulent agreement is the worst contrivance in modern
constitutional history. It is hardly surprising that the
Patriotic Front, as well as the Organization of African
Unity,
has rejected it. My delegation calls On the Council
not only to reject the so-called internal settlement but to
condemn it.

19. WC refuse to accept that a simpleton like Smith
should continue to defy the world and be allowed to
commit this most heinous crime, the worst since the
United Kingdom turned over power, in political and
material terms, to racist minorities in southern Africa. We
still say categorically, for the umpteenth time, that the
United Kingdom, as the colonial Power, has the Primary
responsibility to end the Smith rebellion. But it would

23, My delegation has serious doubts as to the credibility
of the recent press statement ascribed to the British
3

current disastrous course wlfi$ can only Compound the
hardship of the entire people In the Territory and Prolong
&ejr suffering UImeCeSsarib.
We wish to remind the
Council that since the unilateral declaration of indepen.
dence the Smith r8gime
has been dubbed an illegal
administration by the Council. It would be highly pre.
Sumptuous
of any self-respectrng Government now to turn
round and declare that that SaIne illegal government
had
suddenly become deserting of international
acceptablQ,

Foreign Secretary, Mr. David Owen, to the effect. th.at
Smith’s fraudulent experiment would amount to “a @mficant
Step towards
majority
rule".
If this is true, it is a
contradiction and an outright attempt to legitimlze an
degality. It is in contradiction not only with the AngloAmerican proposals but also with paragraph 14 Of *e
Final
COmmuniquB
of the June 1977 Conference Of
Co~onwe&h
Heads of Government, which reads as
follows:

How
can
anyone
expect, ill the middle of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial l&rim.
hation, that the international ConUWnity
should condeae
a deal under which One White man’s vote is worth 10
black men’s votes? This is beyond comprehension; t&s 1s
racist arithmetic that is certainly unacceptable to Nigeria,
28.

f‘Heads of Government reiterated that the independence of Zimbabwe must be achieved on the basis of
majority rule. They recognised therefore that it is
necessary to mobilise and exert maximum pressure on
the illegal Smith regime. In this connection they noted
that the armed struggle has become Complementary to
other efforts including a negotiated settlement and
agreed that its maintenance was inevitable.. . . Heads
of Government recognised that a genuine settlement
must involve agreement not only on appropriate constitutional changes but also on practical measures to
ensure the transfer of effective power to a majority
government. In this connection they expressed their
deep conviction that a negotiated settlement must entail
not only the removal of the illegal Smith regime but
also the dismantling of its apparatus of repression, in
order to pave the way for the creation of police and
armed forces which would be responsive to the needs of
the people of Zimbabwe and ensure the orderly and
effective transfer of power.”

29, For the optimists who might argue that the bogus
Salisbury experiment
should
be given
a trial,
we should
like to draw attention to a few acts of international
brigandage and vandalism perpetrated by the rebel’s notorious paramilitary forces. Lad November, just when the
rebel leader announced blithely his programme for an
internal settlement, his notorious army was engagedin its
worst raid to date, deep inside Mozambique, a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations. Press reports of that
invasion indicated that the killing was on an unprece.
dented scale, surpassing even the holocaust at the
Nyazonia refugee camp in August 1976. Last week
another incursion was perpetrated against Botswana, and
only a few days ago Smith’s forces invaded Zambia, How
long will certain vested interests continue to conniveat
Smith’s recklessness at the expense of Africans? How
long will the Security Council allow such acts of aggression to be committed
with impunity
by an illegal @me?

24. The United Kingdom was indeed a party to that
communique and was, in fact, the host to the Conunonwealth Conference that issued it, The communique is the
strongest indictment by the Commonwealth not only of
the illegal r&ime but I believe also of the levity with
which the British have treated this problem.

30. Nigeria and Africa can no longer stand idly by with
folded arms. The administering Power responsible for
decolonizing Rhodesia should utilizc the resources of the
Council to achieve
the
right
and
just
solution
for
Zimbabwe. Any humane person who has reconciliation
rather than subjugation in his heart cannot reasonably
conceive of such heinous crimes as have been perpetrated
by Inn Smith. Smith’s villainy all through the years has
only proved one thing, that is, that the permanent
subjugation of the majority is his ultimate gOalin
Rhodesia and that his instruments for achieving it are
typically machiavellian, if not genocidal.

25. It is becoming clearer to us that the administering
Power does not intend to accept its colonial responsibilities and obligations. We would be more comfortable if
the United Kingdom would make it clear to the world
that it is unable to discharge its responsibility genuinely
to decolonize Rhodesia. We are similarly baffled by the
rather evasive statement issued by the United States State
Department.
26. Both statements from the very two parties Sponsoring a negotiated settlement have been a terrible &SapPOintIIlent
to US. It is therefore hardly surprising that the
illegal regime feels encouraged by these statements and
has proceeded at full steam to try to sell the internal
settlement. These statements have created the impreSSion
that the principal authors of the Anglo-American proposals have to all intents and purposes abandoned their
own Proposals and left the matter to the fraudulent
apartheid parliament at Salisbury.

31. In summary, I should like to place on record mY
Government’s total rejection of the obnoxious and repugnant Salisbury agreement and all that has to do with
the so-called internal settlement, It constitutes a negation
of the process of genuine self-deterruination and co*
tradicts even the Anglo.American proposals. For example,
the Anglo-American proposals, as contained in document
S/12393 of 1 September 1977, provide for the followlag~
first, the Surrender of power by the ittegnl r&ime anda
return to legality. -by contraS[, the irlternill
settlement stilt
retains Smith in power and has not restored legality;
secondly, an orderly and peaceful transition to indePen*
dence in the course of 1978.., by contrast, the exclusion
from the internal settlement of the key actors in
Rhodesia, namely, the patriotic Front, makes peaceful

27. What Smith has done is a new &&nge to and an
act of blatant defiance of the Security Council, Nigeria
and Africa Call on members of the Council to take up this
challenge by lluking a positive pronouncement on the
side of sanity and constitutionality. It is the minimum we
expand Of the Council, if Smith is to be Stopped in his
4

transition impossible; thirdly, free and impartial elections
on the basis of universal adult suffrage-by
contrast,
Smith’s proposed electoral processes are entrenched unbridled racism and racial discrimination; fourthly, the establishment by the British Government of a transitional
administration, with the task of conducting the elections
for an independent government-by
contrast, Smith’s
formula does not guarantee this; fifthly, a United Nations
presence, including a United Nations force, during the
transition period-by contrast, no provision was made for
this by Smith and his puppets; sixthly, an independence
constitution providing for a democratically elected government, the abolition of discrimination, the protection of
individual human rights and the independence of the
judiciary-by contrast, these provisions do not exist in the
Smith charter.

living. But it still has to contend with the. unwavering
dedication, patriotism and grim determination of the
nationalist liberation movements. The nationalists and
freedom fighters will continue to stand ready to pay the
supreme sacrifice rather than live ignominiously in perpetual bondage. Their cause is just, and their struggles
sacred. Their sacrifices will not be in vain, because time
is on their side and Africa stands by them, and they
enjoy the full solidarity of all freedom-loving peoples
throughout the world. In this regard it is necessary to
emphasize once again that the Nigerian Government and
people are totally committed to the cause of freedom
and justice in that part of our continent. This we
consider as a duty that must be performed, and we are
determined to restore the honour and dignity that
belong to that continent and to all its inhabitants, at
whatever cost.“2

32. Independence for Southern Rhodesia should be
handed down from the recognized administering Power
rather than from Mr. Smith and his clique at Salisbury.
We would therefore want to see more positive action
towards an internationally acceptable solution of the
Rhodesian independence issue. The first step in this
direction is the restoration of legality in Rhodesia and the
dissolution of the illegal minority government. This
should be followed by other necessary actions under the
Anglo-American proposals.

35. Africa has demonstrated at all times that it is
prepared to work for a peaceful solution to this problem.
But if we fail, the armed struggle will continue with
renewed intensity. We have always worked against internationalizing African problems, We have always preferred
to be left alone to chart our destiny. But Africa has
friends who are reliable and committed to our liberation.
We hope that we shall not be forced to call on them to
help push the armed struggle to its logical conclusion.
36. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Commissioner for
External Affairs of Nigeria for the kind words which he
addressed to me at the beginning of his statement. I
cannot thank him for the kind words addressed to my
country since, although I listened very carefully to what
he had to say, I could not actually detect any. 1 am sure
that he would not expect me to accept his strictures. I
can only tell him that, naturally, we shall study what he
had to say with great care and that in due course we
shall, if necessary,seekto reply to it.

33. We look forward to the Council’s taking appropriate
measures at the right time, if the potentially explosive
situation in Rhodesia is to be defused and the threat to
international peace and security removed. We believe that
this is a straightforward matter within the authority of
the Council. We hope that the generality of the majority
African population will be able, for once, to remember
this momentous debate as an occasion when the Council,
in consistency with its noble role as mankind’s genuine
custodian of world peace and security, upheld the principles of justice, freedom and human dignity in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. Such a
positive declaration should halt Smith and his collaborators in their disastrous course and serve notice to Vorster
that the world is not prepared to condone an identical
fraudulent experiment in Namibia.

37. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (interpretation
from Chinese):
Since the Security Council, on Monday, started its consideration of the question concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia, we have listenedattentively to the
statements made by the representativesof a number of
African countries and others. They have all condemned
Ian Smith for his concoction of the “internal settlement”
fraud, In particular, the two leadersof the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe have reaffirmed (2064tk meeting]
their
strong will to continue to perseverein armed struggle,We
expressour appreciationand support for this.

34. I can find no better conclusion than to recall the
statement of my head of State delivered in the General
Assembly on 13 October 1977, in which he declared the
following on the question of Zimbabwe:
“In Zimbabwe alone we have witnessed with dismay
the strange phenomenon, unprecedented in recent colonial history, of a minority white r6gime in rebellion
against the colonizing Power, and getting away with it
for 12 years despite all the efforts to persuade the
administering Power to acknowledge and discharge its
obligations to the 6 million indigenous people, ~110
continue to be denied their basic human rights in
defiance of the Charter of our Organization. All our
appeals have been met with half-hearted measures, and
the invention of superficial economic sanctions that are
full of loop holes. Today, therefore, the racist regime in
rebellion can still boast that the white minority has a
more viable economy and enjoys a higher standard of

38. When the question of Southern Rhodesia has been
considered at Security Council meetings and General
Assembly sessions,the Chinesedelegationhas repeatedly
pointed out that the atrocious and feeble Smith racist
rBgimehas habitually resortedto its counter-revolutionary
dual tactics by alternately usingmilitary suppressionand
political deception to maintain its reactionary rule. In
recent years, with the support of the African countries,
front-line countries in particular, the people of Zimbabwe
have won great victories in their armed struggle. Their
2 official Records of the General Assembl.~, ‘i’lzirfy-second SOS&, Plenary MectinRs, 32nd meeting, paw 11.5.

5

.

is bound to enhance the further awakening of the people
of Zimbabwe, the strengthening of their unity and their
perseverance in armed struggle. It will also enable them
further to realize that only when one is Prepared for
armed stmggle can one afford to go to peace negotiations
md while going to peace negotiations, it is all the mot;
necessary to be prepared for armed struggle for only by
basing oneself on fighting can one be able to frustrate ~1
schemes and machinations Of the enemy. Not long ago,
the Organization of African Unity adopted a resolution
condemning the Smith regime for the so-called internal
settlement and calling upon all to give stronger support to
the armed struggle under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front of Zimbabwe. This is exactly what the present situs.
tion calls for. The Chinese delegation firmly supports this
stand,

struggle against the reactionary racist r@mes and for
national independence and liberation has been continuously developing, whereas the Smith regime is getting
ever more isolated in the world and its reactionary Fascist
rule is tottering. In the face of the situation in which the
people of Zimbabwe win one victory after another and
the Smith r&we is at the end of its tether, the Smith
rdghe is playing all kinds of tricks, and seeking help
from the so-called “internal settlement”, “parliamentary
election” and so forth. This is, of course, an out-and-out
fraud whose aim is to deceive world public oPhio%
paralyze the fighting will of the people of Zimbabwe,
disrupt the unity of the national liberation Orgadzations
of Zimbabwe and realize the scheme of divide-and-rule
and put out the flames of the people’s armed struggle,
thereby sustaining the domination and privilege of the
minority white racists. Meanwhile, the reactionary Smith
regime has intensified its sanguinary suppression of the
people of Zimbabwe and carried on armed provocations
against neighbouring countries in an attempt to cow the
African countries and people now resolutely fighting
against racism and to sabotage the African countries’
support for the liberation struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe. Just recently, the Smith regime made repeated
armed intrusions into Botswana and Zambia, seriously
menacing and violating their sovereignty and security. The
Chinese delegation expresses its utmost indignation at these
new acts of aggression and strongly condemns them.

41. The Chinese Government and people firmly support
the people of Zimbabwe in their courageous struggles for
national independence and liberation and strongly con.
demn the Smith racist regime for its various frauds, We
are deeply convinced that SO long as the people of
Zimbabwe fight dauntlessly, persist in unity, adhere to
principle, persevere in struggle and always guard against
super-Power meddling and sabotage, they will certainly be
able to win final victory in their struggle.
42. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretatim frur~~ Russian): Before turning
to the substance of the problem being considered by the
Security Council, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, upon your assumption of your important
post for March and to express the hope that under your
experienced leadership the Council will be able to arrive at
a favourable decision on a question so important for the
future of the people of Zimbabwe,

39. Why does the Smith rigime dare to be so rampant?
The reason for its rampancy cannot be separated from the
protection and abetment ‘by one super-Power, apart from
the support given by the Pretoria racist authorities. This
super-Power, in collusion with one of its major allies,
overtly or covertly supports the Smith regime in engaging
in the so-called “internal settlement” in an attempt to
frustrate the Zimbabwe people’s cause of genuine independence and liberation and to preserve the vested interests and privileged status of the minority whites. However; this will only result in lifting a rock to drop it on its
own feet. The other super-Power, flaunting the banner of
“supporting the national liberation movement”, is carrying on massive infiltration and expansion in southern
Africa. It is trying by hook or by crook to sow dissension
and interfere in and undermine the Zimbabwe people’s
struggle in the hope of bringing it within its orbit of
contending for hegemony with the other super-Power in
this area of strategic importance, With a covetous eye it is
now attempting to create greater confusion in the present
situation in Zimbabwe so as to fish in troubled waters.

43. The Soviet delegation wishes to welcome the Corn.
missioner for External Affairs of Nigeria, His Excellency
Mr. Garba. His participation in the Council’s work is
further confirmation of the great importance his country
attaches to the achievement of the earliest possible liberation of southern Africa from colonialism.
44. 1 should like to take this opportunity warmly to
welcome our new colleague the representative of Venezuela, Ambassador Ruben Carpio Castillo, and to wish him
success in his work. On behalf of the Soviet delegation, 1
should like to assure the new representative of Venezuela
of our readiness to co-opcratc with him and his delegation
in solving the important probletns facing the Council and
the other organs of the United Nations.

40. However, since the Zimbabwe people, who have been
tempered through long struggles, were not bluffed in the
Past by the’military suppression of the reactionaries, they
cannot possibly be taken in today by Smith’s political
intrigues. History shows that no reactionary forces will
ever change their counter-revolutionary nature, nor will
theY step down from the stage of history of their own
accord. In the “internal settlement” it concocted, the
Smith rQ$me has placed in its firm grasp the two vital
issues, Political Power and military forces, This reveals
most clearly that its evil doing runs completely counter to
the genuine independence and liberation of the people of
Zimbabwe. Smith’s role as a teacher by negative exalnple

4.5. Permit me also to express my gratitude for the
compliments to the Soviet Union and me personally in
connexion with my discharge of the functions of president of the Council last month.
46. Recently the attention of world public opinion and
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, has
once again been focused on what is happening in southern
Africa, an area which 1~1slong been one of the sources of
tension on our planet. The essence of the process occur.
ring there is an intensification of the struggle for the
6

immediate elimination of the outrageous system of colonialism and racial domination which still survives in that
part of the world. The struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe for self-determination and independence and
for the elimination of the racist regime of Ian Smith is
not a regional problem but a problem of great international importance. The Smith regime’s refusal to satisfy
the lawful demand of the African majority that it should
be granted freedom and elementary rights has now
created in southern Africa a situation fraught with
serious danger to international peace and security. Only
the early elimination of that colonial regime as well as the
racist regime of Vorster and the total and final victory of
the patriotic forces of the African majority can ensure
peace and justice in southern Africa.

cently circulated at the United Nations [see ‘S/22583,
annei], we find the following statement:
“In this sensitive area, jn which the problems of
South Africa and Namibia are still unsolved, Peace can
be ensured omy if the peoples concerned join in
working out a solution and, in this particular case, if
the Patriotic Front, the authentic representative Of the
people of Zimbabwe, takes part in that effort.”
JO. The redecoration of the faqade of the racist @me
in Rhodesia should, according to the calculations Of the
strategists of neocolonialism, give the Western Powers an
excuse to take no further part in talks with the patriotic
forces of Zimbabwe. In putting forward plans which pay
lip-service to the principle of government by the African
majority in Rhodesia, what the Western Powers are domg
in actual fact is tantamount to legitimizing the racist
regime in one form or another and undermining the
national liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe. It
would appear that they are banking on splitting the
anti-colonial front of African States and trying to get
some of them to recognize the deal between the racists
and those Africans who are willing to go along.

47. It is well known that as it draws closer to its doom
every obsolete and reactionary regime tends to intensify
its struggle against what is new and progressive and resorts
to the most subtle contrivances in order to keep its hold
on power and the wealth it has plundered, The Salisbury
deal between the chief of the Rhodesian racists, Ian
Smith, and the so-called moderate African leaders is
aimed at creating a government which, on the one hand,
would guarantee the preservation of the political, economic and social domination of the white minority and,
on the other, would create the semblance, and only the
semblance, of participation by representatives of the
African population in the government of the country. It
has been possible to find collaborationists who are ready
to go along with the perpetration of this fraud, but they
no more represent their people than did those who in the
last war collaborated with the Hitlerites in the occupied
countries of Europe. These are attempts by the racists
and their protectors to make the illegal regime of Salisbury appear more acceptable or, to be more accurate, less
revolting.

51. Everyone knows that the actions of the racist clique
at Salisbury aimed at bringing about a so”called internal
settlement have been dictated not only by the desire to
preserve their rights and privileges but also by their
anxiety to protect the interests of international monopolies operating actively in southern Africa. It is typical that
in the agreement signed at Salisbury on 3 March direct
provision is made for protection against deprivation of
property. Thus under that agreement the imperialist
monopolies are getting constitutional guarantees protecting their property against nationalization.

48. In spite of resounding assertions about the introduction of the principle “one man, one vote”, representatives
of the indigenous African population, which makes up 95
per cent of the country’s population, will not receive any
real power in the governmental organs to be set UP
pursuant to the internal settlement. In essence all power
will remain in the hands of the insignificant minority, and
all the racist regime’s apparatus of military and police
repressionwill remain in the country indefinitely.

52. Only recently those who bear direct responsibility for
the situation in Southern Rhodesia have asserted that any
subterfuges on Smith’s part will fail to receive their support
and will be condemned. I would remind Council members
that in January 1978 a letter was circulated in the Council
from the representative of the United Kingdom which
contains a statement made in the House of Commons by
the Foreign Secretary, Mr. Owen (see S/12.540, rmncx],
who stated:

49. In creating in Rhodesia a puppet parliament and
government, the Salisbury clique is attempting to exclude
the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe from any decisions
affecting the destiny of the country, to lend the appearance of legitimacy to the racist regime and to escape the
condemnation of the international community and United
Nations sanctions. It is, however, obvious that the Patriotic Front enjoys broad support in world public opinion
and in the world community as the only legitimate
representative of the people of that country. This fact is
continually being confirmed and reconfirmed by statements and documents from international organizations,
from States belonging to the most widely differing political and social systems and from the independent countries
of Africa. For example, in a letter from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Algeria to the Secretary-General, re-

L‘, . . an internal settlement which excludes one of the
leading nationalist groups cannot bring about a cease-fire
during the elections or bring peace and stability to a newly
independent Zimbabwe, nor would it eliminate the threat
to international peace and security, It would, therefore,
be most unlikely to be recognized by the Security
Council. We are signatories to many Security Council
resolutions,”
53. The Permanent Representative of the United States
&O
criticized the “internal settlement” when he said that
the only consequence of such a step would be an
intensification of the armed struggle. He pointed out that
any Rhodesian settlement which did not involve the
participation of the Patriotic Front would open the way to
civil war in Southern Rhodesia.
7

L

.

tion of the illegal minority regime, whatever appearanceit
may contrive for itself, should be the first step towards
ensurillg a just settlement of the Rhodesian problem. lfthst
is still defying world public opinion, it is becausethe
relevant decisions arid sanctions of the Security Council are
not
observed by certain Member States.

54. yet now the British Foreign Secretary describes yhe
deal at Salisbury as an “important step towards majority
rule” and stresses the reluctance of his Government to do
anything to “undermine a peaceful settlement, from whatever source it may come‘3, while the representatives Of the
United States Government refer Ody to certain Obscurities
in its provisions. Certain Western representatives have
described the events in Salisbury as “a step in the r@ht
&&ion”.
Probably those events can be so described-if, of
course, by the “right direction” we mean further bloodshed
and further repression of the people of Zimbabwe.

dgime

being

59, The Soviet UniOn’S pOSiti On the question that we
are discussing has been repeatedly set forth in the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies. We have ac
difficulty at all in perceiving the racist and neo-colon&t
aims of the Salisbury deal, and the Soviet Union cste.
gorically condemns and repudiates it. Our delegation
believes that the COUnCil
Should Support the just and lawful
demands of the African countries and of the representatives
of the people of Zimbabwe, the leaders of the Patriotic
Front, which have been set forth in the course of this series
of meetings. The Soviet Union supports the idea that there
is a need to transfer power as SOOIIas possible to the people
of that country, and I should like t0 take this opportunity
to stress that, for us there is only one legitimate repre.
tentative of the people of Zimbabwe: the Patriotic Front,
The best way to find a solution to the problem of Southern
Rhodesia has been and ctlntinues to be ensuring the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and strict and unswerv.
ing application of full SZIIKtiuns against the rdgirne of Smith
and against his ally the Republic of South Africa. That is
the direct path that can and should ensure a just solution of
the problem entirely in keeping with the will and aspire
tions of the people of Zimbabwe.

55. We are not supporters or followers of the so-called
Anglo-American plan, but we cannot fail to point out that a
strange situation is being created. The United Kingdom and
fie United States have, in essence, been taking a favourable
view of Smith’s manoeuvres and have been hastening to
divorce themselves from their own proposals which, they
had asserted, provided for the elimination of Smith from
power at Salisbury. Furthermore, the Western Powers have
been openly putting pressure on the Patriotic Front, trying
somehow or other to involve it in the machinations of the
Smith r6gime and its henchmen. We cannot fail to agree
with the comment of the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Ambassador Salim, who at the
Council’s meeting on 6 March of this year stated:
“a legitimate question will arise as to how serious they
[the United Kingdom and the United States] were in the
first place in promoting a just settlement” (2061st
meeting, para 4.51.
It is precisely the connivance of those Powers that has made
it possible for Smith to continue his aggressive action
against the independent African States, the latest example
of which was the incursion of Rhodesian troops into
Zambia, which caused a large number of casualties.

60. As was stressed by the Foreign Minister of the USSR,
Mr. Gromyko:
“We do not conceal the fact that in Africa-and,
indeed, everywhere--our sympathies lie with the States
which have chosen a progressive course of development,
the path of social and economic reform, for the benefit of
the broad masses. We state opculy our total solidarity
with the peoples fighting for the elimination of the last
bastions of colonialism and racism.”

56. We share the view expressed by the leaders of
the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, Mr. Joshua Nkomo and
Mr. Robert Mugabe, in their statements in the Council
(2064th meeting/ regarding the situation at Salisbury. The
Soviet delegation entirely agrees with the statements of the
representatives of many African countries who have already
spoken in the Council to the effect that the manoeuvres of
the racist minority rdgime have led to a sharp deterioration
of the situation in Southern Rhodesia and has seriously
exacerbated an already tense situation in that part of the
world.

That is why we shall continue to stand side by side with the
African countries and give assistance to those forces which
are waging a liberation struggle in Zimbabwe, and we will
support those who are attempting to put an end tc
oppression and domination by a minority racist regime.

5’7. The Soviet delegation does not consider it necessary to
reply to the tired old fabrications about Soviet assistance to
the peoples of, Africa contained in the statement of the
representative of China. They are clearly designed to divert
the attention of those participating in this discussion from
the essence of the problem under consideration and from a
constructive Search for a solution to it. lt is obvious that
such verbal exercises are dictated by purposes having
nothing whatsoever in common with the interests of the
struggle of the African countries, in particular the people of
Zimbabwe, for their earliest possible liberation from cola.
nial and racist oppression.

61. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius):
announcement.

1 only want to make aI

62. Mr. President, since WC are 011the eve Of the week-end,
1 feel that I ought to inform you and, through you, the
other members of the Council that the African members cf
the Council have prepared a working paper on the question
under consideration and that we have started consultations
and negotiations with some other members. It is therefore
probable that we shall be in a position later today to hand
this document Over to the Sccrctariat for processing, thstis,
translation and distribution by tomorrow morning. We shall
then be happy to receive the views of other members ca
our Paper so that we Africans may bc in a positicll to
introduce a final draft resolution on Monday with a view to

58. The COnSpiIWy
at Salisbury should be condemned and
repudiated by the Security Council, The immediate elihna.
8

taking a decision OII it by Tuesday at the latest. I hope bat
this advance information will be useful to delegations.

eventually be liberated”; they always said, “in principle . . .
but . . .“. I was afraid of that word “but”, And we are stjll
confronted with that reservation “but”-not
necessarily by
the erstwhile colonial countries but even by our own
people, in Africa and in Asia. So it is not a question of
Policy, it is a human trait, I believe, always to seek refuge in
reservations,

63. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his courtesy in informing me in open Council
of his Intentions; no doubt what he has to say about the
possible timing of the rest of this debate will be of interest
to other members of the Security Council, and as President
I will be delighted to consult with them and with him upon
how we proceed with the debate.

70. Now I want to speak to you from my own humble
experience. In 1922 when I was 17 we in the Middle East
woke up to fmd that France and Britain, the Powers that
had emerged victorious from the First World War, had
placed the countries of the verdant crescent under mandates. I was young, but others who were older than I asked:
“What is the meaning of the mandates? ” It meant that
France and Britain were going to be administering Powers
and that they were going to train us for self-rule. Good
Lord, at one time in our history we, the Arab States, had
four empires, and we got drunk with power and wealth and
then fell down. We knew something about governing
ourselves. In fact, when we were part of the Ottoman
Empire we sent deputies to Constantinople, as it was
called-Istanbul now-and there were also cabinet ministers
from Lebanon, Syria and Iraq there then, in the Porte.

64. I should like to inform members of the Council that 1
have a letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia in
which he requests to be invited to participate in he
discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite him to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.
65. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of Saudi
Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement, in the confident expectation that the brevity of
his wisdom will give us all food for thought.

71. However, let me tell you something of my experience;
perchance my African brothers will benefit from it. We
were confronted with a fait accompli: in Syria and Lebanon
we had the French, in Iraq and Palestine we had the British
as the mandatory Powers. Many of us objected, some of us
rioted, others raised their voices and wrote articles. We also
had a few so-called freedom fighters. Finally; the Lebanese
were promised by the High Commissioner, who in, the
beginning, I remember, was General Gouraud, a famous
general of the First World War, that they would have a
republic declared in 1926. I still remember the gentleman
who was President of the Republic: he was Charles Debbas.
Many of us, including myself, said: “He is a Francophile; he
is no good; he is going to be a puppet of the French.” He
had had a French education; I had had my education at the
American University, so I did not know French very well.
Some of us were a little fanatical about his appointment,
and some of the French-speaking Lebanese were divided.
To make a long story short, Mr. Debbas proved to be almost
an exemplary President, and, as I learned 30 years later
from some people at the Quai d’orsay, they sometimes had
trouble with him and another President of the Republic
because they knew how to defend the interests of Lebanon
Another one was Habib Pasha Al Saad, who was a friend of
my late father. We Baroodys were never in politics, but we
knew the political families there. He too handled the
French with sagacity-with duplicity, if you will-and he
was also an exemplary President. Still we had a French High
Commissioncr4uut
Commissaire, as they called him.

66, Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Before I extol you,
Sir, let me say that while I do not claim to be a prophet, I
do not think that the ancient prophets-of the monotheistic
religions at least-were very concise, either in the Old
Testament, which is quite a voluminous book, or in the
New Testament, or in the Holy Koran. But not being a
prophet, 1 will try to be as concise as is humanly possible.
67. Anyway, 1 know you like to rib me once in a while,
and 1 take it with good humour because I feel you are my
friend. But actually, why did you not admonish those who
preceded me, my good sir-the members who always start
three quarters of an hour iate, always on the pretext that
they were consulting with one another? It may be that
they had quite a heavy lunch.
68. Having disposed of the levities of the occasion that
were started by your remarks, Sir, may I say that I redly
feel quite confident that under your guidance, since you
yourself have been involved in the question of Rhodesia,
having gone there and knowing it perhaps better than mY
one of us around this table, it is to be hoped that, thanks to
your sagacity and wisdom, some results might accrue not
necessarily at the end of this meeting but from future
meetings of the Council on Zimbabwe.
69. That said, members will note that I do not have in
front of me a prefabricated speech; 1 do not have to have: I
have been here long enough. The first time 1 was seized of
the question of Southern Rhodesia, as we Call it-Zimbabwe-was in the Fourth Committee in the 1950s. At
that time I was elaborating with a few friends the Principle
of self-determination as a human right-the
right to
self.determination--and not only in principle, because we
always found that when we spoke about the liberation of a
colonial people, some of our friends the erstwhile colonial
Powers said: “ln principle we agree that thy people should

72. Now, if you go across the border to the east of
Lebanon, there was a Syrian mandate at that time, and our
Syrian brothers were known as being amongst the most
patriotic in the Arab world. I think they still are; 1 do not
think they have ceasedto be so. And someSyriansasked:
“Why don’t we do asl..ebanonis doing now and accepta
Presidentof the Republic?” “No”, they said,“we Will have
nothing at all to do with the French.That iscolonialismin
in
disguise.” That was true: a mandate is COlOniabsm
9

I.

.._

-

people from the Caribbean,from India, from Pakistan and
from other places.There is a colour problem now in the
United Kingdom. The British-having a colour problem of
their own-are not going to say to Ian Smith “To hell with
you, Ian Smith. You are white-skinnedand a dishonourto
our colour”. Many of the British who are seekingvotes in
their constituencieswould lose them, SO they cannot say
that.

disguise. Neither we nor the Syrians exercised power, but
there were so-called freedom fighters, and there were many
protests. I remember that even in I922 there was a hero by
the name of El Azma, who died throwing bombs at the
French. ‘And, mind you, they were mostly not French
troops either: they were from Senegal. When Senegal was
under the French, our black brothers were fighting us.
NOW, of course, they were not fighting us because we were
white but because they were under the French. What is the
gist of it? Finally, the Syrians, 10 years after the
declaration of the republic in Lebanon, found that the
better part of wisdom would be to accept the same formula
as had been worked out with the Lebanese.

77. They cannot do it also for economic reasons.I am
telling membersof the Council, in an unorthodox manner,
things that no one elseherewill tell them and I am doingit
so that they may know what the situation is. Let Usnot
talk in platitudes. We have had enoughof platitudes in the
30 years that I havebeenservingin the United Nations. We
use the. sanleclich6s,the sameplatitudes. Let us be frank.

73. What is the moral of what I am saying? No one can
challengewhat I said in the Fourth Committee about Ian
Smith when that Committee was more active on the
question of Southern Rhodesia.1pride myself on it. At one
time I said “He has a schizophrenicpersonality, and the
administeringPower should recall him”-since the United
Kingdom wasthe administeringPower-“and chastisehim”.
But 1 misled myself, 1 tried not to play politics-I want to
be frank-and I went to Mr. Mendelevich. I think the
representativeof the Soviet Union knowsof him, if he does
not know him personally; he wasvery active in the Fourth
Committee. And I saidto Mr. Mendelevich“You are very
adamant in defending the blacks. What is the use of just
ta&ng and talking? Why do you not do somethingabout
it? ” He answered“Let me think about it, and I will give
you my answer”. In about a weekor so, he said“We do not
want to clash with the WesternPowers”.

78. Therefore, I ask my brothers from Africa, from Asia
and from the developingworld, the third world or whatever
you choose to call it, to face facts; whether or not the facts
are what they should be they are still the realities, Take
thesethings into account.
79. Our friend from China and our friend from the Soviet
Union come and cast aspersions
at one another. I do not
like this. They are neighboursand sharethe sameideology.
80. Also, I never thought that our relatively new cdleague, AmbassadorYoung, would have become such a
sphinx. He saysnothing. Today I told him “Say something.
Let us know where we stand with the United States”. We
have an Arab proverb: lrff speechis silver, then silenceis
golden”, but the United States has gone off the gold
standard. Still. I do not blamehim.

74. Of coursenow it is history. At that time I would not
have said it. I found out that the British were still an
administeringPower de June,but not de facto. You remember how Mr. Ian Smith renounced the link between
Rhodesiaand the United Kingdom. He said “We do not
care”. The British are still caIled the administeringPower
by the Commissionerfor External Affairs of Nigeria and by
others. They are no more an administeringPower than you
and I are the administeringPowerof a statelessislandin the
Pacific. Not becausethey lack the power; they are not that
weak. But they have their economicand political problems.
I can say this on their behalf without having a mandate
from them. How do I know? When, after the SecondWorld
War they could not managePalestine they threw the
problem of Palestineinto the lap of the United Nations,
and they were then the mandatory Power. There they gave
it up cELfacto and de&r-e, and we have been seized of the
questionfor 30 years.

81. There hasbeen an impassebecauseof inflexibility on
both sides,and I commiseratewith those patriotic fighters
there. They areoutsidetheir country.

75. Therefore, do not expect our President today-of
whom 1 am fond-to say these things to you. He is
courageous,but he sometimesputs it in the British way,
with shadesof meaning and with a little sarcasmand
ridicule here and there, somethingof which he is a past
master. Anyway, he is not English, he is Welsh, like
Mr. Lloyd George.
76. The British have their internal problems.It so happens
that ihey are in the northern hemisphereand are white. But
do not think that all the whites in Englandobserveequality
between races and nations. There are problems there now
becauseof the ingressinto the United Kingdom of many

82. But let me make a few suggestions,and I will reply,
here or elsewhere,to anyone who daresto say that I have
not given the matter enoughthought and that I am being
lenient. I mentionedthe mandatory Powers;in the instance
I spoke of, the mandatory Power wasFrance-but I could
go on and on and this is not a sessionon history. Let me
tefl you that not only do the blacksin Southern Rhodesia,
in South Africa and, I hope, ultimately in Namibia have
their foot in the door, they are now inside.The problem is
not how to outwit Smith, since if he goes there will be
others like him; he hasa following. It is not to say that “we
do not want to do business%ith him”. No one has
criticized lan Smith more than I have, but we have to do
businesswith him, unless,like the proverbial bedouins, the
whites stealout in the night with their tents and pitch them
elsewhere.That would be the best solution, and perhaps
eventually they will clearout of the whole continent, unless
they want to conform to the democratic rule of the
continent. But let usface the fact that they are not doing it
now. So what shallwe do? Have an impasse’!And who will
pay the price? It will be the innocent blacks,and to a lesser
extent the innocent whites, 1sthat what we in the United
Nations want? Is this what the Charter prescribes? Bc like
one of the caliphs,who said:

10

“Always keep a hair between you and your opponent.
If he pulls, give in a little bit. If you pull, do not pull too
hard lest that hair be broken and there then be fighting.”
83. I am not giving you a formula here. Far be it from me
to tell those patriots who yesterday spoke with clarity,
attention to the democratic rule and singleness of mind
what they should do. Far be it from me to call the other
three parties who seem to be trying to find a Solution with
Ian Smith weaklings or traitors. Who am I to do that’? Who
are we to take sides? We should not. But, for heaven’s sake,
there has been a transformation, even in Ian Smith. You say
he shows duplicity; all right, why do you not show
duplicity? We show duplicity too. But let us not arrive at
an impasse so that after two or three meetings somebody
will come up with a draft resolution and if it does not Sit
well with certain Powers that have interests in that part of
the world it will be vetoed, and then we Shall have achieved
nothing. Why do I say that? Because we have seen many
questions discussed here and there has been a veto.
Sometimes the veto is better than a consensus, because a
consensus solves nothing.
84. The United States, more than any other country,
could play a role, because it is a world Power and has a
direct interest in that part of the world, I am not talking
about strategic interests; to heck with those. Why should
you go and bother yourselves with the whole world
strategically? You have a continent here, my good friend
Ambassador Young. And the Russians, their territory is
twice the size of yours. Keep away from spheres of
influence and power politics. We are tired of you both,
waging war by proxy sometimes when you do not dare to
confront one another because your own people would take
issue with those in the seats of power and would lynch
them should there, God forbid, be a nuclear war or mass
destruction,
Therefore why do we come here as false
witnesses? Why?

situation is. I appeal to you, my good friends of the
Patriotic Front. I wasa patriot, but I neverusedviolence.
To tell you the truth, I do not believein it. Try to get
inside and work inside. I do not know how. You are the
sPecialis@it is your country. There is even a priest, a
bishop--BishopMuzorewa. I hear that You are not on
Speak@ terms with him. Play on his religioussentiment,
circumvent him. He is a human beinglike you. Let him
come.Why be inflexible?
88. I will tell YOUsomething.I am an Arab, a pan-Arab,
one of the first. When the usurpersof Palestine-I do not
want to exacerbatematters, but this applies-meaningt.ha
Zionists,cameand carvedup Palestineandtook it, someof
my Arab friends said“We are not goingto listen to them.
Let USgo out.” 1 said“Why go out? ” But many of aem
went out of the Assembly.I said “Why don’t you stay
in? ” They said “Solidarity.” I said “To hell with solidarity; I want to hearwhat they have to say sothat I may
reP]Y.” And who dare say I am not as good an Arab?
PerhapsI am a slightly better Arab, beingmore ancient.
The older the wine, the better it is. I stayedandI rebutted
anything that had to berebutted.
89. So, for heaven’ssake-l do not know what the others
are; you call them almosttraitors, I do not know, I haveno
right to say-bring themto your sideandwork from inside.
And rememberthis, all my African friends. This is not
becauseIan Smith and his peoplehappento be white, but
becausethey came from Europe with a more advanced
backgroundafter the Industrial Revolution, whereasthe
blacks were still natural, in a primitive society.They went
there and built, of coursefor their own benefit; they did
not do it for the benefit of the blacks,but they hadto use
black labour. Now, if thosewhites are scaredand leave,
think of the economy of the country. Learnfrom them SO
that you may be able to run the country properly and, if
they do not considerthemselveslike you, then you say
“Out, it isno country of yours”.

85. I have talked with my Chinese friend and with his
predecessor, my good friend who is today Foreign Minister-he is still Foreign Minister, Huang Hua? Yes. He told
me ‘LYou don’t know: they are conspiring against US”. I
said “For heaven’s sake”, and he said “Don’t try, we are
ljke oil and water”. I said “I used to be a chemist; 1 can
make an emulsion of oil and water”. There is interest in the
old tradition. Think of our Chinese brothers. I talk about
brothers because, although they are from one side of Asia
and I am from the other, Asia is the mother Continent.
Those Europeans all came from Asia.

90. But do you know what couldhappen?I amnot going
to mention specificexamples,but I know Statesthat got
rid of certain elementsinside their countriesbecauseof
political considerationsand are now more stagnantthan
ever. Why? Becausethey did not learnhow to managetheir
own countries.I do not say that Ian Smithis the teacherof
technology, scienceandso on. There aremany Whiteswho
act emotionally, aswe Asiansor Africans act emotionahy.
Many of us sometimesact fanatically, on religiousgrounds,
on ideological grounds,on variousgrounds.But you are
leaders,my good friends of the Patriotic Front, YOUare
true leadevs.I would not call you that and compromisemY
conscience.I listenedto every word YOUsaid, but 1 have
tMS reservation: for heaven’ssakebe a little more pliable.
Not that, if you are pliable, Ian Smith Will change
tomorrow, but eventually hc has to Change.He is not
eternal.Your black peopleareeternalthere. The whitesare
ephemeral,unlessthey want to live with equal rights and
not set themselvesabove others. It is not a questionof
colour, it is a questionof privilege.They cannot have the
privilegeonce You know how to run affairs.And 1am sure
that with peoplelike you that is not a problem. 1 noticed
your
diction, your exposition of the case.Another thing iS

86. We are tired, as human beings. What axe do I have to
grind? Did 1 ever have ambitions? I am a United Nations
man first and foremost because we all adhere to the
Charter. Our loyalty should be to the Charter because it
transcends our petty national interests, and the older one
gets the more one feels that one should do so.
87. So my message-and I am going to be brief now, my
good friend Mr. President-my
appeal, is not to be SO
inflexible. First and foremost 1 speakto those bulwarksof
strength there. If they had not been bulwarks to strength
they could not have suffered what they have and still have
had the clarity of mind to come and tell us what the
11

92. That is my message-my message from the heart and
from my humble experience in colonial affairs. It may be
thought that because I am now old I have lost my pun&.
No, I still have punch. But there is a lot of suffering and it
is mostly inflicted on innocent people. That is my message.
I do not consider it wisdom; I consider it facts. If they were
not facts they would not be so brief; it is not a question of
symbols.

that bitterness, which is natural. YOUshould have seen how
bitter 1 was;I used to explode when I was your age, young.
Grow mature.
91, ~0 not say they are co-operating with Smith. Again,
how long will Smith last? Try t0 circumvent him, not
necessarily by violent methods but by other methods.
Sometimes you have to use violence, I agree, unfortunately,
just as when one has an abscessone has to have a surgeon
remove the pus.

The meetingroseat 5.50 p.m.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite-l
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PWBLYCATIONS

may be obtained
from
bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units sent en vente dnns les librairies
et les a~ences
d&posit&es
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupri% de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
h : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las
publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidns,
6ecci6h de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

7%70006January

1980-2,20
