S/PV.7784

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7784

th meeting
Thursday, 6 October 2016, 3.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 27 September 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/813)
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/819)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31187 (E)
*1631187*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.7784

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.

implementation of the Peace Agreement and the latest
violations of the ceasefire are incompatible with lasting
stabilization, even if that were temporary.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda is adopted.
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 27 September 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/813)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/819)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Atul Khare, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item of the agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/813, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 September 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, as
well as to document S/2016/819, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your invitation to brief the
Security Council along with my colleague and
friend Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare, on the
overall developments in the situation in Mali. I take
this opportunity to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Mali, Mr. Issa Konfourou.
After four months of calm, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) was once again the target of a
series of coordinated attacks on 3 October. Although
the relative calm in recent months might have given us
some hope that there could possibly be improvement
in the situation on the ground, unfortunately we need
to realize that the persistent delays we have seen in the
2/8

06/10/2016

At the meeting of the Security Council on Mali in
June (see S/PV.7727), Foreign Minister Diop announced
the agreement of the parties on the modalities for the
appointment of interim authorities and the timing
for establishing them in the five northern regions of
Mali during the June-September period, as well as the
establishment of security arrangements, including the
structures for the Operational Coordination Mechanism.
In that context, the Council adopted resolution
2295 (2016) to call upon the parties to accelerate the
implementation of the Agreement, notably by agreeing,
inter alia, to prioritize certain provisions.
Unfortunately, three months, later I am compelled
to report to the Council that, since July, clashes have
resumed among signatory groups in the Kidal region,
thereby seriously threatening the peace process and
postponing once again the appointment of the interim
administration. Those institutional and security
arrangements should have been in place for nearly a
year, and the joint patrols should have been launched
in November 2015. I also deplore the lack of progress
regarding the process of cantonment and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
The situation in the centre of the country has
become worse. On 29 May, in Sévaré in the Mopti
region, an improvised explosive device — if such
devices really are improvised — was exploded during
a convoy of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
killing five Blue Helmets returning from a civilianprotection operation in Ténenkou Cercle. On 18 July, a
column of 18 vehicles and several motorcycles attacked
installations of Malian armed forces in Nampala in the
Ségou region, killing 15 and wounding 34 people. On
2 September, armed individuals briefly occupied the
locality of Boni again in the Mopti region.
In that context, it is very important that the
Government of Mali, with United Nations support,
continue its efforts to prepare a national counterterrorism strategy that is multifaceted and coherent and
includes comprehensive measures to prevent violent
extremism. This is necessary because repeated attacks
against the authority of the State are taking place
against the background of general degradation in the
rule of law and social cohesion. In the region of Mopti
16-31187

06/10/2016

The situation in Mali

alone, intercommunity violence led to 18 deaths and
44 wounded in June, as well as 6 dead and 9 wounded
in the period from late August to early September. In
that regard, we must welcome the announcement by
President Keita, during the ministerial meeting on the
sidelines of the General Assembly on 23 September,
that a conference of national accord would be held
later this year, which could be an important step in
strengthening cohesion and national reconciliation to
find a long-term, as inclusive as possible, solution to
the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in northern Mali.
In the past three months since the adoption of
resolution 2295 (2016), MINUSMA has spared no effort
to proactively adjust to its new mandate. The fact that
Malian stakeholders resort to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif’s good offices
even on issues with indirect links to the Peace
Agreement — such as when he facilitated discussions
between opposition parties and the Government on the
draft revised electoral law — demonstrates the level of
trust that Mr. Annadif has been able to establish in the
nine months he has been in office. While there is a high
level of trust with the parties, unfortunately it must be
said that the parties to the Peace Agreement are yet to
leave aside their differences — for example, on Kidal
and other issues — and to sit down with our colleague
to prioritize implementation steps in order to finalize
benchmarks and concrete timelines, as requested in
the resolution.
With regard to additional capabilities, they have
not yet been generated. The force has utilized the tools
at its disposal to the fullest extent in order to project a
more robust and proactive posture to protect civilians.
Following the clashes in July in Kidal, the Mission
launched an operation to deter clashes and protect
civilians by showing a robust presence with patrols and
checkpoints. It was therefore a very active posture. In
August, the Mission launched another operation, again
establishing checkpoints and conducting coordinated
patrols with the Malian armed forces along the
Timbuktu-Douentza-Hombori access from Timbuktu to
the Mopti region. Furthermore, in spite of the Mission
doing its utmost, civilians continue to suffer from the
consequences of military operations by both the armed
groups and the Government.
New violations of the ceasefire have further
hampered access for humanitarian actors, who are
doing their best to answer the most pressing needs of
the population, pending the resumption of basic public

S/PV.7784

services by the State. I also regret to note that there have
been serious allegations of human rights violations,
notably by the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs
imghad et leurs alliés in the Kidal region, and we also
continue to receive reports of the excessive use of force
by the Malian army in the centre of the country.
Pursuant to resolution 2295 (2016), MINUSMA
has developed a plan to support the redeployment of
the Malian armed forces, which is fully in line with the
human rights due diligence policy of the Organization.
While the state of play of the peace process currently
precludes the return of the Malian army to the north part
of the country, the Mission has already taken concrete
steps to support them in the centre of the country, for
example, by upgrading protection for the armed forces
at its base in Nampala and by deploying troops with air
support to aid them in reasserting control over Boni.
Meanwhile, in parallel, MINUSMA continues to
seek to enhance collaboration with Mali’s neighbours
and to support a regional security initiative to more
effectively address all the common security challenges.
It is in that context that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Annadif has been engaging the
Governments of the Group of Five Sahel Member States,
while the Mission is currently planning the deployment
of liaison officers as stipulated in the resolution.
The participants in the ministerial meeting of
23 September unanimously stressed that the primary
responsibility for the success of the peace process in
Mali lies with the parties. MINUSMA will not be able
to fully implement its mandate as long as the signatories
to the Peace Agreement do not resolutely engage in its
implementation. The time has come — it is certainly
time — to rise above those immediate localized
interests and to think of the long-term expectations of
the constituents directly affected, as well as the needs
of the country as a whole. As tragically illustrated by
the attacks on Monday, the Mission’s capacity to protect
civilians and counter asymmetric attacks in active
defence of its mandate has further been hampered by
the absence of the capabilities recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report issued in June, which
the Council authorized in resolution 2295 (2016).
In that context, I regret to have to inform the
Security Council that MINUSMA, instead of receiving
reinforcements, will soon be facing the loss of key
enablers. For example, two troop-contributing countries
have recently apprised us of their decision to withdraw

16-311873/8

S/PV.7784

The situation in Mali

three of the Mission’s five helicopter units by early
2017.
I can assure the Council that we will make every
effort to generate assets to replace them. We take every
opportunity to work towards that goal, including at
the London peacekeeping defence ministerial held a
few weeks ago and at the ministerial meeting on Mali
held here on 23 September. I attended a meeting in
Europe, in Slovakia, last week, and I have also spoken
to all interlocutors. But the reality is that no Member
State has so far committed to filling in the gaps in our
capabilities or to provide us with the capacities that
have been authorized by resolution 2295 (2016) and
previous resolutions.
Indeed, there is a glaring lack of volunteers. I deeply
regret the sombre tone of my presentation today, but I
would be remiss if I did not draw the attention of the
Council to the persistent absence of concrete progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement and
the deterioration of the security situation, 18 months
after the signing of the Algiers Accord. The situation
poses serious questions as to the sustainability and the
very relevance of the overall framework for peace and
stability in Mali, a framework that the Malian parties
have agreed to and that Mali’s international partners
have committed to supporting.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I give the floor to Mr. Khare.
Mr. Khare: I am honoured to be here today alongside
my colleague and friend, the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Ladsous.
Mali remains one of the most difficult environments
known to United Nations peacekeeping. The size of the
country, the remote and landlocked areas where we
are deployed, and the poor and insecure road networks
continue to pose significant challenges.
Currently we are focused on implementing
measures to ensure secure and uninterrupted supply
routes; upgrade and strengthen the defence and
infrastructure of all existing camps; and improve the
capabilities of the the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
MINUSMA is establishing its main logistics hub
in Gao to better serve the locations in northern Mali.
Discussions with Algeria, Benin and the Niger continue
4/8

06/10/2016

so as to establish additional and much shorter supply
routes to Gao. The route from the port of Cotonou
through Niamey to Gao, for example, would be more
than 1,400 kilometres shorter than MINUSMA’s
current supply route.
In response to the significant security threat in Mali,
MINUSMA continues to upgrade and strengthen the
defence infrastructure of all existing camps, including
by reinforcing its facilities against blasts and installing
protected command positions and bunkers. In high-risk
areas, the Mission has also improved living conditions
for civilian and uniformed personnel.
We continue to innovate with the use of modern
technology, particularly to improve our situational
awareness and strengthen the security of our own
personnel and assets as well as our capacity to protect
civilians. MINUSMA has implemented several
pilot projects using surveillance and early-warning
technology to improve the intelligence-gathering
capacity of the Mission so as to prevent attacks.
In order for MINUSMA to be able to implement
its mandate, it is critical that the Mission be provided
with the necessary capacities and capabilities required
to operate safely and effectively in the current
environment, which I have just described.
Since its inception, MINUSMA has experienced
significant contingent-owned equipment capability
gaps, particularly with the rehatted formed units from
the African Union. Shortages of major equipment
such as armoured personnel carriers, support
vehicles, generators, water-treatment plants and
other critical logistics equipment have affected the
ability of military and police components to perform
operational tasks. The self-sustainment services of
the contingents, especially in the medical, observation
and communication categories, among others, have not
always been provided up to the established standards.
Thanks to the corrective actions taken by the
concerned troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries this year to deploy the
needed contingent-owned equipment vehicles and
other items so as to meet their obligations and improve
equipment serviceability, the overall contingent-owned
equipment capability of contingents in MINUSMA has
improved, but key gaps remain.
Given the increasingly insecure and violent
environment outlined by Under-Secretary-General
16-31187

06/10/2016

The situation in Mali

Ladsous, efforts are being made to strengthen the
Mission medical support plan, equipment and personnel
gaps identified in the Mission’s medical facilities.
MINUSMA’s vast area of operations and the austere
environment present unique challenges with regard to
the implementation of our 10-1-2 emergency medical
response timeline for CASEVAC. To address critical
gaps in TCC capabilities in this area, the Mission
recently acquired, through a commercial solicitation
process, two medical evacuation helicopters equipped
with the latest in night-vision technology, along
with fully integrated medical teams. One is already
operational, deployed to Timbuktu, and the second will
be deployed shortly to Kidal.
In addition, in order to effectively address the
first 10 minutes from the onset of injury or illness, the
training of MINUSMA troops and medical personnel
is ongoing. We are also working on the development
of United Nations-specific first-aid training material,
which will be delivered to all Member States as a
United Nations medical standard to be incorporated
into predeployment troop-training material, so as to
streamline the quality of first aid.
Modern peacekeeping operations such as
MINUSMA demand a range of new or stronger
capabilities, and they demand innovative solutions.
We continue to call on Member States to consider
becoming what I would refer to as “contingent-ownedequipment-contributing countries”. We also call on
them to consider contributing to joint battalions, and/or
partnering directly with troop- and police-contributing
countries to provide the required equipment.
One example of an innovative approach to ensuring
the required capabilities is the recent collaboration
between Norway, Belgium, Denmark, Portugal and
Sweden, which have jointly agreed to provide a C-130
aviation unit to MINUSMA through a mutually agreed
multinational rotation concept. This will guarantee
the continuous provision of this critical air asset to
MINUSMA for a period of approximately two years.
The Department of Field Support (DFS) is open to
exploring similar arrangements for other equipment in
Mali.
It is essential that we uphold the highest standards
as we serve and protect the local population. In Mali,
environmental management remains a key priority
for my Department. Likewise, I continue to prioritize
efforts to address sexual exploitation and abuse and

S/PV.7784

all issues related to the conduct of United Nations
personnel. I call on all Member States to ensure that
our personnel upholds the highest standards of conduct
and discipline, ensuring adequate training, the timely
reporting of incidents and follow-up action when
necessary, so as to ensure accountability.
Looking ahead, neither the challenges nor the risks
at hand should be underestimated. A failure to enhance
the Mission’s capability will have a significant impact
on our capacity to deliver on the mandate. However, the
results achieved by MINUSMA thus far suggest that
with commitment, vision and the continued support of
the Council, these challenges are not insurmountable.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Khare
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wisheds to make a statent.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Under-SecretariesGeneral Hervé Ladsous and Atul Khare for their
respective briefings this afternoon.
I would like to highlight the holding, on 23 September,
of a high-level meeting on the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
was a good opportunity for exchanging various points
of view on the situation in the country. The situation in
Mali continues to be a source of concern, in particular
with regard to the levels of violence affecting the
civilian population. In the past few months, terrorist
attacks and successive violations of the ceasefire have
been attributed to the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad and the Platform and the absence of State
authority in most of the country.
Some of those conditions were assessed by the
Security Council mission that ook place in March as
part of visits and interviews in Mali. In the light of
this sensitive situation, in June, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2295 (2016), which grants the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) increased military and
police contingents and a considerably more robust
mandate than its previous one. It includes active defence
and prevention capabilities and the ability to combat
asymmetric threats, among other provisions.
Although Uruguay believes that the current
MINUSMA mandate goes beyond what is usually
expected in a peacekeeping operation by including

16-311875/8

S/PV.7784

The situation in Mali

counter-terrorism activities, my delegation voted in
favour of it, with the understanding that Mali’s security
situation is an extraordinary one. Three months after
adopting resolution 2295 (2016), the situation in Mali
remains critical and the security situation on the ground
shows no signs of improving — on the contrary.
We believe that the activities conducted thanks to
financing from the Peacebuilding fund are relevant
and have made it possible to achieve results on the
socioeconomic front conducive to capacity-building.
As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2016/819), such activities made it possible for 3,856
Malian children to attend school, 650 income-generating
activities for internally displaced persons, refugees and
persons returning home to be created and 460 women
affected by gender violence to have improved access to
justice and security. Thanks to those types of activities,
Mali will have an opportunity to build capacity that
transcends the presence of the United Nations on the
ground.
Uruguay is aware of the challenges being faced
by the Government of Mali, particularly in the areas
of security and the economy, but it should tackle that
problem with a long-term approach, by addressing the
root causes of the problem, giving signs of credibility
to the parties to the Peace Agreement and avoiding
the spread of terrorism in the country. The regional
initiatives to combat terrorism, as the Group of Five
for the Sahel, are crucial in addressing the problem
of terrorism affecting Mali and various countries in
the region. We must recall that such terrorist groups
disregard borders and, as such, approaching the issue
from a solely national perspective would be simplistic.
Therefore, we urge the Government of Mali and the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the
Platform to keep dialogue open in order to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in the conviction that if these are not achieved, new
flanks facilitating terrorist activities will emerge and it
will be increasingly difficult to re-establish the State’s
authority throughout the country.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I take the floor at the Security
Council since assuming my duties as Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Mali, I am delighted to
convey cordial greetings and profound gratitude from
6/8

06/10/2016

the Government and the people of Mali for the special
attention paid to Mali by the Council. I am committed
to working closely with the members of the Council to
achieve peace and stability in Mali and beyond.
I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of the delegation of Mali, on the accession of your
great country, the Russian Federation, to the presidency
of the Security Council for October. I sincerely thank
the delegation of New Zealand for the commendable
work done during its presidency of the Council over the
past month. I must also pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his deep and unwavering commitment
to peace, security and to the well-being of people
throughout the world and, in particular, in my county,
Mali. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Minister Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, the United Nations system and all of our
other partners for their ceaseless efforts to promote
peace and stability in Mali. On behalf of the President
of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, I would like to commend the members
of the Council today on reaching consensus in selecting
Prime Minister António Guterres as the next SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
I would like to reiterate the appreciation of the
Government and people of Mali to the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria, the Chair of the
Follow-Up Committee on the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger,
Chad, the United States of America, Russia, the United
Kingdom and China for their commitment to restoring
peace and stability in our country.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/819) and commends
Under-Secretaries-General Hervé Ladsous and Atul
Khare for their briefings. The report is focused on
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
econciliation in Mali and on action taken by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We commend the fact
that the current report refers to the progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement and acknowledges
the efforts made by the Government of Mali, led by
President Keita as the Head of State.
16-31187

06/10/2016

The situation in Mali

With regard to security, the delegation of Mali is
concerned about the inter- and intra-community tension
in regions in the north of the country, including Kidal.
We share the analysis of the Secretary-General that the
situation in the centre and north of the country remains
of concern given the persistence of asymmetric attacks
perpetrated by extremist and terrorist groups against
Mali’s defence and security forces and international
forces. Such factors are the main obstacles to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Like the Secretary-General, the Government of
Mali is concerned about the human rights situation
in the country. However, the excessive use of force,
of which the security and defence forces of Mali have
been accused in their fight against terrorism, appears
to be exaggerated. It does not take into account the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Mali in order
to promote and protect human rights in a very difficult
environment, marked by the lack of State authority in
certain parts of the country. Be that as it may, I can
assure the Council that investigations are under way
and proceedings have been opened by the Ministry of
Justice in Mali. I would also like to assure the Council
that the Government of Mali remains fully committed
to promoting and protecting human rights.
You will recall, Sir, that on 16 June, following a
similar exercise, the Prime Minister of Mali informed
the Security Council about actions and initiatives
undertaken by the Government of Mali within the
framework of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconcilation in Mali. Convinced that
speeding up its implementation is the only viable
political and strategic option in the current situation
faced by my country, the Government has spared no
effort to continue along that path.
More recently, during the high-level ministerial
meeting devoted to the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which was
co-chaired with the Secretary-General on 23 September
here in New York, the Head of State of Mali recalled the
major progress that had been achieved. Also, to express
his personal involvement and his desire to expedite the
process, the President of the Republic informed us of
his appointment of a High Representative responsible
for follow-up to the implementation of the Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. He also stressed that a total
cessation of hostilities between the defence and security
forces of Mali and armed groups had taken place since

S/PV.7784

the signing of the Agreement in May/June 2015. Trust is
therefore being restored among Malian parties.
With regard to political and institutional reforms,
the Government of Mali has carried out a review of
the code on local collectivities, the adoption of a new
electoral law and the appointment of governors of new
regions, as well as the setting up of a working group
to review the Constitution with a view to looking at a
number of relevant provisions of the Peace Agreement.
On the development front, the Government of
Mali has adopted an emergency reconstruction plan
for the interim period, which covers 2016-2017, and is
continuing to develop apecific development strategy
for the northern regions of Mali and one for a financial
architecture of a sustainable development fund for
the north. The fund will include almost €457 million
for the period 2016-2018, which is considered to be
our Government’s contribution to the peace effort.
We will also establish of a number of regional
development agencies.
In addition to these measures, the President has
announced the convening of the national reconciliation
conference before the end of the current year. This
will be in keeping with the relevant provisions of
the Agreement and its article 5, which calls for the
establishment of the necessary conditions for an
in-depth debate among all the components of our nation
regarding the deep-rooted causes of the conflict. The
objective is to come up with a charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation. Similarly, the Government
has decided that we will hold communal local elections
before the end of 2016.
In keeping with this momentum, the Head of State
has held a number of meetings and discussions with
the key political and social players in our country. The
President has received the leader of the opposition and
several other political, religious and traditional leaders
to hear their concerns. The overall situation of the
country, particularly in the centre and the north, lay at
the very heart of these exchanges.
With regard to the situation in Kidal, one marked
by inter- and intra-community clashes, which are of
concern to the national authorities at the very highest
level, I would like to underscore that the Government of
the Republic Mali is in no way linked to these tensions
and local rivalries. The Government has no interest in
backing one camp against any other. Given the loss of
life and the consequences of these tensions on the whole

16-311877/8

S/PV.7784

The situation in Mali

peace process, the High Representative of the President
to follow-up on the implementation of Peace Agreement
has organized a series of meetings in Bamako between
the signatory movements, with the participation of
international members of the Follow-up Committee.
The President will continue to work with the leaders
of the different movements and traditional leaders in
the region to contribute to the return of peace, which is
necessary for trust among the different parties.
Similarly, the Government has given pride of
place to the same approach comprising dialogue and
the search for peaceful solutions in the face of the
deteriorating security situation in the centre of the
country. The Head of State has called upon traditional
mechanisms for resolving inter-communal tensions by
contacting political, religious and traditional leaders to
reduce tensions in the Mopti region. He has also called
to avoid any confusion in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. The Government had worked to
finalize a comprehensive action plan to secure, stabilize
and strengthen social cohesion aimed at coming up with
a multifaceted response to the situation in the central
parts of my country.
As can be noted, the Government of Mali, under the
authority of the President Keita, has as its only priority
the welfare of the Malian people, a well-being which
requires peace and reconciliation, which lies at the very
heart of our country. That is why he has committed
himself in a resolved way and in good faith to a fullfledged implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. However, we will not be able to achieve this
alone. The other Malian parties must fully play their
role in that exercise. They will have to break with all
terrorist movements and organized crime, and commit
themselves in good faith to peace.
I would like to underscore the necessity
of accelerating the process of cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration in
order to isolate those armed groups that have not signed
the Peace Agreement that are affiliated with terrorist
networks, whose presence in the northern regions is
undermining efforts under way there.
Also, to put an end to the untold suffering inflicted
upon innocent people, the Government again calls for
the adoption of targeted sanctions against all those who

8/8

06/10/2016

impede the implementation of the Peace Agreement, in
keeping with the relevant provisions of article 54 and the
declaration of the international mediation team during
the eleventh meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee. The international community also has a
great responsibility as guarantor of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. We would like to renew our
call upon friendly States and partner organizations
to make more concrete the commitments undertaken
during successive conferences on the development of
Mali to enable us to ensure the effective implementation
of the Agreement.
It is also the responsibility of the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 2295 (2016) — and we
welcome its adoption — to help thе Government of
Mali to progressively restore the authority of the State
throughout the national territory, a precondition for
ending the abuse and lawlessness in a number of areas
of Mali. To do this, MINUSMA, as now authorized by
resolution 2295 (2016), must adopt a more proactive and
robust posture. It is therefore important, even urgent,
that MINUSMA be fully equipped and provided with
the necessary means and resources to appropriately
discharge its mandate, which is to stabilize Mali. On
its part, the Government of Mali will fully play its role
within the framework of the new mandate, and is already
working closely with MINUSMA to very rapidly
achieve a common vision regarding its implementation
through the development of quantifiable benchmarks.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government and the people of Mali to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative in Mali
and to all the troop-contributing countries for all the
sacrifices that they have made for a final and lasting
settlement to the Malian crisis. I pay tribute to all
victims of this crisis, civilians and military, foreign and
Malian. I also welcome the outstanding work carried
out by the women and men of MINUSMA, as well as
the Barkhane Force for the stabilization of Mali and the
entire Sahel region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

16-31187
